ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that are based upon current expectations and involve risks, assumptions and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements described in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a medical device company that develops and commercializes innovative platforms for performing minimally invasive surgical procedures in the brain under direct, intra-procedural MRI guidance. Our principal product platform is our ClearPoint system, which is in commercial use and is used to perform minimally invasive surgical procedures in the brain. The ClearPoint system utilizes intra-procedural MRI to guide the procedures and are designed to work in a hospital’s existing MRI suite. We believe that this product platform delivers better patient outcomes, enhances revenue potential for both physicians and hospitals, and reduces costs to the healthcare system.
In 2010, we received regulatory clearance from the FDA to market our ClearPoint system in the U.S. for general neurosurgery procedures. In 2011, we also obtained CE marking approval for our ClearPoint system, which enables us to sell our ClearPoint system in the EU. Substantially all our product revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 relate to sales of our ClearPoint system products and related services. We have financed our operations and internal growth primarily through the sale of equity securities, the issuance of convertible and other secured notes, and license arrangements. We have incurred significant losses since our inception in 1998 as we have devoted substantial efforts to research and development. As of December 31, 2020, we had accumulated losses of approximately $120 million. We may continue to incur operating losses as we expand our ClearPoint system platform and our business generally.
Factors Which May Influence Future Results of Operations
The following is a description of factors which may influence our future results of operations, and which we believe are important to an understanding of our business and results of operations.
COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the spread of a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) as a global pandemic, and on March 13, 2020, the President of the United States proclaimed that the COVID-19 outbreak in the United States constituted a national emergency. Continued widespread infection in the United States is an ongoing possibility. Although vaccinations to combat the COVID-19 virus have commenced, we are unable to determine the timing and extent to which the vaccination process will affect the progression of the virus. Extraordinary actions have been taken by federal, state and local governmental authorities to combat the spread of COVID-19, including issuance of “stay-at-home” directives and similar mandates for many individuals to substantially restrict daily activities and for many businesses to curtail or cease normal operations. These measures, while intended to protect human life, have led to reduced economic activity, including the postponement or cancellation of elective surgical procedures, which historically have represented approximately 80% of the number of surgical procedures using our ClearPoint system.
Furthermore, the recessionary conditions on the global economy caused by the COVID-19 pandemic could have a material adverse effect on our business, as hospitals postpone or reduce capital purchases and overall spending. Although most segments of the United States economy have reopened, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic remain intense in many areas of the country, and many public health experts continue to anticipate future surges of COVID-19 in the coming months of 2021. Accordingly, reinstatement of directives and mandates requiring businesses to again curtail or cease normal operations, including the postponement or cancellation of elective surgeries, remains a possibility. The continuing uncertainty as to whether the federal government will address the resulting fiscal condition in both the near and long-term with measures such as additional fiscal stimulus, as well as other geopolitical issues relating to the global economic slowdown, has increased domestic and global instability. The rapid development and fluidity of the situation precludes any prediction as to the ultimate impact COVID-19 will have on our business, financial condition, results of operation and cash flows, which will depend largely on future developments directly or indirectly relating to the duration and scope of the COVID-19 outbreak in the United States.
Key Performance Indicators
The key performance indicators we utilize on a tactical basis are integrated into our longer-term strategic plan within the following categories:
● Functional neurosurgery navigation
o Case volume - Underlying the revenue from sales of our functional neurosurgical navigation products reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report are the procedures, or cases, performed in hospitals utilizing one or more of our products or our clinical services. Case volume data is not influenced by variations in pricing or quantities of product used on a per case basis, and thus provide a more reliable indicator of the growth of our functional neurosurgery navigation line of business. Management analyzes case volume by hospital and by type of procedure to gain information that informs targeted sales and marketing activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the ClearPoint system was used in 682 cases, respectively, as compared to 801 cases during 2019, representing a decrease of 15%. Consistent with the discussion in the section “Results of Operations -Revenues,” we attribute this decrease to the COVID-19 pandemic.
o Number of “Active Surgical Centers” - For purposes of analyzing this performance indicator, an Active Surgical Center is a hospital that has purchased products from us or has performed procedures utilizing our ClearPoint system within a rolling 24-month period, and includes hospital sites having purchased the ClearPoint system, as well as sites in which the ClearPoint system is being used on an evaluation basis. The justification for including “evaluation sites” is that our disposable neurosurgical product is sold to such hospitals for their use in cases. In addition to signifying growth, the number of Active Surgical Centers, when analyzed in conjunction with case volume data, further informs targeted sales and marketing activities and confirms where these activities have led to increased penetration of our product lines. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the ClearPoint system was used in more than 60 Active Surgical Centers. Consistent with the discussion in the section “Results of Operations -Revenues,” we attribute the minimal growth in this performance indicator to the COVID-19 pandemic.
● Biologics and drug delivery
o Number of “Partners” - Underlying the revenue from sales of products and services to our biologics and drug delivery customers is the number of customers, or “Partners.” Our Partners consist of pharmaceutical and biotech companies that are developing methods to deliver a wide variety of molecules, genes or proteins to targeted brain tissue or structures that would need to bypass the blood-brain barrier for the treatment of a variety of disorders. This is a novel area in which commercialization must be preceded by FDA-mandated clinical trials, which are expensive and time consuming to conduct, and for which the commercial success is uncertain, pending, in part, the outcome of those trials. While our revenues from sales of products and services to these Partners in support of their clinical trials are indicative of growth, the number of such relationships is also of importance as we recognize the possibility that some Partners’ research will reach commercial success, and others may not. To the extent our Partners achieve commercial success, our expectation is that we will share in such success through the use of our products and services in delivering our Partners’ therapies. At December 31, 2020, we had commercial relationships with approximately 25 Partners, as compared with approximately 20 Partners at December 31, 2019.
● Therapy products - We do not expect meaningful revenue from therapy products in 2021 insofar as we are targeting a limited market release of such products in 2022. As a result, our milestones in the therapy space are focused on refining the product and obtaining regulatory clearance. Should we be successful in achieving these milestones, we believe our initial performance indicators will focus on case volume and number of Active Surgical Centers, as are currently used in measuring our performance in functional neurosurgery navigation.
● Global scale and efficiency - We have been cautious in setting our goals for operations beyond the U.S. so as to conserve our resources and not establish a foreign presence in advance of being assured of a corresponding revenue stream. In late 2020 we took the first steps in leveraging the CE Marks we have for our ClearPoint system and SmartFlow cannula by establishing an initial presence in Europe for product sales and clinical advisory services. From this initial presence, we believe that future global key performance indicators will be similar to those described above for our U.S. business: case volume, number of Active Surgical Centers and number of biologics and drug delivery Partners.
Revenues
In 2010, we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA to market our ClearPoint system in the U.S. for general neurosurgical procedures; in February 2011 and May 2018, we also obtained CE marketing approval for our ClearPoint system and SmartFlow cannula, respectively; and in June 2020 we obtained CE marking approval for version 2.0 of our ClearPoint software and our Inflexion head fixation frame. Future revenues from sales of our ClearPoint platform products and services are difficult to predict and may not be sufficient to offset our continuing research and development expenses and our increasing selling, general and administrative expenses.
Generating recurring revenues from the sale of products is an important part of our business model for our ClearPoint system. We anticipate that, over time, recurring revenues will constitute an increasing percentage of our total revenues as we leverage installations of our ClearPoint system to generate recurring sales of our functional neurosurgical products. Our product revenues were approximately $8.8 million and $9.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and were almost entirely related to our ClearPoint system.
In addition, we expect that, over time, service revenues will constitute an increasing portion of our total revenues based on: (a) leveraging current and future installations of ClearPoint systems, as discussed above, so as to result in an increase in functional neurosurgical service revenues; and (b) increasing biologics and drug delivery service revenues should our customers in this space be successful in expansion of their clinical trials, and should we be successful in continuing to establish relationships with new biologic and drug delivery partners. Our service revenues were approximately $4.0 million and $1.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our revenue recognition policies are more fully described in the “Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates” section below.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues includes the direct costs associated with the assembly and purchase of components for functional neurosurgical products, drug delivery and biologic products, non-neurosurgical therapy products, and ClearPoint capital equipment which we have sold, and for which we have recognized the revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. Cost of revenues also includes the allocation of manufacturing overhead costs and depreciation of loaned systems installed under our ClearPoint placement program, as well as provisions for obsolete, impaired, or excess inventory. With the anticipated increases in the contribution to total revenues of sales of recurring products and services, as discussed above, we expect gross margin, as a percentage of total revenue, to increase over time.
Research and Development Costs
Our research and development costs consist primarily of costs associated with the conceptualization, design, testing, and prototyping of our ClearPoint system products. Such costs include salaries, travel, and benefits for research and development personnel, including related share-based compensation; materials and laboratory supplies in research and development activities; consultant costs; and licensing costs related to technology not yet commercialized. We anticipate that, over time, our research and development costs may increase as we: (i) continue to develop enhancements to our ClearPoint system; and (ii) seek to expand the application of our technological platforms. From our inception through December 31, 2020, we have incurred approximately $61 million in research and development expenses.
Product development timelines, likelihood of success, and total costs can vary widely by product candidate. There are also risks inherent in the regulatory clearance and approval process. At this time, we are unable to estimate with any certainty the costs that we will incur in our efforts to expand the application of our technological platforms.
Sales and Marketing, and General and Administrative Expenses
Our sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, incentive-based compensation, travel and benefits, including related share-based compensation; marketing costs; professional fees, including fees for attorneys and outside accountants; occupancy costs; insurance; and other general and administrative expenses, which include, but are not limited to, corporate licenses, director fees, hiring costs, taxes, postage, office supplies and meeting costs. Our sales and marketing expenses are expected to increase due to costs associated with the commercialization of our ClearPoint system and the increased headcount necessary to support growth in operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements as well as the reported expenses during the reporting periods. The accounting estimates that require our most significant, difficult and subjective judgments are discussed below. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies and estimates are most critical to a full understanding and evaluation of our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition. Our revenues are comprised primarily of: (1) product revenues resulting from the sale of functional neurosurgery, navigation, therapy, and biologics and drug delivery disposable products; (2) product revenues resulting from the sale of ClearPoint capital equipment and software; (3) revenues resulting from the service, installation, training and shipping related to ClearPoint capital equipment and software; and (4) clinical case support revenues in connection with customer-sponsored clinical trials. We recognize revenue when control of our products and services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive from our customers in exchange for those products and services. This process involves identifying the contract with a customer, determining the performance obligations in the contract, determining the contract price, allocating the contract price to the distinct performance obligations in the contract, and recognizing revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. When a contract calls for the satisfaction of multiple performance obligations for a single contract price, we allocate the contract price among the performance obligations based on the relative stand-alone prices for each such performance obligation we customarily charge. We consider a performance obligation satisfied once we have transferred control of a good or service to the customer, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the good or service. We recognize revenue for satisfied performance obligations only when we determine there are no uncertainties regarding payment terms or transfer of control.
Lines of Business; Timing of Revenue Recognition
● Functional neurosurgery navigation product, biologics and drug delivery systems product, and non-neurosurgery therapy product sales: Revenues from the sale of functional neurosurgery navigation products (consisting of disposable products sold commercially and related to cases utilizing our ClearPoint system), biologics and drug delivery systems (consisting primarily of disposable products related to customer-sponsored clinical trials utilizing the ClearPoint system), and therapy products (consisting primarily of disposable laser-related products used in non-neurosurgical procedures) are generally based on customer purchase orders, the predominance of which require delivery within one week of the order having been placed, and are recognized at the point in time of delivery to the customer, which is the point at which legal title, and risks and rewards of ownership, along with physical possession, transfer to the customer.
● Capital equipment and software sales
o Capital equipment and software sales preceded by evaluation periods: The predominance of capital equipment and software sales (consisting of integrated computer hardware and software that are integral components of our ClearPoint system) are preceded by customer evaluation periods of generally 90 days. During these evaluation periods, installation of, and training of customer personnel on, the systems have been completed and the systems have been in operation. Accordingly, revenue from capital equipment and software sales following such evaluation periods is recognized at the point in time that we are in receipt of an executed purchase agreement or purchase order.
o Capital equipment and software sales not preceded by evaluation periods: Revenue from sales of capital equipment and software not having been preceded by an evaluation period is recognized at the point in time that the equipment and software has been delivered to the customer.
For both types of capital equipment and software sales described above, our determination of the point in time at which to recognize revenue represents that point at which the customer has legal title, physical possession, and the risks and rewards of ownership, and we have a present right to payment.
● Therapy services: We recognize revenue for such services at the point in time that the performance obligation has been satisfied.
● Biologics and drug delivery services
o Outsourced technical clinical support of cases performed pursuant to customer-sponsored clinical trials:
• Service Access Fess: For contracts in which we receive a periodic fixed fee, irrespective of the number of cases attended by our personnel during such periods, revenue is recognized ratably over the period covered by such fees. A time-elapsed output method is used for such fees because we transfer control evenly by providing a stand-ready service.
• Procedure-Based Fees: We recognize revenue at the point in time a case is attended by our personnel.
● Services related to sales of capital equipment and software: Revenues from services related to sales of capital equipment and software are recognized over the period of time such services are rendered.
● Capital equipment and software-related services
o Equipment service: Revenue from service of ClearPoint capital equipment and software previously sold to customers is based on agreements with terms ranging from one to three years and revenue is recognized ratably on a monthly basis over the term of the service agreement. A time-elapsed output method is used for service revenues because we transfer control evenly by providing a stand-ready service.
o Installation, training and shipping: Consistent with our recognition of revenue for capital equipment and software sales as described above, fees for installation, training and shipping in connection with sales of capital equipment and software that have been preceded by customer evaluation periods are recognized as revenue at the point in time we are in receipt of an executed purchase order for the equipment and software. Installation, training and shipping fees related to capital equipment and software sales not having been preceded by an evaluation period are recognized as revenue at the point in time that the related services are performed.
Inventory. Inventory is carried at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out method) or net realizable value. Items in inventory relate predominantly to our functional neurosurgical products, drug delivery and biologic products, non-neurosurgical therapy products and ClearPoint capital equipment. Software license inventory related to ClearPoint systems undergoing on-site customer evaluation is included in inventory in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. All other software license inventory is classified as a non-current asset. We periodically review our inventory for obsolete items and provide a reserve upon identification of potentially obsolete items.
Share-Based Compensation. We account for compensation for all arrangements under which employees and others receive shares of stock or other equity instruments (including options and warrants) based on fair value. The fair value of each award is estimated as of the grant date and amortized as compensation expense over the requisite vesting period. The fair values of our share-based awards are estimated on the grant dates using the Black-Scholes valuation model. This valuation model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected stock volatility, estimated award terms and risk-free interest rates for the expected terms. To estimate the expected terms, we utilize the “simplified” method for “plain vanilla” options discussed in the SEC’s Staff Accounting Bulletin 107, or SAB 107. We believe that all factors listed within SAB 107 as prerequisites for utilizing the simplified method apply to us and to our share-based compensation arrangements. We intend to utilize the simplified method for the foreseeable future until more detailed information about exercise behavior becomes available. We base our estimate of expected volatility on the average of historical volatilities of publicly traded companies we deem similar to us because we lack our own relevant historical volatility data. We will consistently apply this methodology until we have sufficient historical information regarding the volatility of our own share prices to use as the input for all of our share-based fair value calculations. We utilize risk-free interest rates based on a zero-coupon U.S. treasury instrument, the term of which is consistent with the expected term of the share-based award. We have not paid, and do not anticipate paying, cash dividends on shares of our common stock; therefore, the expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero.
Research and Development Costs. Costs related to research, design and development of products are charged to research and development expense as incurred. These costs include direct salary and employee benefit-related costs for research and development personnel, costs incurred under the terms of collaborative agreements, costs for materials used in research and development activities, and costs for outside services.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
NM - The percentage change is not meaningful.
Revenue. Total revenues were approximately $12.8 million and $11.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Functional neurosurgery navigation and therapy product and service revenues, which consists of disposable product commercial sales related to cases utilizing the ClearPoint system and related services, decreased 12% to $6.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $7.1 million for the same period in 2019. This decrease was due primarily to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, in which elective surgical procedures, historically representing approximately 80% of our ClearPoint system case volume, were postponed or cancelled for a substantial portion of 2020. Although vaccinations to combat the COVID-19 virus have commenced, we are unable to determine the timing and extent to which the vaccination process will affect virus progression; the timing, adoption or viability of periodic resumption, if any, of elective procedures; and the resulting length of time that the COVID-19 pandemic will adversely affect our product revenues. There were no increases in functional neurosurgery navigation product prices during the period between the year ended December 31, 2020 and the same period in 2019 that would be reasonably expected to affect a typical customer order.
Biologics and drug delivery revenues, which include sales of services related to customer-sponsored clinical trials utilizing the ClearPoint system and of related disposable products, increased 109% to $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $2.4 million for the same period in 2019. This increase was due primarily to an increase from 2019 to 2020 of approximately $2.7 million, or 302%, in biologics and drug delivery services, due primarily to an increase in service revenue from a customer who is a related party, as described in Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. There were no increases in biologics and drug delivery product prices during 2020 that would be reasonably expected to affect a typical customer order.
Capital equipment revenue, consisting of sales of ClearPoint reusable hardware and software, and of related services, decreased 10% to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $1.7 million for the same period in 2019. While revenues from this product line historically have varied from quarter to quarter, we believe that many hospitals have postponed capital equipment acquisition activities due to the COVID-19 pandemic. There were no increases in capital equipment product prices during the period between the year ended December 31, 2020 and the same period in 2019 that would be reasonably expected to affect a typical customer order.
Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues was approximately $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing gross margin of 71% and 65%, respectively. This increase in gross margin was due primarily to a shift in the mix of revenues by line of business that resulted in service revenues, which bear higher gross margins in comparison to other product lines, representing a greater contribution to total sales for the year ended December 31, 2020, relative to the same period in 2019. While we believe that this factor may prevail during the period that precautionary measures are in effect due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we also believe it is likely that gross margin will erode from its current level if the mix of revenues and overhead allocations return to historical norms.
Research and Development Costs. Research and development costs were $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.8 million for the same period in 2019, an increase of $1.9 million, or 67%. The increase was due primarily to increases in: (a) compensation costs, due primarily to increases in headcount, of $0.6 million; (b) research costs of $0.5 million incurred in connection with collaborative agreements entered into during the year ended December 31, 2020; (c) product and software development costs of $0.2 million; (d) intellectual property costs, including amortization of acquired license rights, of $0.4 million; and (e) professional fees of $0.3 million.
Sales and Marketing Expenses. Sales and marketing expenses were $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $4.8 million for the same period in 2019, an increase of $0.6 million, or 13%. This increase was primarily due to a $1.1 million increase in base compensation costs, attributable primarily to headcount increases in our clinical and marketing teams, that were partially offset by decreases in travel of $0.4 million and incentive-based compensation of $0.3 million.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses were $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $4.3 million for the same period in 2019, an increase of $1.0 million, or 22%. This increase was due primarily to increases in: (a) compensation, consisting primarily of stock-based compensation and officer transition costs, of $0.6 million; (b) occupancy costs of $0.1 million; and (c) corporate legal fees of $0.2 million related primarily to new and potential biologic and drug delivery relationships.
Other Income. Other income was $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $9,000 for the same period in 2019. This increase was due primarily to the gain recognized on the forgiveness of the PPP Loan in November 2020, the proceeds of which the Company received in April 2020. Additional information with respect to the PPP Loan is in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Interest Expense, net. Net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.4 million, compared with $1.0 million for the same period in 2019. This increase was primarily due to: (a) an increase of $0.2 million in amortization of discount associated with notes payable, due to the acceleration of such amortization in 2020 of the 2010 Secured Notes, which were repaid and retired in 2020, and the amortization of the discount and financing costs incurred in January 2020 in connection with the 2020 Secured Notes; and (b) a $0.4 million increase in cash-based interest expense associated with notes payable, due to the issuance of the 2020 Secured Notes, as compared to the interest expense incurred in 2019 associated with the 2010 Secured Notes and the secured notes issued in 2014 and repaid in June 2019. Additional information with respect to the 2010 Secured Notes and the 2020 Secured Notes is in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalent balances aggregating $20.1 million, resulting primarily from completion of the 2019 PIPE and the note issuances pursuant to the 2020 Financing Transaction as discussed in Notes 8 and 6, respectively, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report and as discussed further below.
We have incurred net losses since our inception which has resulted in a cumulative deficit at December 31, 2020 of approximately $120 million. In addition, our use of cash from operations amounted to $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Since inception, we have financed our operations principally from the sale of equity securities, the issuance of notes payable and license arrangements.
As discussed in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, in May 2019, we completed the 2019 PIPE with certain accredited investors under which such investors purchased 2,426,455 shares of our common stock at $3.10 per share, resulting in proceeds of approximately $7.5 million, before deducting offering expenses aggregating approximately $0.1 million.
In January 2020, we entered into the 2020 Financing Transaction with two investors (the “2020 Convertible Noteholders”) under which we issued an aggregate principal amount of $17.5 million of floating rate secured convertible notes (the “First Closing Notes”), resulting in proceeds, net of financing costs paid and payable, and a commitment fee paid to one of the 2020 Convertible Noteholders, of approximately $16.8 million. From the net proceeds received from the issuance of the First Closing Notes, which have a five-year term, we repaid and retired the 2010 Junior Secured Notes Payable that otherwise would have matured in October and November 2020.
The terms of the Securities Purchase Agreement (the “SPA”) underlying the 2020 Financing Transaction also gave us the right, but not the obligation, to request one of the 2020 Convertible Noteholders to purchase an additional $5.0 million in principal amount of a note (the “Second Closing Note”). On December 29, 2020, under the terms of an amendment to the SPA which, among other provisions, increased the principal amount of the Second Closing Note, we issued the Second Closing Note to the 2020 Convertible Noteholder in the principal amount of $7.5 million.
In April 2020, we received $896,000 in proceeds through a loan funded under the Payroll Protection Program as part of the CARES Act (the “PPP Loan”). In November 2020, we were notified by the U.S. Small Business Administration that the loan had been forgiven under the provision of the CARES Act.
Additional information with respect to the 2020 Secured Notes and the PPP Loan is in Notes 6 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
As discussed in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, on February 23, 2021, we completed a public offering of 2,127,660 shares of our common stock.Net proceeds from the offering were approximately $46.8 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other estimated offering expenses payable by us.
Based on the foregoing, in management’s opinion, cash and cash equivalent balances at December 31, 2020, are sufficient to support the Company’s operations and meet its obligations for at least the next twelve months.
Cash Flows
Cash activity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is summarized as follows:
Net Cash Flows from Operating Activities. We used $7.8 million and $2.8 million of cash for operating activities in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In 2020, uses of cash in operating activities consisted primarily of: (i) our $6.8 million loss; (ii) an increase in accounts receivable of $0.8 million; and (iii) decreases in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $0.5 million, accrued interest of $1.0 million; lease liabilities of $0.1 million, and deferred revenue of $0.4 million. These uses were offset by: (a) a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.1 million; and (b) net non-cash expenses included in our net loss aggregating $1.6 million and consisting of expenses related to depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation, paid-in-kind interest, amortization of debt issuance costs and original issue discounts and amortization of lease right of use assets, and net of accretion in lease liabilities, which were partially offset by the gain recognized with the forgiveness of the PPP loan.
In 2019, uses of cash in operating activities consisted of: (i) our $5.5 million loss; (ii) increases in inventory of $1.0 million and prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.1 million; and (iii) a decrease in the lease liability of $0.1 million. These uses were offset by: (a) a decrease in accounts receivable of $0.1 million; (b) increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $1.2 million and in deferred revenue of $0.9 million; and (c) non-cash expenses included in our net loss aggregating $1.8 million and consisting of depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation, amortization of debt issuance costs and original issue discounts and amortization of lease right of use assets, net of accretion in lease liabilities.
Net Cash Flows from Investing Activities. Net cash flows used in investing activities in 2020 were $0.5 million and consisted primarily an acquisition of medical device license rights.
Net cash flows used in investing activities in 2019 were $0.2 million and consisted primarily of an acquisition of medical device license rights.
Net Cash Flows from Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 consisted of proceeds from: (a) the issuance of the 2020 Secured Notes amounting to $24.3 million net of financing cost and discount; (b) the PPP Loan, amounting to $0.9 million; and (c) the exercise of common stock warrants and options, amounting to $0.4 million, which were partially offset by repayments of notes payable amounting to $2.8 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2019 consisted of proceeds from the 2019 PIPE of $7.4 million and the exercise of warrants of $0.4 million. These proceeds were partially offset by (i) the prepayment in 2019 of financing costs in connection with the 2020 Secured Notes; and (ii) principal repayments of the 2014 and 2010 Secured Notes of $2.1 million.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Operating Capital and Capital Expenditure Requirements
To date, we have not achieved profitability. We could continue to incur net losses as we continue our efforts to expand the commercialization of our ClearPoint system products and pursue additional applications for our technology platforms. Our cash balances are typically held in a variety of demand accounts with a view to liquidity and capital preservation.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of medical devices, we are unable to estimate the exact amounts of capital outlays and operating expenditures necessary to successfully commercialize our ClearPoint system products and pursue additional applications for our technology platforms. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to, the following:
● the timing of broader market acceptance and adoption of our ClearPoint system products;
● the scope, rate of progress and cost of our ongoing product development activities relating to our ClearPoint system;
● the cost and timing of expanding our sales, clinical support, marketing and distribution capabilities, and other corporate infrastructure;
● the cost and timing of establishing inventories at levels sufficient to support our sales;
● the effect of competing technological and market developments;
● the cost of pursuing additional applications of our technology platforms under current collaborative arrangements, and the terms and timing of any future collaborative, licensing or other arrangements that we may establish;
● the cost and timing of any clinical trials;
● the cost and timing of regulatory filings, clearances and approvals; and
● the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights.