Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We are a late-stage clinical biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of drugs for the treatment of cancer. Our core objective is to leverage our proprietary PDC delivery platform to develop PDCs that are designed to specifically target cancer cells and deliver improved efficacy and better safety as a result of fewer off-target effects. Our PDC platform possesses the potential for the discovery and development of the next generation of cancer-targeting treatments, and we plan to develop PDCs both independently and through research and development collaborations.
Our lead PDC therapeutic, CLR 131 is a small-molecule PDC designed to provide targeted delivery of iodine-131 directly to cancer cells, while limiting exposure to healthy cells. We believe this profile differentiates CLR 131 from many traditional on-market treatments. CLR 131 is currently being evaluated in the multi cohort CLOVER-1 Phase 2 study in adult B-cell malignancies and the CLOVER-2 Phase 1 study for a variety of pediatric cancers. Our product pipeline also includes one preclinical PDC chemotherapeutic program (CLR 1900) and several partnered PDC assets. The CLR 1900 Series is being targeted for solid tumors with a payload that inhibits mitosis (cell division) a validated pathway for treating cancers.
Results of Operations
Research and development expense. Research and development expense consists of costs incurred in identifying, developing and testing, and manufacturing product candidates, which primarily include cost of manufacturing materials, fees paid to contract research organizations, fees paid to medical institutions for clinical studies, and costs to secure intellectual property. We analyze our research and development expenses based on four categories as follows: clinical projects, manufacturing and related, preclinical projects, and general fixed and overhead costs that are not allocated to the functional project costs, including personnel costs, facility costs, related overhead costs, and patent costs.
General and administrative expense. General and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries and other related costs for personnel in executive, finance, and administrative functions. Other costs include insurance, costs for public company activities, investor relations, directors’ fees, and professional fees for legal and accounting services.
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development. Research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $10,141,000 compared to approximately $8,996,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table is a comparison summary of research and development costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
The overall increase in research and development expense of approximately $1,145,000, or 13%, was primarily attributable to an increase in general research and development costs of approximately $1,540,000 largely related to an increase in research and development personnel. Manufacturing and related costs decreased by approximately $450,000 due to a reduction in materials production processes and related costs. The clinical and pre-clinical project costs were relatively consistent.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $5,150,000 compared to approximately $5,183,000 in 2019. The decrease of $18,000, or less than 1%, in general and administrative costs was primarily related to a decrease of approximately $42,000 in personnel costs and an approximate $158,000 decrease related to public company expenses. These costs were offset by an increase in legal fees and business insurance of approximately $185,000.
Gain on Revaluation of Derivative Warrants. We recorded a gain on the revaluation of derivative warrants of approximately $43,000 in 2019. These amounts, which are non-cash in nature, represent the change in fair value (resulting primarily from changes in our stock price, and reduced remaining time over which the warrants will remain outstanding), during the respective period, of outstanding warrants which were classified as liabilities because they contain a certain type of cash settlement provision or a “down-round” anti-dilution provision whereby the number of shares for which the warrants are exercisable and/or the exercise price of the warrants is subject to change in the event of certain issuances of stock at prices below the then-effective exercise prices of the warrants. For the year ended December 31, 2020, there was no gain or loss on derivatives as they expired on August 20, 2019.
Other income (expense), net. Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $185,000 due a gain on extinguishment of debt related to the forgiveness of our loan and accrued interest obtained under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The PPP was established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act which provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The loans and accrued interest are forgivable after 24 weeks as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if the borrower terminates employees or reduces salaries during the 24-week period. Interest income, net, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $11,000, as compared to approximately $43,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is a result of decreased returns on investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Year ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $57.2 million compared to $10.6 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was largely attributable to net cash received from financing activities of approximately $60.5 million, offset by cash used in operating activities of $13.9 million and cash used in investing activities of approximately $62,000.
Cash provided from financing activities of approximately $60.5 million was due to the net proceeds we received from the sale of our common stock, preferred stock and pre-funded warrants. On June 5, 2020, we issued and sold 14,601,628 shares of common stock, 2,789,700 pre-funded warrants exercisable for one share of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.00001 per share and 8,695,664 Series H warrants to purchase 8,695,664 shares of common stock. The public offering price of a share of common stock together with one-half of a Series H warrant to purchase one share of common stock was $1.15. The public offering price of a pre-funded warrant together with one-half of a Series H Warrant was $1.1499. The Series H warrants have an exercise price of $1.2075 per share and are exercisable for five years from the date of issuance. Gross offering proceeds were $20.0 million, with net proceeds of approximately $18.3 million after deducting placement agent fees and related offering expenses. On December 23, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement where we agreed to sell 18,148,136 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $1.35 per share of common stock, prior to deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses. On December 23, 2020, in a separate concurrent private placement, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain purchasers named therein, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell, 1,518.5180 shares of Series D convertible preferred stock (the “Preferred Shares”). The Preferred Shares are convertible into a number of shares of common stock equal to $13,500 divided by $1.35 (or 10,000 shares of common stock for each share of Series D Preferred Stock converted) and were issued at a price of $13,500 per share of Series D Preferred Stock. The net proceeds of the offerings, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions, placement agency fees and estimated offering expenses payable by us were approximately $41.4 million.
Cash used in operating activities of approximately $13.9 million was largely due to funding of our research and development programs and general and administrative expenses.
Cash used in investing activities of $62,000 was due to the purchase of computer hardware.
Liquidity Outlook
We have incurred losses since inception in devoting substantially all of our efforts toward research and development and have an accumulated deficit of approximately $126.8 million at December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated a net loss of approximately $15.1 million, and used approximately $13.9 million in cash from operations. We expect that we will continue to generate operating losses for the foreseeable future. At December 31, 2020, our consolidated cash balance was approximately $57.2 million. We believe our cash balance at December 31, 2020, is adequate to fund our basic budgeted operations for at least 12 months from the filing of these financial statements. Our ability to execute our operating plan beyond that time depends on our ability to obtain additional funding via the sale of equity and/or debt securities, a strategic transaction or otherwise. We plan to actively pursue all available financing alternatives; however, there can be no assurance that we will obtain the necessary funding. Other than the uncertainties regarding our ability to obtain additional funding, there are currently no known trends, demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that are likely to materially affect our liquidity. To date we have raised capital aggregating approximately $267 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., or GAAP, requires management to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience, knowledge of current conditions and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We review these estimates and assumptions periodically and reflect the effects of revisions in the period that they are determined to be necessary.
We believe that the following accounting policies reflect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Accrued Liabilities. As part of the process of preparing financial statements, we are required to estimate accrued liabilities. This process involves identifying services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for such service as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements. Examples of estimated expenses for which we accrue include: contract service fees such as amounts paid to clinical research organizations and investigators in conjunction with clinical studies; fees paid to vendors in conjunction with the manufacturing of clinical materials; and professional service fees, such as for lawyers and accountants. In connection with such service fees, our estimates are most affected by our understanding of the status and timing of services provided relative to the actual levels of services incurred by such service providers. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. In the event that we do not identify certain costs that have begun to be incurred, or we over- or underestimate the level of services performed or the costs of such services, our reported expenses for such period would be too high or too low. The date on which certain services commence, the level of services performed on or before a given date and the cost of such services are often determined based on subjective judgments. We make these judgments based on the facts and circumstances known to us, in accordance with GAAP.
Long-Lived Assets. Long-lived assets include property, equipment and right-of-use assets. We periodically evaluate long-lived assets for potential impairment. Whenever events or circumstances change, an assessment is made as to whether there has been impairment to the value of long-lived assets by determining whether projected undiscounted cash flows generated by the applicable asset exceed its net book value as of the assessment date. There were no long-lived asset impairment charges recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Right-Of-Use Asset and Lease Liability. A lessee is also required to record a right-of-use asset and a lease liability for all leases with a term of greater than twelve months regardless of classification. Leases with a term of twelve months or less will be accounted for similar to existing guidance for operating leases.
Stock-based Compensation. We account for stock-based compensation by measuring the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The cost of non-performance-based awards is recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award, the requisite service period (usually the vesting period). For stock options with performance-based vesting provisions, recognition of compensation expense commences if and when the achievement of the performance criteria is deemed probable and is recognized over the relevant performance period. We account for transactions in which services are received from non-employees in exchange for equity instruments based on the fair value of such services received or of the equity instruments issued (using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model) whichever is more reliably measured. The measurement of stock-based compensation for non-employees is subject to periodic adjustments as the options vest, and the expense is recognized over the period during which a non-employee is required to provide services for the award (usually the vesting period).
Accounting for equity instruments granted or sold by us under accounting guidance requires fair-value estimates of the equity instrument granted or sold. If our estimates of the fair value of these equity instruments are too high or too low, our expenses may be over- or understated. For equity instruments granted or sold in exchange for the receipt of goods or services, we estimate the fair value of the equity instruments based on consideration of factors that we deem to be relevant at that time.
Derivative Warrants. Certain warrants to purchase common stock that do not meet the requirements for classification as equity, in accordance with the Derivatives and Hedging Topic of the FASB ASC, had been classified as liabilities on our balance sheet. In such instances, net-cash settlement is assumed for financial reporting purposes, even when the terms of the underlying contracts do not provide for a net-cash settlement. These warrants had been considered derivative instruments as the agreements allow cash settlement in certain circumstances or contain either “down-round” provisions whereby the number of shares for which the warrants are exercisable and/or the exercise price of the warrants is subject to change in the event of certain issuances of stock at prices below the then-effective exercise price of the warrants. The primary underlying risk exposure pertaining to the warrants was the change in fair value of the underlying common stock. Such financial instruments were initially recorded at fair value, or relative fair value when issued with other instruments, with subsequent changes in fair value recorded as a component of gain or loss on derivatives in each reporting period.
The fair value of outstanding derivative warrants was estimated as of a reporting date. Where an active market for the warrant exists, fair value is based on the market value. Where no active market exists, the Company principally uses a modified option-pricing model together with assumptions that consider, among other variables, the fair value of the underlying stock, risk-free interest rates, volatility, contractual term of the warrants, projected future financings and dividend rates in estimating fair value for the warrants considered to be derivative instruments. We estimate volatility based on an average of our historical volatility and volatility estimates of publicly held drug development companies with similar market capitalizations. If our estimates of the fair value of these derivative warrants are too high or too low, our expenses may be over- or understated. No derivative warrants existed on December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019.
Fair value measurements. We account for certain financial assets at fair value, defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability (i.e., exit price) in the principal, most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. As such, fair value is a market-based measurement that is determined based on assumptions that a market participant would use in pricing an asset or liability. In conjunction with our financing in 2019 we allocated the common stock and warrants separately based on the respective estimated relative fair value. In conjunction with our financing in June 2020, we allocated the common stock, warrants and pre-funded warrants separately based on the respective estimated relative fair value. In conjunction with our financing in December 2020, we allocated the common stock and preferred stock separately based on the respective estimated relative fair value. If management made different assumptions or judgments, material differences in measurements of fair value could occur.
Contingencies. From time to time, we may become involved in legal disputes regarding our products in development, intellectual property rights, stockholder claims or other matters. We assess each matter to determine if a contingent liability should be recorded. In making this assessment, we may consult, depending on the nature of the matter, with external legal counsel and technical experts. Based on the information we obtain, combined with our judgment regarding all the facts and circumstances of each matter, we determine whether it is probable that a contingent loss may be incurred and whether the amount of such loss can be reasonably estimated. Should a loss be probable and reasonably estimable, we record a loss. In determining the amount of the loss, we consider advice received from experts in the specific matter, current status of legal proceedings, if any, prior case history and other factors. Should the judgments and estimates made by us be incorrect, we may need to record additional contingent losses that could materially adversely impact the results of operations and financial conditions.