ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes to those statements included later in this Annual Report. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, beliefs and expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company dedicated to developing and delivering treatments that restore and preserve vision for people with serious back of the eye diseases. Our proprietary SCS Microinjector targeting the suprachoroidal space, or SCS, offers unique access to the macula, retina and choroid where sight-threatening disease often occurs. Our SCS injection platform is an inherently flexible, in-office, non-surgical procedure intended to provide targeted delivery to the site of disease and to work with both established and new formulations of medications, as well as future therapeutic innovations.
We are leveraging our SCS injection platform by building an internal research and development pipeline targeting retinal diseases and by creating external collaborations with other companies. Using our suprachoroidal injection technology in conjunction with proprietary formulations of existing drugs as well as novel therapies, we believe that we have created a broad therapeutic platform for developing product candidates to treat serious eye diseases.
We have incurred net losses since our inception in May 2011. Our operations to date have been limited to organizing and staffing our company, raising capital, conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials and undertaking other research and development initiatives. To date, we have not generated any revenue, other than license and other revenue generated from collaboration agreements, and we have primarily financed our operations through public offerings and private placements of our equity securities, issuances of convertible promissory notes and loan agreements. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $255.9 million. We recorded net losses of $18.2 million, $30.8 million and $82.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We anticipate that a substantial portion of our capital resources and efforts in the foreseeable future will be focused on completing the necessary development for and obtaining regulatory approval of our product candidates, as well as discovering compounds and developing proprietary solutions to utilize with our SCS Microinjector.
We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing operating losses at least for the next several years. We do not expect to generate significant product or license and other revenue unless and until we successfully complete necessary development of, obtain regulatory approval for and successfully commercialize one or more of our product candidates, either on our own or together with a third party. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year, depending on the timing of our clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities. Our clinical trial expenses have decreased significantly following our decision to discontinue late-stage clinical trials of XIPERE for indications other than uveitis. However, we will continue our efforts to seek to discover, research and develop additional product candidates and seek regulatory approvals in additional regions for XIPERE for the treatment of macular edema associated with uveitis. We have advanced our proprietary suspension of axitinib, which we refer to as CLS-AX, into clinical development, and if these trials are successful, we anticipate an increase in clinical trial expenses as we continue further development of that product candidate.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue from the sale of any drugs, and we do not expect to generate any product revenue unless or until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize our product candidates, either on our own or with a third party. Our revenue in recent years has been generated primarily from our license agreements. We are seeking to enter into additional license and other agreements with third parties to evaluate the potential use of our proprietary SCS Microinjector with the third party’s product candidates for the treatment of various eye diseases. These agreements may include payments to us for technology access, upfront license payments, regulatory and commercial milestone payments and royalties.
Research and Development
Since our inception, we have focused on our development programs. Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the research and development of our preclinical and clinical product candidates, which include:
•
employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and share-based compensation expense for research and development personnel;
•
expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, as well as contract manufacturing organizations and consultants that conduct clinical trials and preclinical studies;
•
costs associated with preclinical activities and clinical trials;
•
costs associated with submitting regulatory approval applications for our product candidates;
•
costs associated with training physicians on the suprachoroidal injection procedure and educating and providing them with appropriate product candidate information;
•
costs associated with technology and intellectual property licenses;
•
costs for our research and development facility; and
•
depreciation expense for assets used in research and development activities.
We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred. These costs include preclinical activities, such as manufacturing and stability and toxicology studies, that are supportive of a product candidate itself. In addition, there are expenses related to clinical trials and similar activities for each program, including costs associated with CROs. Clinical costs are recognized based on the terms of underlying agreements, as well as an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations and additional information provided to us by our vendors about their actual costs occurred. Expenses related to activities that support more than one development program or activity, such as salaries, share-based compensation and depreciation, are not classified as direct preclinical costs or clinical costs and are separately classified as unallocated.
The following table shows our research and development expenses by type of activity for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Our expenses related to clinical trials are based on estimates of patient enrollment and related expenses at clinical investigator sites as well as estimates for the services received and efforts expended under contracts with research institutions, consultants and CROs that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. We generally accrue expenses related to clinical trials based on contracted amounts applied to the level of patient enrollment and activity according to the protocol. If future timelines or contracts are modified based upon changes in the clinical trial protocol or scope of work to be performed, we would modify our estimates of accrued expenses accordingly on a prospective basis.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. However, it is difficult to determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of our current or future preclinical programs and clinical trials of our product candidates, or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates that obtain regulatory approval. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors that include the following:
•
the costs associated with process development, scale-up and manufacturing of XIPERE and the SCS Microinjector for clinical trials and for requirements associated with regulatory filings associated with approval;
•
the number of trials required for approval and any requirement for extension trials;
•
per patient trial costs;
•
the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•
the number of sites included in the trials;
•
the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•
the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•
the number of doses that patients receive;
•
the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the enrollment in, and timing of, our clinical trials;
•
the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•
potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•
the duration of patient follow-up; and
•
the efficacy and safety profiles of the product candidates.
In addition, the probability of success for each product candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We will determine which programs to pursue and how much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate, as well as an assessment of each product candidate’s commercial potential.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including share-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative costs historically included commercial pre-launch preparations for XIPERE, and also include facility related costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, and accounting and audit services.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income consists of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. Interest income is not currently significant to our financial statements.
Other expense consists of interest expense incurred under our loan agreements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the dates of the balance sheets and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting periods. In accordance with U.S GAAP, we evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. Significant estimates include assumptions used in the determination of share-based compensation and some of our research and development expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We define our critical accounting policies, in accordance with U.S. GAAP, as those that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations, as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. While our significant accounting policies are more fully
described in Note 2 to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe the following are the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements that require significant estimates and judgments.
Revenue recognition
On January 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Update, or ASU, 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), or ASC 606, as amended by ASU 2016-08, 2016-10, 2016-12 and 2016-20 using the modified retrospective method. Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for the transfer of promised goods or services to customers. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with customers that are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following steps: (1) identify the contract with the customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services transferred to the customer.
As part of the accounting for our revenue arrangements, we develop assumptions that require judgment such as the estimate of the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract.
Licenses of intellectual property: If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenue allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promised goods or services, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes development, commercialization, and regulatory milestone payments, we evaluate whether the achievement of the milestones is considered probable and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. Performance milestone payments represent a form of variable consideration. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Achievement of milestones that are not within our or our licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable until the approvals are achieved. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis and we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achieving such milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Manufacturing Supply Services: Arrangements that include a promise for future supply of drug substance or drug product for either clinical development or commercial supply at the customer’s discretion are generally considered options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the licensee and if so, they are accounted for as separate performance obligations at the outset of the arrangement.
Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not received any royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements.
Accrued expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with applicable vendor personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued expenses include fees paid to CROs and investigative sites in connection with clinical trials.
We accrue our expenses related to clinical trials based on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct research activities or manage clinical trials on our behalf. The
financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the level of effort varies from our estimate, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. If we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates. Although we do not currently anticipate the future settlement of existing accruals to differ materially from our estimates, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any period.
Share-based compensation
Compensation cost related to share-based awards granted to employees is measured based on the estimated fair value of the award at the grant date. We estimate the fair value of stock options using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. Compensation expense for options granted to non-employees is determined as the fair value of consideration received or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more reliably measured. Share-based compensation costs are expensed on a straight-line basis over the relevant vesting period. The fair value of restricted stock units, or RSUs, granted is measured based on the market value of our common stock on the date of grant and is recognized ratably over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the awards. All share-based compensation costs are recorded in general and administrative or research and development costs in the statements of operations based upon the underlying employees’ roles.
Significant factors, assumptions and methodologies used in determining fair value
Determining the appropriate fair value measurement of share-based awards requires the use of subjective assumptions. The determination of the fair value measurement of options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model is affected by our estimated common stock fair values as well as assumptions regarding a number of other subjective variables. These other variables include the expected term of the options, our expected stock price volatility over the expected term of the options, stock option exercise and cancellation behaviors, risk-free interest rates and expected dividends.
We estimate the fair value of stock options at the grant date using Black-Scholes option pricing model with the following assumptions:
•
Fair value of our common stock. We estimate the fair value of our common stock by reference to the closing price of our common stock on The Nasdaq Global Market on the date of grant.
•
Volatility. We calculate expected volatility based on the historical volatility of our common stock.
•
Expected term. We use the simplified method as prescribed by the SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment, as we do not have sufficient historical exercise and post-vesting termination data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term of stock options granted to employees.
•
Risk-free rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yields of U.S. Treasury securities with maturities similar to the expected time to liquidity.
•
Forfeitures. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur.
•
Dividend yield. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
We have an employee stock purchase plan that is considered a compensatory plan. The fair value of the discount and the look-back period of the employee stock purchase plan are estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and expense is recognized over the six-month withholding period prior to the purchase date.
Share-based compensation expense related to stock options, the employee stock purchase plan and RSUs aggregated $3.6 million, $4.6 million and $4.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Tax valuation allowance
We recorded aggregate deferred tax assets of $63.4 million, primarily related to our net operating losses, as of December 31, 2020, which have been fully offset by a valuation allowance due to uncertainties surrounding our ability to realize these tax benefits. We record a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized. We provided a full valuation
allowance on our deferred tax assets that primarily consist of cumulative net operating losses, or NOLs for the period from our inception through December 31, 2020. We incurred a net loss for tax purposes of $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Due to our three-year cumulative loss position, history of operating losses and losses expected to be incurred in the foreseeable future, we considered it necessary to provide for a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets.
Our deferred tax assets are primarily composed of federal and state tax NOL carryforwards. As of December 31, 2020, we had federal NOL carryforwards of $232.7 million and state NOL carryforwards of $40.7 million available to reduce future taxable income, if any. These federal NOL carryforwards will begin to expire at various dates starting in 2031. The state NOL carryforwards will begin to expire at various dates starting in 2027. In general, if we experience a greater than 50 percentage point aggregate change in ownership of specified significant stockholders over a three-year period, utilization of our pre-change NOL carryforwards will be subject to an annual limitation under Section 382 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code, and similar state laws. Such limitations may result in expiration of a portion of the NOL carryforwards before utilization and may be substantial. If we experience a Section 382 ownership change as a result of future offerings or changes in our stock ownership, some of which changes are outside our control, the tax benefits related to the NOL carryforwards may be further limited or lost.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenue. In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we recognized $7.7 million and $2.1 million, respectively, of revenue associated with our license agreements. In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $0.2 million and $0.1 million, respectively, of revenue associated with other agreements to evaluate the potential use of our proprietary SCS Microinjector with third-party product candidates for the treatment of various diseases.
Research and development. Research and development expense decreased by $0.6 million, from $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $15.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily attributable to the $2.2 million in costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2019 to close down the SAPPHIRE and TOPAZ trials. Additionally, there was a $0.9 million decrease in employee-related costs and a $0.2 million decrease in travel costs between the periods. These decreases were partially offset by a $3.0 million increase in costs related to device and drug manufacturing for XIPERE and CLS-AX, as well as the initial startup costs for the Phase 1/2a clinical trial of CLS-AX referred to as OASIS.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased by $6.1 million, from $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily attributable to a $4.1 million reduction in marketing-related expenses related to the change of our business strategy to seek partners for XIPERE rather than commercializing XIPERE on our own, a decrease of $1.4 million of employee-related costs due to expenses incurred in the prior year primarily related to the departure of our former chief executive officer and a $0.9 million decrease in professional fees.
Other expense. Other expense for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 primarily consisted of interest on long-term debt, the amortization of financing costs, the accretion of warrants and the final payment related to our loan agreements. The decrease in other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily due to lower costs on our loan agreement that we prepaid in full in May 2020.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Revenue. In the year ended December 31, 2019 we recognized $2.1 million of revenue associated with our license agreements. In the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we recognized $0.1 million and $30,000, respectively, of revenue associated with other agreements.
Research and development. Research and development expense decreased by $52.6 million, from $68.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily attributable to a $42.1 million decrease due to closing down the SAPPHIRE and TOPAZ trials. Additionally, there was a $4.6 million decrease due to the completion of the PEACHTREE trial during the first quarter of 2018, a $3.2 million decrease in costs related to our DME program, as the TYBEE trial was completed in the second quarter of 2018, a $1.2 million decrease in costs related to device and drug manufacturing, a $0.6 million decrease in costs related to quality assurance as audits related to our NDA filing were completed during 2018 and a $1.4 million decrease in regulatory expenses as the NDA submission for XIPERE was completed in the fourth quarter of 2018. These decreases were partially offset by a $0.4 million increase in employee-related costs and a $0.5 million increase in nonclinical activities.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses increased by $2.1 million, from $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to a $1.9 million increase in employee-related costs, including accrued expenses related to the resignation of our former CEO, and an increase of $0.9 million in professional fees. These increases were partially offset by a $0.4 million decrease that was primarily attributable to marketing-related expenses related to the change of our business strategy to seek partners for XIPERE rather than commercialize it on our own.
Other (expense) income. The decrease from other income of $0.1 million in 2018 to other expense of $0.5 million in 2019 was the result of higher interest income on short-term investment balances in the first quarter of 2018 following our public offering of common stock, which balances decreased over time.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have funded our operations primarily through the proceeds of public offerings of our common stock, sales of convertible preferred stock and the issuance of long-term debt. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $17.3 million. We invest any cash in excess of our immediate requirements primarily with a view to liquidity and capital preservation. As of December 31, 2020, our funds were held in cash and money market funds.
On January 6, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional purchasers pursuant to which we issued and sold 4.2 million shares of our common stock in a registered direct offering at a price of $2.851 per share. We raised net cash proceeds of $11.1 million after deducting offering expenses.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 6.2 million shares of our common stock for net proceeds of $12.0 million under the at-the-market, or ATM, agreement, Cowen and Company LLC, or Cowen. Under the ATM agreement, we may offer and
sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock through Cowen acting as our sales agent. As of December 31, 2020, there was $27.0 million available for future sales under the ATM agreement. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we sold 1.2 million shares of our common stock for net proceeds of $3.3 million.
In September 2020, we received $3.0 million in milestone payments under the REGENXBIO agreement.
On April 20, 2020, we entered into a loan agreement with Silicon Valley Bank under the terms of which Silicon Valley Bank loaned us $1.0 million, or the PPP Loan, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act. In accordance with the requirements of the CARES Act, we used the proceeds primarily for payroll costs and other eligible expenses. The CARES Act and the PPP provided a mechanism for forgiveness of up to the full amount borrowed. On January 11, 2021, we received notification from Silicon Valley bank that the full amount borrowed under the PPP Loan and approximately $7,000 of accrued interest was forgiven.
On March 10, 2020, we entered into the Arctic License Agreement, under which Arctic Vision has agreed to pay us up to a total of $35.5 million. This amount includes an upfront payment of $4.0 million, which we received in March 2020, as well as an aggregate of up to $31.5 million in potential development milestone payments for specified events prior to and including receipt of regulatory approval of XIPERE in the United States and potential sales milestone payments for achievement of specified levels of net sales. Further, during the applicable royalty term, we will also be entitled to receive tiered royalties of 10-12% of net sales in the Arctic Territory, subject to customary reductions.
We previously entered into a loan and security agreement with Silicon Valley Bank and MidCap Financial Services, or collectively the Lenders, under which we borrowed $10.0 million in May 2018. In October 2019, we repaid $5.0 million of the outstanding principal balance. Under the loan agreement, we were required to pay accrued interest only on the $5.0 million remaining outstanding balance through October 31, 2020, followed by consecutive equal monthly payments of principal and interest in arrears continuing through the maturity date of October 1, 2022. We had the option to prepay the outstanding balance in full, subject to a prepayment fee. In May 2020, we prepaid in full the outstanding $5.0 million principal balance, plus $0.3 million reflecting a final payment fee and accrued interest. The prepayment fees were waived by the Lenders.
Funding Requirements
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, ongoing costs related to our NDA submission for XIPERE, research and development costs to build our product candidate pipeline, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. As such, at this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of XIPERE or any future product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from product sales. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
•
successful enrollment in, and completion of, clinical trials;
•
receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•
establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
•
obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates; and
•
launching commercial sales of the products, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that candidate.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings and potential collaboration, license and development agreements. Other than potential payments we may receive under our license and other agreements, we do not currently have any committed external source of funds, though, as described above, we may also be able to sell our common stock under the ATM agreement with Cowen subject to the terms of that agreement and depending on market conditions. We expect that we will require additional capital to fund our ongoing operations. Additional funds may not be available to us on a timely basis, on commercially reasonable terms, or at all. Our ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, your ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common
stockholder. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise funds through additional collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, including any future collaboration or licensing arrangement for XIPERE outside the U.S. and Canada, we may be required to relinquish additional rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our drug development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
We also incur costs as a public company, including costs and expenses for fees to members of our board of directors, accounting and finance personnel costs, directors and officers insurance premiums, audit and legal fees, investor relations fees and expenses for compliance with reporting requirements under the Exchange Act and rules implemented by the SEC and Nasdaq.
Outlook
We have suffered recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception and anticipate incurring additional losses until such time, if ever, that we can obtain FDA approval to market and then generate significant royalties from XIPERE and other licensing arrangements or revenues from other product candidates. We will need additional financing to fund our operations. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date of this report. Our plans primarily consist of raising additional capital, potentially in a combination of equity or debt financings or restructurings, or potentially entering into additional collaborations, partnerships and other strategic arrangements.
Based on our current plans and forecasted expenses, we expect that our cash and cash equivalents as of the filing date, March 15, 2021, will enable us to fund our planned operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the first quarter of 2022. This estimate does not give effect to additional development milestone payments we might receive under the agreements with Bausch, REGENXBIO or Arctic Vision or in connection with any other potential license or collaboration agreement for XIPERE or any future product candidates. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our capital resources sooner than we expect.
Our financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might result should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
The following is a summary of the net cash flows provided by (used in) our operating, investing and financing activities:
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, our operating activities used net cash of $13.0 million, $27.1 million and $79.2 million, respectively. The use of cash in each period primarily resulted from our net losses.
The decrease in the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to lower research and development expenses as a result of the discontinuation of the SAPPHIRE and TOPAZ trials and ceasing of commercialization activities in 2019. The losses were partially offset by non-cash items, made up primarily of share-based compensation, of $3.6 million and $4.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The decrease in net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily attributable to lower research and development expenses as a result of the completion of the PEACHTREE and TYBEE trials in the prior year and the discontinuation of the SAPPHIRE and TOPAZ trials. The year ended December 31, 2019 also included a net cash outflow of $5.1 million from a decrease in accounts payable, which was the result of payments we made in connection with winding down the clinical trials.
The increase in net loss for the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily attributable to higher research and development expenses related to our Phase 3 clinical trials PEACHTREE, SAPPHIRE and TOPAZ and the related expenses to support them including employee-related costs. In addition, for the year ended December 31, 2018, we incurred regulatory costs in preparation for an NDA submission and costs associated with the planned commercialization of XIPERE.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, our investing activities used net cash of $55,000 for the purchase of machinery and equipment. In the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by investing activities of $32.9 million consisted of maturities of short-term available-for-sale investments. In the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in investing activities of $3.8 million was primarily for the purchase of $80.1 million of short-term, available-for-sale investments, which included commercial paper and treasury bills, offset by the maturities of $76.5 million of short-term, available-for-sale investments, which included corporate bonds, commercial paper and treasury bills and $88,000 for the purchase of furniture and fixtures.
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, our net cash provided by financing activities was $7.9 million, $8.7 million and $81.8 million, respectively. The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily comprised of $12.0 million of net proceeds from the sale of shares of common stock under the ATM agreement and $1.0 million of proceeds from the PPP Loan, partially offset by the full prepayment of the remaining $5.3 million owed under our loan agreement. The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily comprised of $10.3 million of net proceeds from sales of common stock pursuant to our ATM agreement and $3.3 million of net proceeds from a private placement of common stock, partially offset by a $5.0 million principal payment made under our Loan Agreement. The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily comprised of the $79.6 million of net proceeds received from a public follow-on offering of our common stock in March 2018, $1.7 million of net proceeds received from the Loan Agreement and $0.5 million of proceeds received from shares issued from the exercise of stock options and the employee stock purchase plan.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies” for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their effect on us.
JOBS Act
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period, and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies.