ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” should be read in conjunction with the “Business” section and our audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020, which are included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The financial information contained herein is taken or derived from such consolidated financial statements, unless otherwise indicated. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Actual results could differ materially from those that are discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, particularly under “Risk Factors.”
Amounts are presented in thousands of U.S. dollars, except for per share data or as otherwise noted.
Our Company
We are a multi-national cannabis company with the mission to be an industry-leading global cannabinoid company recognized for our principles, people and performance while fostering a healthier global community. We are working to develop one of the industry’s leading, low-cost global business-to-business supply chains with the goal of providing high quality, pharmaceutical grade cannabis and wellness products to customers and patients at competitive prices. In addition to the cannabinoid business, we are also engaged in the non-cannabinoid business of formulating, manufacturing, marketing, selling, distributing, and otherwise commercializing homeopathic and other natural remedies, wellness products, and nutraceuticals. We continue to invest in building a distribution network with a global footprint, with operations and investments in Colombia, Portugal, Germany, the United States and Canada.
As of the date of this Form 10-K, we own over 1.9 million square feet of greenhouse cultivation capacity across two continents and approximately 13 million square feet of agricultural land, with an option to acquire approximately 73 million additional
square feet of land for cultivation expansion. Our Colombian cultivation operations have one of the largest greenhouse capacities licensed for cannabis production in Latin America, and have been granted GACP certification by CUMCS. Our Colombian manufacturing facilities were granted Colombian GMP certification by INVIMA in August 2019 and EU GMP certification by HALMED in July 2020. Our post-harvest facility also received EU GMP certification in July 2020. We are the first company to legally export cannabinoids from Colombia, and we are among a small number of cannabis companies in the world to receive EU GMP certification. EU GMP certification is a required qualification to import medical cannabis products into the European market, which adheres to strict pharmaceutical quality standards. In August 2020, our operations in Portugal were provisionally licensed for the commercial cultivation, import and export of medical cannabis by INFARMED. Our Portugal facility received the GACP certificate in March 2021.
Unlike several cannabis operators, which in many cases are confined to one geography and may rely on initial market protections afforded by the existing regulatory framework, we can scale our production in low-cost regions of the world, such as Colombia and Portugal, while maintaining access to some higher value-added end markets such as the EU because of our EU GMP certification and global network.
Our business model is focused on partnering with leading and emerging cannabis businesses by providing them with lower cost product, variable cost structures, reliable supply throughout the year, and accelerated speed to market. This is achievable due to our production locations, capacity, product registrations and various product certifications. To date, we have had limited export shipments of our cannabis products to Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Germany, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Peru, Poland, Spain, South Africa, the United Kingdom and the United States.
In April 2019, we acquired Herbal Brands, which manufactures and distributes nutraceutical products to over 15,000 retail locations across the United States. Although the vast majority of our sales to date have been from our Herbal Brands subsidiary, we believe Herbal Brands provides a platform we can leverage for greater cannabinoid distribution in the future.
We manage our business in two segments: the Cannabinoid and Non-Cannabinoid segments.
1.The Cannabinoid operating segment is comprised of the Company’s cultivation, extraction, manufacturing, commercialization, and distribution of cannabinoid products. This operating segment is in the early stages of commercializing cannabinoid products internationally subject to applicable international and state laws and regulations. All our customers and sales for our cannabinoid segment products are presently outside of the U.S.
2.The Non-Cannabinoid operating segment is comprised of the brands and manufacturing assets acquired as part of our acquisition of Herbal Brands. The segment is engaged in the business of formulating, manufacturing, marketing, selling, distributing, and otherwise commercializing wellness products and nutraceuticals, excluding cannabinoid products. Our principal customers for the Herbal Brands products include specialty and health retailers, mass retailers and specialty and health stores in the U.S.
Factors Impacting our Business
We believe that our future success will primarily depend on the following factors:
Globalization of the industry. Due to our MNO model focused on geographic diversification, which distinguishes us from many of our competitors and allows us to scale our production in low-cost regions of the world, we believe we are well positioned to capitalize in markets where the medical cannabis and hemp industry offers a reasonably regulated and free flow of goods across national boundaries. While certain countries, such as Canada, have historically not welcomed imported cannabis or hemp products for commercial purposes, other countries, such as Germany and Brazil, depend primarily on imports.
Global medical market expansion. We believe that we are well-positioned to capitalize on expansion of global cannabis markets, as more legal medical cannabis geographies emerge. Medical cannabis is now authorized at the national or federal level in over 41 countries, and more than half of these countries have legalized or introduced significant reforms to their cannabis-use laws to broaden the scope of permitted medical uses beyond the original parameters. Over the past three years, we have established regional operations in Canada, Colombia, Portugal, and Germany, and we have invested significant resources in personnel and partnerships to build the foundation for new export channels.
Product development and innovation. Because of the rapid evolution of the cannabis industry, the disparate regulations across different geographies, and the time required to develop and validate pharmaceutical-grade products, the pace at which we can expand our portfolio of products and formulations will impact market acceptance for our products. To increase our output while maintaining or reducing unit costs, we may need to enhance our cultivation, extraction, and other processing methods.
We believe our focus on the production of proprietary and exclusive products or formulations that comply with stringent regulations, or that result in enhanced benefits for patients or consumers, could create advantages in various markets.
Regulatory expertise and adaptation. As more markets welcome the importation of cannabis or hemp products for commercial purposes, which requires navigating and complying with the strict and evolving cannabis regulations across the different geographies, we believe that we are well positioned to expand in these markets. Clever Leaves has built a global regulatory team that is experienced in developing good relationships with regulatory agencies and governments that govern and shape the cannabis industry in their respective jurisdictions. Key expertise includes complying with and securing quotas, product approvals, export permits, import permits and other geographic specific licenses.
Strategically expanding productive capacity and manufacturing capabilities. It is beneficial to have low operating costs and to control the production process to generate consistency and quality on a large scale. As we expand into new markets and grow our presence in existing markets, we expect significant investments in cultivation and processing will be required, which may necessitate additional capital raises. We also aim to increase productive capacity through innovation in cultivation or processing methods, improving yields and output levels of our existing assets. While we believe our core cultivation and extraction operations in Colombia are adequately sized for our current business operations, as our cannabis sales grow and expand to flower products, we plan to expand our operations and invest in advanced processing or finished good manufacturing capabilities, particularly in Colombia and Portugal.
Key Operating Metrics
We use the following key operating metrics to evaluate our business and operations, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, project our future performance and make strategic decisions. Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate key operating metrics with similar names differently, which may reduce their usefulness as comparative measures.
The following table presents select operational and financial information of the Cannabinoid segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
N/M: Not a meaningful percentage.
_______________
(a)Kilograms (dry flower) harvested - represents the weight of dried plants post-harvest both for sale and for research and development purposes. This operating metric is used to measure the productivity of our farms.
(b)Costs to produce - includes costs associated with cultivation, extraction, depreciation, quality assurance and supply chain related to kilograms (dry flower) harvested.
(c)Kilograms sold - represents the amount in kilograms of product sold in dry plant equivalents. Extract is converted to dry plant equivalent for purposes of this metric.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we sold 24,035 and 644 kilograms, respectively, of dry flower equivalents. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our cannabinoid segment sales were primarily in Colombia, Australia, Israel and Brazil. The increase was primarily driven by the Company commencing its sales activity for cannabinoid products.
We harvested 56,685 kilograms of cannabinoids in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 39,720 kilograms in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to the expansion of our cultivation facilities in Colombia.
Costs to produce were approximately $0.14 per gram of dry flower equivalent for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $0.21 per gram of dry flower equivalent for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in costs to produce is primarily driven by the expansion of our cultivation capacity facilities in Colombia and the resulting economies of scale.
Recent Developments
Portugal Licensing
The GACP certification attests that we operate under the guidelines that ensure high quality production and products, according to WHO and European Medicine Agency Guidelines ("EMA"), on good agricultural and collection practices for (i) medicinal plants under WHO and (ii) starting materials of herbal origin under EMA. Our operations in Colombia were granted such certification on May 27, 2020, with an inclusion of land on November 9, 2020, which means that all greenhouses operate under GACP.
The same certification was granted to our operation in Portugal on February 22, 2021, for its greenhouse and postharvest facility.
These certificates must be yearly renewed.
Notable 2020 Developments
Closing of the Business Combination
On December 18, 2020, Clever Leaves and SAMA consummated the previously announced Business Combination contemplated by the Amended and Restated Business Combination Agreement, dated as of November 9, 2020, by and among SAMA, Clever Leaves, the Company and Merger Sub.
Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, each of the following transactions occurred in the following order: (i) pursuant to a court-approved Canadian plan of arrangement (the “Plan of Arrangement” and the arrangement pursuant to such Plan of Arrangement, the “Arrangement”), at 11:59 p.m., Pacific time, on December 17, 2020 (2:59 a.m., Eastern time, on December 18, 2020) (a) all of the Clever Leaves shareholders exchanged their Class A common shares without par value of Clever Leaves (“Clever Leaves common shares”) for our common shares without par value (“common shares”) and/or non-voting common shares without par value (“non-voting common shares”) (as determined in accordance with the Business Combination Agreement) and (b) certain Clever Leaves shareholders received approximately $3,100 in cash in the aggregate (the “Cash Arrangement Consideration”), such that, immediately following the Arrangement, Clever Leaves became our direct wholly-owned subsidiary; (ii) at 12:01 a.m., Pacific time (3:01 a.m. Eastern time), on December 18, 2020, Merger Sub merged with and into SAMA, with SAMA surviving such merger as our direct wholly-owned subsidiary (the “Merger”) and, as a result of the Merger, all of the shares of SAMA common stock were converted into the right to receive common shares as set forth in the Business Combination Agreement; (iii) immediately following the consummation of the Merger, we contributed 100% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of SAMA (as the surviving corporation of the Merger) to Clever Leaves, such that, SAMA became a direct wholly-owned subsidiary of Clever Leaves; and (iv) immediately following the contribution of SAMA to Clever Leaves, Clever Leaves contributed 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of NS US Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Clever Leaves, to SAMA. Upon the closing of the Merger, SAMA changed its name to Clever Leaves US, Inc.
On December 18, 2020, SAMA’s units, shares of SAMA common stock and warrants ceased trading on The Nasdaq Stock Market (“Nasdaq”), and our common shares and warrants began trading on Nasdaq under the symbols “CLVR” and “CLVRW,” respectively. For further details, see Note 8. and Note 13. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The Company expects its operations to continue to be affected by the recent and ongoing outbreak of the 2019 coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”), which was declared a pandemic by the WHO in March 2020. The spread of COVID-19 has severely impacted many economies around the globe. In many countries, including those where the Company operates, businesses are being forced to cease or limit operations for long or indefinite periods of time. Measures taken to contain the spread of the virus, including travel bans, quarantines, social distancing, and closures of non-essential services have triggered significant disruptions to businesses worldwide, resulting in an economic slowdown. Global stock markets have also experienced increased volatility and, in certain cases, significant declines.
Governments and central banks have responded with monetary and fiscal interventions to stabilize economic conditions and the Company has taken steps to obtain financial assistance made available from jurisdictional governments, however the Company expects its 2021 financial performance to continue to be impacted and result in a delay of certain of its go-to-market initiatives.
The duration and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the effectiveness of government and central bank responses, remains unclear. It is not possible to reliably estimate the duration and severity of these consequences, nor their impact on the financial position and results of the Company for future periods.
We continue to monitor closely the impact of COVID-19, with a focus on the health and safety of our employees, and business continuity. We have implemented various measures to reduce the spread of the virus including requiring that our non-production employees work from home, restricting visitors to production locations, screening employees with infrared temperature readings and requiring them to complete health questionnaires on a daily basis before they enter facilities, implementing social distancing measures at our production locations, enhancing facility cleaning protocols, and encouraging employees to adhere to preventative measures recommended by the WHO. Our global operational sites have been reduced to business-critical personnel only and physical distancing measures are in effect. In addition, since our non-production workforce can effectively work remotely using various technology tools, we are able to maintain our full operations. Although our operational sites remain open, mandatory or voluntary self-quarantines may further limit the staffing of our facilities.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, there have been disruptions in supply chains, including the impact on international flights and air-cargo restrictions that has limited the shipping of our products from Colombia to other countries. Since July 10, 2020, international flights from Colombia have resumed on a limited basis and with certain restrictions. In addition, there have been disruptions to our planned expansion of certain product line and production processes. The COVID-19 pandemic has also affected the completion of licensing in Portugal due to INFARMED’s impaired ability to conduct physical inspections of our facilities. For more information on the potential impact of COVID-19 on our business, refer to “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business - The current outbreak of the novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, has caused severe disruptions in the global economy and to our business, and may have an adverse impact on our performance and results of operations.”
Convertible Note Amendments
In connection with the Business Combination, on November 9, 2020, Clever Leaves and the noteholders agreed to amend the terms of the 2022 Convertible Notes to, among other matters, decrease the interest rate to 8%, commencing January 1, 2021, and provide that such interest is to be paid in cash, quarterly in arrears, and also provides the Company with the option to satisfy the payment of quarterly interest by issuing common shares to the noteholders.
Following the closing of the Business Combination, the 2022 Convertible Notes remained outstanding, but are convertible into our common shares in accordance with their terms. For additional detail see " - Liquidity and Capital Resources - Debt - Convertible Note Amendments" and Note 12. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Neem Holdings Convertible Note and Neem Holdings Warrants
On November 9, 2020, Clever Leaves and the Company entered into an unsecured subordinated convertible note (the “Neem Holdings Convertible Note”) with a principal amount of $3,000 in favor of Neem Holdings, LLC (“Neem Holdings”), a shareholder of Clever Leaves. Clever Leaves is required to repay the Neem Holdings Convertible Note within 10 business days after the closing of the Business Combination, and the Company has agreed to promptly satisfy this obligation in full. The Neem Holdings Convertible Note is interest free. The Neem Holdings Convertible Note was repaid on December 23, 2020.
On November 9, 2020, Clever Leaves issued to Neem Holdings, a shareholder of Clever Leaves, a warrant (the “Neem Holdings Warrants”) to purchase the number of Clever Leaves common shares (the “Warrant Shares”) that would entitle Neem Holdings to receive 300,000 common shares in the Arrangement for an aggregate purchase price of $3. The Neem Holdings Warrants are exercisable for all, but not less than all, of the Warrant Shares and expire at the earlier of (i) the date and time that the Business Combination Agreement is terminated in accordance with its terms; and (ii) the Arrangement Effective Time. The Neem Holdings Warrants were exercised prior to the Arrangement Effective Time.
For further details, see Note 12. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
2020 Fourth Quarter Debenture Fundraising
In October 2020, Clever Leaves completed a financing, pursuant to which it issued $1,230 aggregate principal amount of September 2023 Convertible Debentures. In addition, on November 9, 2020, certain Subscribers in the SAMA PIPE signed subscription agreements with Clever Leaves to invest $1,500 in the aggregate in additional September 2023 Convertible Debentures as part of the Convertible Debenture Investment. All September 2023 Convertible Debentures were converted into Clever Leaves common shares and then into common shares of the Company as part of the Arrangement. For additional details see “- Liquidity and Capital Resources - Debt - 2020 Fourth Quarter Debenture Financing.” and Note 12. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
GNC Bankruptcy
On June 23, 2020, GNC and its affiliates filed voluntary petitions for relief pursuant to Chapter 11 of Title 11 of the United States Code (the “Bankruptcy Code”) in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware. In September 2020, a bankruptcy court judge approved the sale of GNC to an investor and in the third quarter of 2020, substantially all of the assets of GNC were sold to Harbin Pharmaceutical Group Holding Corp. Ltd., and GNC emerged from Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code. For more information on the potential impact of GNC on our business, refer to “Risk Factors - Risks Related to our Business - We currently depend on a limited set of customers for a substantial portion of our revenue. If we fail to retain or expand our customer relationships or if one or more significant customers were to terminate their relationship with us or reduce their purchases, or, our revenue could decline significantly”, as well as Note 9. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Herbal Brands Loan Amendment
On August 27, 2020, we amended certain terms of the Herbal Brands Loan to provide for an additional interest of 4% per annum, compounding quarterly and payable in-kind at maturity. In addition, we extended the expiry date of the outstanding 193,402 warrants till May 3, 2023. As part of the amendment, the parties agreed that compliance with certain financial covenants under the Herbal Brands Loan will be deferred until September 30, 2021 and will not be required following a Qualified IPO (as defined in the Herbal Brands Loan). The Business Combination meets the definition of Qualified IPO under the Herbal Brands Loan. See Note 12. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
EU GMP Certification
On July 8, 2020, Clever Leaves received EU GMP certification from the HALMED for its post-harvest and extraction facilities located in Colombia. EU GMP certification is expected to expand Clever Leaves’ ability to serve the burgeoning European medical cannabis and hemp markets, which have rigorous quality, compliance, and regulatory requirements. Because we are among a small number of companies globally to have earned EU GMP certification, EU GMP certification is also expected to expand our early mover advantage in the pharmaceutical channel as global demand increases and more legal cannabis geographies emerge.
Series E Round of Fundraising
In April and July 2020, Clever Leaves completed the Series E round of financing (the “Series E Financing”) and issued an aggregate of approximately $18,396 of senior convertible Class D preferred shares (the “Class D preferred shares”) and $4,162 aggregate principal amount of Convertible Debentures due 2023 (the “June 2023 Convertible Debentures”). The Class D preferred shares and the June 2023 Convertible Debentures were converted into Clever Leaves common shares and then into common shares of the Company as part of the Arrangement. For additional details see “- Liquidity and Capital Resources - Debt - Series E Financing” and Note 12. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Portugal Licensing
In August 2020, we received a license from INFARMED to cultivate, import and export dried cannabis flower produced at our Portuguese cultivation site and, similar to other licensed cannabis companies in Portugal, we are listed as of August 2020 on INFARMED’s Licensing Department’s registry. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and restrictions on INFARMED’s ability to conduct a physical inspection of our Portuguese operation, the license was issued under a special licensing procedure and requires a confirmatory physical inspection from INFARMED. Our license provides our Portuguese operations the same rights and qualifications as licenses issued under the normal procedures, including the ability to conduct commercial operations. The physical inspection took place on August 27, 2020 and, upon successful completion of the inspection review, we expect our current license to be replaced with a license issued under the normal procedures. Under the current license granted by INFARMED, our production facility in Portugal is currently cultivating cannabis for commercial purposes. Our Portugal facility received the GACP certificate in March 2021. To maintain the GACP certificate, we must cultivate and operate under GACP guidelines.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue - in our Cannabinoid segment, revenue is primarily comprised of sales of our cannabis products, which currently include cannabidiol isolate, full spectrum and standardized extracts. In our Non-Cannabinoid segment, revenue is primarily composed of sales of our nutraceutical products to our retail customers. As we have only recently begun to carry out our cannabinoid sales operations, our main revenues are derived from our Herbal Brands business.
Cost of Sales - in our Cannabinoid segment, cost of sales is primarily composed of pre-harvest, post-harvest and shipment and fulfillment. Pre-harvest costs include labor and direct materials to grow cannabis, which includes water, electricity, nutrients, integrated pest management, growing supplies and allocated overhead. Post-harvest costs include costs associated with drying, trimming, blending, extraction, purification, quality testing and allocated overhead. Shipment and fulfillment costs include the costs of packaging, labelling, courier services and allocated overhead. Total cost of sales also includes cost of sales associated with accessories and inventory adjustments. In our Non-Cannabinoid segment, cost of sales primarily includes raw materials, labor, and attributable overhead, as well as packaging labelling and fulfillment costs.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Consolidated Statements of Net Loss Data
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
Revenue by Channel
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
The following table provides our revenues by channel for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenue
Revenue increased to $12,117 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $7,834 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven primarily by the additional months of sales in the year ended December 31, 2020 from the Herbal Brands business which was acquired in April 2019, as well as the sales in our Cannabinoid segment.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales decreased to $4,704 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $4,732 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The slight decrease in 2020 is primarily due to the inclusion in 2019 of additional costs related to the fair value of Herbal Brands inventory following the Herbal Brands acquisition. This was mostly offset by sales of Herbal Brands products, which included an additional four months of sales in 2020, as well as the costs of sales from our Cannabinoid segment sales.
Operating expenses
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
N/M: Not a meaningful percentage
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased to $29,828 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $34,979 for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower office and administration and employee-related costs, such as salaries and benefits, following certain measures we took to reduce costs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses decreased to $2,577 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $3,183 for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to our cost control measures to address the impact from COVID-19. Additionally, in the prior year period, we incurred higher sales and marketing costs in connection with the exploration of potential new export markets for our cannabinoid products. The decline was partly offset by an increase in marketing and selling costs related to the Herbal Brands business in the U.S., which included an additional four months of costs in 2020 compared to 2019.
Goodwill impairment. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a goodwill impairment of $1,682 related to our Herbal Brands business. For more information, see Note 8. and Note 10. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expenses increased to $1,854 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1,480 for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to capital expenditures for the expansion of our cultivation and extraction assets. Additionally, the increase is attributable to the amortization of finite-lived intangible assets acquired as part of the Herbal Brands acquisition, which included an additional four months of amortization in 2020 compared
to 2019, as well as higher amortization expense during the second half of 2020 due to the acceleration of the period over which the useful life of the GNC intangible asset is amortized, as described under “-Recent Developments - GNC Bankruptcy” and Note 9. and Note 11. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Non-operating income and expenses
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
N/M: Not a meaningful percentage
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $4,455 compared to $2,684 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increased interest expense associated with the 2022 Convertible Notes, as well as a promissory note issued in relation to the Herbal Brands acquisition. Additionally, the increase reflects higher interest rates during 2020 related to the amendment in March 2020 of the terms of the 2022 Convertible Notes. For additional details, see Note 12. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Loss on investments. Loss on investment was $464 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a loss of $756 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The loss on investments was primarily related to the decline in the carrying value of our investments in Lift & Co. shares and Cansativa. For more information refer to Note 7. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Loss on debt extinguishment. Loss on debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2,360 and related primarily to the conversion of the Series E Debentures and the September 2023 Convertible Debentures at the closing of the Business Combination. Loss on debt extinguishment of $3,374 for year ended December 31, 2019 was due to the conversion of our Series C debt of Clever Leaves in March 2019 into Class C preferred shares that were subsequently exchanged for common shares of the Company at the closing of the Business Combination. For more information, see Note 12. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Loss on fair value of derivative instrument. For the year ended December 31, 2020 we experienced a loss of $657 compared to loss of $421 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the conversion of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures. The loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 was driven by the initial recognition of a derivative instrument related to the Company’s holding of Lift & Co. warrants. For additional details, see Note 12. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Foreign exchange loss. The impact of foreign exchange for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a loss of $491 compared to a loss of $1,575 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The foreign exchange losses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were primarily driven by the currency fluctuations of the Colombian peso versus the U.S. Dollar.
Other (income) expenses, net. Other (income) expenses, net includes costs not individually material to our consolidated financial statements.
Operating Results by Business Segment
Our management evaluates segment profit/loss for each of the Company’s reportable segments. We define segment profit/loss as income from continuing operations before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation expense, gains/losses on foreign currency fluctuations, gains/losses on the early extinguishment of debt and miscellaneous expenses. Segment profit/loss also excludes the impact of certain items that are not directly attributable to the reportable segments’ underlying operating performance. For a reconciliation of segment profit to loss from continuing operations before income taxes, see Note 17. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Revenue by segment
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
Cannabinoid. Cannabinoid revenue increased to $2,511 for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $133 for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven primarily by the sale of cannabinoid products as we began to carry out our Cannabinoid sales operations.
Non-Cannabinoid. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $9,606 from $7,701 for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily attributable to the Herbal Brands business in the U.S., which included four additional months of sales in 2020, partly offset by the slower sales in 2020 due to the impact from COVID-19.
Segment profit/loss
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
(a) For a reconciliation of segment profit/(loss) to loss before income taxes see Note 17. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Cannabinoid - Cannabinoid segment loss decreased to $18,798 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $25,250 for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to cost control measures implemented by us in 2020, as well as increased sales of cannabinoid products. The decrease was partly offset by costs incurred on the expansion of our operations in Colombia, Portugal and Germany.
Non-Cannabinoid - Non-Cannabinoid segment profit increased to $1,863 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $614 the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to cost control measures implemented during 2020, as well as the additional four months of activity in the 2020 period, partly offset by lower sales in 2020 due to the impact of COVID-19.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table sets forth the major components of our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the periods presented:
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
Cash flows from operating activities
The change in net cash used by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily related to a decrease in use of working capital, as well as a lower net loss, net of non-cash items.
Cash flows from investing activities
The decrease in net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily related to the Herbal Brands acquisition, our investment in Cansativa, as well as higher capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, our capital expenditures increased by approximately $14,209, primarily due to our investment in the expansion of our operations of the cannabinoid business.
Cash flows from financing activities
The increase in net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to the higher proceeds from debt and equity financings in 2020 compared to 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the financing activities related primarily to the Business Combination and the Series E Financing of Clever Leaves, whereas during the year ended December 31, 2019, Clever Leaves issued Series D preferred shares, 2022 Convertible Notes and debt incurred in connection with the Herbal Brands acquisition. For more information, see Note 9. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Sources of Liquidity
We primarily financed our operations through the issuance of preferred shares, the sale of convertible notes and cash from operations. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, we had cash and cash equivalents of $79,107 and $12,044, respectively, which were held for working capital and general corporate purposes. This represents an overall increase of $67,063.
In connection with the closing of the Business Combination we received approximately $73,509 of net proceeds (refer to Note 8. to the audited consolidated financial statements included within this Form 10-K). We have had operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception and expects to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future until such time, if ever, that it can generate significant revenues from the sale of its available inventories. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses from operations due to pre-commercialization activities, marketing and manufacturing activities, and general and administrative costs to support operations.
We have historically been able to manage liquidity requirements through cost management and cost reduction measures, supplemented with raising additional financing. While Clever Leaves has been successful in raising financing in the past, and did so as recently as November 2020, there can be no assurances that additional financing will be available when needed on acceptable terms, or at all. The continued spread of COVID-19 (see “- Recent Developments - COVID-19 Pandemic” for a discussion on COVID-19) and uncertain market conditions may further limit our ability to access capital. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding, we may be forced to make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, and suspend or curtail planned programs. Any of these actions could materially harm our business, results of operations, financial condition, and prospects.
Uses of Liquidity
Our primary need for liquidity is to fund working capital requirements, capital expenditures, debt service obligations and for general corporate purposes. Our ability to fund operations and make planned capital expenditures and debt service obligations depends on future operating performance and cash flows, which are subject to prevailing economic conditions and financial, business and other factors. Our consolidated interim financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which assumes that we will continue to be in operation for the foreseeable future and, accordingly, will be able to realize our assets and discharge our liabilities in the normal course of operations as they come due.
We manage our liquidity risk by preparing budgets and cash forecasts to ensure we have sufficient funds to meet obligations. In managing working capital, we may limit the amount of our cash needs by selling inventory at wholesale rates, pursuing additional financing sources, and managing the timing of capital expenditures. While we believe we have sufficient cash to meet working capital requirements in the short term, we may need additional sources of capital and/or financing, to meet planned growth requirements and to fund construction activities at our cultivation and processing facilities.
In connection with the Clever Leaves audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2019, our management determined that there were material uncertainties which caused substantial doubt about Clever Leaves’ ability to continue as a going concern, absent additional financing and cost reduction or cost management measures. In connection with the closing of the Business Combination, we received approximately $73,509 of net proceeds (refer to Note 8. to the audited consolidated financial statements included within this Form 10-K). We believe that cash on hand is sufficient to satisfy the Company's estimated liquidity needs during the twelve months from the issuance of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020. If this amount is subsequently insufficient for us to continue to operate as a going concern, we may need to raise additional cash through debt, equity or other forms of financing to fund future operations which may not be available on acceptable terms, or at all.
Debt
Total net debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020 was $33,843. The balance is comprised of 2022 Convertible Notes of approximately $27,750 issued in March 2019, the debt of $8,500 issued to finance the Herbal Brands acquisition in April 2019, as well as other borrowings, net of principal repayments for the Herbal Brands Loan and debt issuance costs. For more information, see Note 12. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Total debt outstanding as of December 31, 2019 was $33,728. The 2019 balance relates to the 2022 Convertible Notes issued in March 2019, as well as the Herbal Brands Loan.
Herbal Brands Debt
In April 2019, to facilitate the financing the Herbal Brands acquisition, Herbal Brands entered into the Herbal Brands Loan with, and issued warrants to, a third-party lender, Rock Cliff Capital LLC (“Lender”). The Herbal Brands Loan was amended in August 2020. For further details on the Herbal Brands acquisition, see Note 8. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
The Herbal Brands Loan is a non-revolving loan with a principal amount of $8,500 and interest of 8% per annum due and payable in arrears on the first day of each fiscal quarter, commencing July 1, 2019, and calculated based on the actual number of days elapsed. In addition, Herbal Brands is required to pay in kind interest ("PIK") on the outstanding principal amount of the Herbal Brands Loan from August 27, 2020 until payment in full at a rate equal to 4.0% per annum, with such PIK interest being capitalized as additional principal to increase the outstanding principal balance of the Herbal Brands Loan on the first day of each fiscal quarter. The Herbal Brands Loan is to be repaid or prepaid prior to its maturity date of May 2, 2023. On a quarterly basis, the loan requires Herbal Brands to repay 85% of positive operating cash flows. Herbal Brands can also choose to prepay a portion or the Herbal Brands Loan, subject to a fee equal to the greater of (1) zero, and (2) $2,337.5, net of interest
payments already paid (excluding PIK interest paid and PIK interest capitalized as outstanding principal) on such prepayment date. The Herbal Brands Loan is guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of the Company, secured by Herbal Brands’ assets and equity interests in Herbal Brands and is subject to certain covenants. The Herbal Brands Loan remained outstanding following the closing of the Business Combination.
Concurrently with the execution of the Herbal Brands Loan, Clever Leaves issued warrants to the Lender to purchase 193,402 Class C preferred shares of Clever Leaves on a 1:1 basis, at a price of $8.79 per share. The warrants can be exercised in whole or in part at any time prior to the expiration date of May 3, 2021, and are not assignable, transferable, or negotiable. Following the closing of the Business Combination, the warrants issued to the Lender remained outstanding but entitle the Lender to purchase common shares of the Company rather than common shares of Clever Leaves.
On August 27, 2020, we amended certain terms of the Herbal Brands Loan to provide for an additional interest of 4% per annum, compounding quarterly and payable in-kind at maturity. In addition, we extended the expiry date of the outstanding 193,402 warrants until May 3, 2023. As part of the amendment, the parties agreed to defer the covenant testing under the Herbal Brands Loan until September 30, 2021.
Following the closing of the Business Combination and pursuant to the terms, the holder of the Rock Cliff Warrants can purchase 63,597 of the Company's common shares at a strike price of $26.73 per share.
For further details, see Note 12. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Convertible notes
In March 2019, as part of the Series D financing, Clever Leaves issued $27,750 aggregate principal amount of secured convertible notes (the “2022 Convertible Notes”) with a maturity date of March 30, 2022 (the “2022 Maturity Date”). The 2022 Convertible Notes initially had an interest of 8% per annum, payable quarterly in cash in arrears. The 2022 Convertible Notes are guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of Clever Leaves and are secured by pledged equity interests in certain subsidiaries. In March 2020 and June 2020, Clever Leaves and the noteholders amended the terms of the 2022 Convertible Notes, to increase in the interest rate to 10% from January 1, 2020 and provided that such interest is to be paid in-kind on the 2022 Maturity Date.
In connection with the Business Combination, on November 9, 2020, Clever Leaves and the noteholders agreed to amend the terms of the 2022 Convertible Notes to: (i) decrease the interest rate to 8%, commencing January 1, 2021, and provide that such interest is to be paid in cash, quarterly in arrears; (ii) provide for the payment of all accrued and outstanding interest from January 1 to December 31, 2020 to be made in the form of PIK Notes; to consent to the transfer of the PIK Notes to SAMA in exchange for the PIPE Shares to be issued as part of the SAMA PIPE pursuant to the terms of the Subscription Agreements; (iii) at the option of Clever Leaves, satisfy the payment of quarterly interest by issuing our common shares to the noteholders, at a price per share equal to 95% of the 10-Day VWAP; (iv) at the option of Clever Leaves, prepay, in cash, any or all amounts outstanding under the 2022 Convertible Notes at any time without penalty; (v) at the option of Clever Leaves on each quarterly interest payment date, repay principal and any other amounts outstanding under the 2022 Convertible Notes up to the lesser of (a) $2,000, or (b) an amount equal to four times the average value of the daily volume of common shares traded during the 10-Day VWAP period, of the total amounts outstanding under the 2022 Convertible Notes at such time by issuing common shares to the noteholders at a price per share equal to 95% of the 10-Day VWAP; and (vi) at the option of each noteholder, in the event, following the Merger Effective Time, Clever Leaves, the Company or any of their respective affiliates proposes to issue equity securities for cash or cash equivalents (the “Equity Financing”) (save and except for certain exempt issuances) at any time after Clever Leaves, the Company or any of their respective affiliates completes one or more equity financings raising, in aggregate, net proceeds of $25,000 (net of reasonable fees, including reasonable accounting, advisory and legal fees, commissions and other out-of-pocket expenses and inclusive of net cash retained as a result of the Business Combination on the Merger Effective Time), convert an amount of principal and/or accrued interest owing under the 2022 Convertible Notes into subscriptions to purchase up to the noteholder’s pro rata share of 25% of the total securities issued under such Equity Financing on the same terms and conditions as such Equity Financing is offered to subscribers; provided, however, that if the noteholder does not elect to participate in such Equity Financing through the conversion of amounts owing under the 2022 Convertible Notes, then Clever Leaves shall be required to repay, in cash within five (5) business days following the closing of such Equity Financing, an amount equal to the noteholder’s pro rata share of 25% of the total net proceeds raised from such Equity Financing (collectively, the “November 2020 Convertible Note Amendments”).
In connection with the November 2020 Convertible Note Amendments, the Required Holders (as that term is defined in the amended and restated intercreditor and collateral agency agreement, dated as of May 10, 2019, in respect of the 2022 Convertible Notes) have agreed to waive Clever Leaves’ required compliance with certain restrictive covenants set forth in the
2022 Convertible Notes, solely for the purposes of allowing Clever Leaves, the Company and their affiliates to complete the Business Combination, and have agreed to direct GLAS Americas LLC, as collateral agent in respect of the 2022 Convertible Notes, to further provide its consent therefor.
In connection with the consummation of the Business Combination, the Company, 1255096 B.C. Ltd., an indirect subsidiary of the Company, and Clever Leaves US, Inc. (as the surviving corporation of the Merger) each entered into a guarantee agreement in favor of GLAS Americas LLC, as the collateral agent, in respect of the 2022 Convertible Notes and became guarantors thereunder. In addition, the terms of the amended and restated pledge agreement, dated as of May 10, 2019, made by Clever Leaves in favor of the collateral agent was further amended and restated pursuant to a second amended and restated pledge agreement such that Clever Leaves pledged all of the shares in the capital of each of 1255096 B.C. Ltd. and Clever Leaves US, Inc. (as the surviving corporation of the Merger) in favor of the collateral agent. In addition, the Company pledged all of the shares in the capital of Clever Leaves in favor of the collateral agent, 1255096 B.C. Ltd. pledged all of the shares in the capital of Northern Swan International, Inc. in favor of the collateral agent, and Clever Leaves US, Inc. pledged all of the shares in the capital of NS US Holdings, Inc. in favor of the collateral agent, each pursuant to a pledge agreement.
Following the closing of the Business Combination, the 2022 Convertible Notes remained outstanding, but are convertible into our common shares in accordance with their terms. In connection with the issuance of the 2022 Convertible Notes, Clever Leaves issued 9,509 warrants to acquire Clever Leaves common shares to one of the noteholders. The warrants vest when the 2022 Convertible Note issued to the warrantholder is converted into shares and expire on March 30, 2023. The warrants will be cancelled if the 2022 Convertible Note issued to the warrantholder is repaid.
In October 2018, as part of the Series C financing, Clever Leaves issued $17,890 aggregate principal amount of noninterest bearing unsecured convertible debentures due 2021 (the “2021 Convertible Debentures”). The 2021 Convertible Debentures had a maturity date of September 30, 2021. All of the 2021 Convertible Debentures were converted into an aggregate of 2,546,670 of Class C preferred shares in March 2019.
Series E Financing
In April and July 2020, Clever Leaves completed the Series E round of financing (the “Series E Financing”) and issued an aggregate of approximately $18,396 of senior convertible Class D preferred shares (the “Class D preferred shares”) and $4,162 aggregate principal amount of Convertible Debentures due 2023 (the “June 2023 Convertible Debentures”). In April 2020, an investor in the Series E Financing exercised its Put Right (as defined below) in full, and Clever Leaves paid $6,250 in exchange for the purchase and cancellation of 711,035 Class C preferred shares. As a result of the Series E Financing and the exercise of the Put Right, the funds raised in the Series E Financing were approximately $16,308.
The June 2023 Convertible Debentures were to mature on June 30, 2023 (the “2023 Maturity Date”) and bore interest of 8% per annum, commencing June 30, 2021, payable semi-annually in arrears. At the discretion of Clever Leaves, any interest accrued and payable in respect of the June 2023 Convertible Debentures might, in lieu of being paid to the holders of the June 2023 Convertible Debentures, be added, to the principal amount outstanding under the June 2023 Convertible Debentures. The Business Combination constituted a Liquidity Event (as defined in the indenture governing the June 2023 Convertible Debentures) and resulted in the conversion of all June 2023 Convertible Debentures into Clever Leaves common shares, which were exchanged for our common shares in the Arrangement.
Class D preferred shares voted together with the Clever Leaves common shares, and were not considered a separate class for voting purposes, except as required by law or in cases of dissolution, liquidation, windup or bankruptcy proceedings which require the consent of a majority of Class D preferred shareholders. The Class D preferred shares carried a liquidation preference (the “Class D Liquidation Preference”) of 1.4 times the original issue price of $11.00 for the one-year period following the original issue date, increasing by 0.02 times quarterly to a maximum of 1.75 times the original issue price, in each case subject to anti-dilution adjustments. The Class D Liquidation Preference is payable on a liquidation or merger with, reverse takeover of, or other business combination with, a public company, provided that such transaction does not provide for the conversion of Class D preferred shares into Clever Leaves common shares, or certain other deemed liquidation events (the “Class D Liquidation Event”). The Business Combination did not constitute a Class D Liquidation Event. The Class D preferred shares were not redeemable but were convertible at any time, at the option of the holders, into Clever Leaves common shares on a 1:1 basis, subject to anti-dilution adjustments. Automatic conversion into Clever Leaves common shares would occur at the applicable conversion price which takes into account the Class D Liquidation Preference in the event of (1) the holders of at least a majority of the outstanding Class D preferred shares consenting to such conversion, (2) an initial public offering or direct listing of Clever Leaves common shares on Nasdaq, NYSE or TSX, or (3) completion of a merger with, reverse takeover of or other business combination with a public company, provided that such transaction provides for the conversion of Class D
preferred shares into Clever Leaves common shares (otherwise such transaction will trigger the payment of the Class D Liquidation Preference).
The Business Combination resulted in the conversion of all Class D preferred shares into Clever Leaves common shares, which were exchanged for common shares of the Company in the Arrangement.
As part of the Series E Financing in April 2020, Clever Leaves granted an investor in the Series E Financing a right to cause Clever Leaves to purchase up to 711,035 of the investor’s previously purchased Class C preferred shares (the “Put Right”) at the investor’s original purchase price of $8.79 per share. On April 13, 2020, the investor exercised the Put Right in full, and Clever Leaves paid $6,250 in exchange for its purchase and cancellation of 711,035 Class C preferred shares. In addition, as part of the July 2020 portion of the Series E Financing, three investors, in aggregate, exchanged 848,363 Class C preferred shares for 646,846 Class D preferred shares.
Subsequent to the completion of the Series E Financing, 4,429,559 Class C preferred shares, 2,319,215 Class D preferred shares and $4,162 principal amount of the June 2023 Convertible Debentures were outstanding. All Class C preferred shares, Class D preferred shares and June 2023 Convertible Debentures were converted into Clever Leaves common shares and then into common shares of the Company as part of the Arrangement.
2020 Fourth Quarter Debenture Financing
On October 23, 2020, Clever Leaves completed the first tranche of a financing pursuant to which it issued $1,230 aggregate principal amount of convertible debentures due September 30, 2023 (the “September 2023 Convertible Debentures”).
The September 2023 Convertible Debentures were to mature on September 30, 2023 (the “September 2023 Maturity Date”) and bore interest of 8% per annum, commencing September 30, 2021, payable semi-annually in arrears. At the discretion of Clever Leaves, any interest accrued and payable in respect of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures might, in lieu of being paid to the holders of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures, be added to the principal amount outstanding under the September 2023 Convertible Debentures. Provided that no Liquidity Event has occurred, on the September 2023 Maturity Date, the principal aggregate amount of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures and the accrued and unpaid interest thereon would be payable in cash. At any time prior to the September 2023 Maturity Date or a Liquidity Event, a holder of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures might elect to convert its principal amount of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures and the accrued and unpaid interest thereon into Clever Leaves common shares, at a price per share equal to $5.95 (subject to adjustment). The September 2023 Convertible Debentures, including any accrued and unpaid interest, would be automatically converted into Clever Leaves common shares at a price per Clever Leaves common share equal to 70% of the price attributable to the Clever Leaves common shares upon occurrence of a Liquidity Event, subject to adjustment in the event of the subdivision or consolidation of the outstanding Clever Leaves common shares, the issue of Clever Leaves common shares or securities convertible into Clever Leaves common shares by stock dividend or distribution, or the issue or distribution of rights, options, or warrants to all or substantially all of the holders of Clever Leaves common shares in certain circumstances.
On November 9, 2020, certain Subscribers in the SAMA PIPE signed subscription agreements with Clever Leaves to invest $1,500 in the aggregate in additional September 2023 Convertible Debentures.
The Business Combination constituted a Liquidity Event and resulted in the conversion of all September 2023 Convertible Debentures into Clever Leaves common shares, which were exchanged for common shares of the Company in the Arrangement. For additional details see Note 12. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Neem Holdings Convertible Note and Neem Holdings Warrants
On November 9, 2020, Clever Leaves and the Company entered into the Neem Holdings Convertible Note with a principal amount of $3,000 in favor of Neem Holdings. On the same day, Clever Leaves issued the Neem Holdings Warrants that, if exercised, would entitle Neem Holdings to receive 300,000 common shares in the Arrangement. The Neem Holdings Convertible Note was repaid on December 23, 2020. The Neem Holdings Warrants were exercised prior to the Arrangement Effective Time. For additional details see “- Recent Developments - Neem Holdings Convertible Note and Neem Holdings Warrants” and Note 12. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we receive inquiries or become involved in legal disputes regarding various litigation matters. In the opinion of management, as of December 31, 2020 any potential liabilities resulting from claims we have received would not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have off-balance sheet arrangements during the periods presented, other than the obligations discussed above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance U.S. GAAP. A detailed discussion of our significant accounting policies can be found in Note 3. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. We have identified certain policies and estimates as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our past or present results of operations related to (i) consolidation, (ii) inventories, (iii) investments, (iv) property, plant and equipment, (v) intangible assets, (vi) business combinations and goodwill, (vii) equity method investments, (viii) leases, (ix) revenue recognition, (x) complex financial instruments. These policies and estimates are considered critical because they had a material impact, or they have the potential to have a material impact, on our consolidated financial statements and because they require us to make significant judgments, assumptions, or estimates. We believe that the estimates, judgments, and assumptions made were reasonable, based on information available at the time they were made. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates.
Share-based compensation
We estimate the fair value of equity classified stock options on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options are outlined in Note 15. to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 included in this Form 10-K.
As Clever Leaves shares were not publicly traded at the time of grant, it engaged independent third-party valuation specialists to assist with determining the estimated fair value of Clever Leaves’ common shares at each grant date under a multi-stage process, which involved calculating the enterprise and equity value of Clever Leaves. The enterprise value was initially calculated using the discounted cash flows method under the income approach and the prior sales of company stock method under the market approach, weighted based on Clever Leaves’ current stage of development, its financial projections and the timing of the prior sales of a company’s securities.
The discounted cash flows method under the income approach adds the present value of projected cash flows generated by operations of the company and the present value of the residual or terminal value of the company. The present values of the cash flows and the terminal value are calculated using discount rates that reflect the time value of money and the risk of the company and the projected cash flows. The greater the perceived risk associated with the forecasted cash flows, the higher the discount rate applied to them, and the lower their present value. The prior sales of company stock method under the market approach uses prices of actual transactions in a company’s own securities to infer the value of the security being valued. There may be adjustments needed to deal with differences in the securities (e.g. preferred share instead of common share), standard value (e.g. control vs. non-control or marketable vs. non-marketable), and the passage of time.
The enterprise value was then adjusted for the Clever Leaves’ cash and debt as of the valuation date and the resulting equity value was allocated using the option pricing method. The value per common share was then reduced by a discount for lack of marketability to put it on a minority, non-marketable basis.
The Black-Scholes implementation of the option pricing method treats the rights of holders of various classes of securities (preferred shares, common shares, warrants, and options) as call options on any value of Clever Leaves above a series of break points. The values of the break points were calculated by reviewing:
•The liquidation preferences of preferred shares (including seniority of any series of preferred shares);
•The participation rights of preferred shares (including any caps on such participation); and
•The strike prices of warrants and options.
A Black-Scholes model requires a series of variables, including the:
•Value of company equity;
•Volatility;
•Time to liquidity event; and
•Risk-free rate.
Uncertain economic conditions, fiscal policy and other factors beyond our control could have an adverse effect on the capital markets, which would affect the discount rate assumptions, terminal value estimates, and transaction premiums. Such uncertain economic conditions could also have an adverse effect on the fundamentals of our business and results of operations, which would affect our internal forecasts about future performance and terminal value estimates. Furthermore, such uncertain economic conditions could have a negative impact on the industry in general. In addition, the risk factors that we have identified in this Form 10-K and will identify from time to time in our reports could have an adverse effect on our internal forecasts about future performance, terminal value estimates and transaction premiums. There can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions made for the purpose of estimating grant date fair value of stock options will prove to be accurate predictions of the future.
In March 2020, Clever Leaves closed a round of class D Convertible Preferred Shares (Class D). Clever Leaves sold 1,308,740 shares of Class D to several investors, for a total of $14,400. While prior sales of a company’s securities can be considered in establishing the current value of a company, the circumstances surrounding such a sale must be considered. In this case, these circumstances included:
•The transaction involved other considerations, specifically a financing for Clever Leaves;
•The transaction involved new investors in Clever Leaves; and
•The transaction occurred just prior to the valuation date.
The Class D transaction did not involve common shares, but instead involved preferred shares. In addition, in light of the substantial economic and legal advantages for Class D shareholders, common shares of Clever Leaves were viewed to be worth less than shares of Class D. The Class D shares have liquidation preferences, the power to block financings or sales, and the ability to withhold approval of any new series or shares of capital stock that have any rights that are senior or pari passu to Class D. Common shares do not have these advantages and the value of Class D does not reflect the value of the Clever Leaves’ common share.
However, subject to the valuation date, the economic differences between common shares and Class D shares noted above may be accounted for in the calculation of the indicated equity value. The Class D transaction was considered an arm’s-length transaction and that the price derived from this transaction can be relied upon in calculating the fair value of Clever Leaves’ common share at a valuation date close to the occurrence of the transaction. However, the transaction involving another class of stock (Class D) occurred more than six months prior to the valuation date, and was determined to have included other considerations involved in the investment decision (such as financing reasons, etc.), all of which suggest that the price derived from this transaction cannot be relied upon in determining the fair value of common shares as of the valuation date. As such, the discounted cash flows method under the income approach is used in calculating the fair value of Clever Leaves’ common shares.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
Foreign Currency Risk
Our consolidated financial statements are expressed in US dollars, but we have cash, accounts payable and financial instruments denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars, including the Canadian dollar, Colombian peso and Euro as our core cultivation, harvest, and distribution operations are conducted in subsidiary locations. As a result, we are exposed to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Revenue and expenses of all foreign operations are translated into U.S. dollars at the foreign currency exchange rates that approximate the rates in effect at the dates when such items are recognized. Appreciating foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar will adversely impact operating income and net earnings, while depreciating foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar will have a positive impact.
A 10% change in the exchange rates for the foreign currencies would affect the carrying value of net assets by approximately $230 as of December 31, 2020, with a corresponding impact to foreign exchange loss. We have not historically engaged in hedging transactions and do not currently contemplate engaging in hedging transactions to mitigate foreign exchange risks. As we continue to recognize gains and losses in foreign currency transactions, depending upon changes in future currency rates, such gains or losses could have a significant, and potentially adverse, effect on our results of operations.
Liquidity Risk
Clever Leaves monitors its cash balances and cash flows generated from operations to ensure there is sufficient liquidity to meet its financial obligations as they come due. Liquidity management is comprised of regular analysis, monitoring, and review of forecasted and actual cash flows, and managing operational and capital funding requirements on a planned and projected basis. As of December 31, 2020, Clever Leaves’ financial liabilities mainly comprise accounts payables, short-term liability, and other current liabilities which would be paid within 12 months, as well as the 2022 Convertible Notes, the Herbal Brands Loan and other loans and borrowings. For more information on our liquidity requirements see “- Liquidity and Capital Resources” above.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk is the risk that the value or yield of fixed-income investments may decline if interest rates change. Fluctuations in interest rates may impact the level of income and expense recorded on our cash equivalents, 2022 Convertible Notes, Herbal Brands Loan, other loans and borrowings and the market value of all interest-earning assets, other than those which possess a short term to maturity. A 1% change in the interest rate in effect on December 31, 2020 would not have a material effect on (i) fair value of our cash equivalents as the majority of the portfolio have a maturity date of three-months or less, or (ii) interest income as interest income is not a significant component of Clever Leaves’ earnings and cash flow. In addition, the 2022 Convertible Notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 8% and are not publicly traded. Therefore, fair value of the 2022 Convertible Notes and interest expense is not materially affected by changes in the market interest rates. We do not enter into derivative financial instruments, including interest rate swaps, for hedging or speculative purposes.
Commodity Price Risk
Clever Leaves’ costs are directly impacted by fluctuations in the price of commodities, particularly in the raw materials used in the production of cannabis. To manage this exposure, Clever Leaves uses purchase commitments for some of the key commodity needs in the normal course of its business and manages selling prices to its customers to offset the effects of significant commodity price changes.
ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Tel: 604 688 5421 BDO Canada LLP
Fax: 604 688 5132 Suite 1100
www.bdo.ca 1055 West Georgia Street
Vancouver BC V6E 3P3 Canada
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Shareholders and Board of Directors
Clever Leaves Holdings Inc.
New York, New York
Opinion on the Consolidated Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated statements of financial position of Clever Leaves Holdings Inc. (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the related consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, shareholders’ equity, and cash flows for each of the two years in the period ended December 31, 2020, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the two years in the period ended December 31, 2020, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Basis for Opinion
These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s consolidated financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (“PCAOB”) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. As part of our audits we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ BDO Canada LLP
Chartered Professional Accountants
We have served as the Company's auditor since 2018.
Vancouver, Canada
March 30, 2021
BDO Canada LLP, a Canadian limited liability partnership, is a member of BDO International Limited, a UK company limited by guarantee, and forms part of the international BDO network of independent member firms.
BDO is the brand name for the BDO network and for each of the BDO Member Firms.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Consolidated Financial Statements
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. Dollars, except share and per share data)
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. Dollars, except share and per share data)
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. Dollars, except share and per share data)
Certain amounts may not add due to rounding.
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity (cont.)
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. Dollars, except share and per share data)
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. Dollars)
(a) See Note 3. for information on the reclassification adjustment of December 31, 2019.
(b) These amounts include restricted cash of $353 and $1,154 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The December 31, 2020 restricted cash is comprised primarily of cash on deposit for certain lease arrangements. December 31, 2019 balance represents cash on deposit for payments related to the Herbal Brands acquisition, and cash on deposit for certain lease arrangements.
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
1. CORPORATE INFORMATION
Clever Leaves Holdings Inc., (the “Company”) is a multi-national New York-based holding company focused on cannabinoids. In addition to the cannabinoid business, we are also engaged in the non-cannabinoid business of homeopathic and other natural remedies, wellness products, and nutraceuticals. The Company is incorporated under the Business Corporations Act of British Columbia, Canada.
The mailing address of our principal executive office is 489 Fifth Avenue, 27th Floor, New York, NY 10017.
Business Combination
On December 18, 2020 (the "Closing Date"), Clever Leaves International Inc., a corporation organized under the laws of British Columbia, Canada (“Clever Leaves”), and SAMA consummated the previously announced Business Combination contemplated by the Amended and Restated Business Combination Agreement, dated as of November 9, 2020 (the “Business Combination Agreement”), by and among SAMA, Clever Leaves, Clever Leaves Holdings Inc., a corporation organized under the laws of British Columbia, Canada (“Holdco” or the “Company”), and Novel Merger Sub Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Merger Sub”). Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, SAMA agreed to combine with Clever Leaves in the Business Combination that resulted in both Clever Leaves and SAMA becoming wholly-owned subsidiaries of Holdco.
Clever Leaves was deemed the accounting acquirer in the Business Combination based on an analysis of the criteria outlined in Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 805. This determination was primarily based on Clever Leaves’ stockholders prior to the Business Combination having a majority of the voting interests in the combined company, Clever Leaves’ operations comprising the ongoing operations of the combined company, Clever Leaves’ board of directors comprising a majority of the board of directors of the combined company, and Clever Leaves’ senior management comprising the senior management of the combined company. Accordingly, for accounting purposes, the Business Combination was treated as the equivalent of Clever Leaves’ issuing stock for the net assets of SAMA, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of SAMA are stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded.
While Holdco was the legal acquirer in the Business Combination, because Clever Leaves was deemed the accounting acquirer, the historical financial statements of Clever Leaves became the historical financial statements of the combined company upon the consummation of the Business Combination. As a result, the financial statements included in this report reflect (i) the historical operating results of Clever Leaves prior to the Business Combination; (ii) the combined results of the Company and Clever Leaves following the closing of the Business Combination; (iii) the assets and liabilities of Clever Leaves’ at their historical cost; and (iv) the Company’s equity structure before and after the Business Combination.
In accordance with applicable guidance, the equity structure has been restated in all comparative periods to reflect the number of shares of the Company's common shares, issued to Clever Leaves’ shareholders in connection with the recapitalization transaction. As such, the shares and corresponding capital amounts and earnings per share related to Clever Leaves’ convertible preferred shares and Clever Leaves’ common shares prior to the Business Combination have been retroactively restated as shares reflecting the exchange ratio of 0.3288 shares (the "Exchange Rate") established in the Business Combination Agreement. Activity within the statement of shareholders' equity for the issuances and repurchases of Clever Leaves’ convertible preferred shares were also retroactively converted to Clever Leaves’ common shares. See Note 13. for more information.
2. BASIS OF PRESENTATION
The accompanying consolidated financial statements are presented in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("U.S. GAAP") and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Going Concern
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which assumes that the Company will be able to meet its obligations and continue its operations for the next twelve months.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
As shown in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company had an accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2020, as well as operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception and expects to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future until such time that it can generate significant revenues from the sale of its available inventories.
The Company’s management believes that the Company’s current cash position, following the consummation of the Business Combination, and management’s plans to continue similar operations with increased marketing, which the Company believes will result in increased revenue and an improvement in net income, will satisfy the Company's estimated liquidity needs during the twelve months from the issuance of the consolidated financial statements. At the time of issuance of these consolidated financial statements, the previously reported going concern has been alleviated based on the reasons above, and management does not have substantial doubt of the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The Company expects its operations to continue to be affected by the recent and ongoing outbreak of the 2019 coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”), which was declared a pandemic by the WHO in March 2020. The spread of COVID-19 has severely impacted many economies around the globe. In many countries, including those where the Company operates, businesses are being forced to cease or limit operations for long or indefinite periods of time. Measures taken to contain the spread of the virus, including travel bans, quarantines, social distancing, and closures of non-essential services have triggered significant disruptions to businesses worldwide, resulting in an economic slowdown. Global stock markets have also experienced increased volatility and, in certain cases, significant declines.
Governments and central banks have responded with monetary and fiscal interventions to stabilize economic conditions and the Company has taken steps to obtain financial assistance made available from jurisdictional governments, however the Company expects its 2021 financial performance to continue to be impacted and result in a delay of certain of its go-to-market initiatives.
The duration and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the effectiveness of government and central bank responses, remains unclear. It is not possible to reliably estimate the duration and severity of these consequences, nor their impact on the financial position and results of the Company for future periods.
We continue to monitor closely the impact of COVID-19, with a focus on the health and safety of our employees, and business continuity. We have implemented various measures to reduce the spread of the virus including requiring that our non-production employees work from home, restricting visitors to production locations, screening employees with infrared temperature readings and requiring them to complete health questionnaires on a daily basis before they enter facilities, implementing social distancing measures at our production locations, enhancing facility cleaning protocols, and encouraging employees to adhere to preventative measures recommended by the WHO. Our global operational sites have been reduced to business-critical personnel only and physical distancing measures are in effect. In addition, since our non-production workforce can effectively work remotely using various technology tools, we are able to maintain our full operations. Although our operational sites remain open, mandatory or voluntary self-quarantines may further limit the staffing of our facilities.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, there have been disruptions in supply chains, including the impact on international flights and air-cargo restrictions that has limited the shipping of our products from Colombia to other countries. Since July 10, 2020, international flights from Colombia have resumed on a limited basis and with certain restrictions. In addition, there have been disruptions to our planned expansion of certain product line and production processes. The COVID-19 pandemic has also affected the completion of licensing in Portugal due to INFARMED’s impaired ability to conduct physical inspections of our facilities.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries. The following table provides a summary of the Company’s subsidiaries and respective ownership percentage at December 31, 2020:
The financial statements of the subsidiaries are prepared for the same reporting period as the parent company. All intra-group balances, transactions, unrealized gains and losses resulting from intra-group transactions have been eliminated.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
The following table provides a summary of the Clever Leaves’ subsidiaries and respective ownership percentage at December 31, 2019:
3. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Use of Estimates
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes in the reported period. While the significant estimates made by management in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements are reasonable, prudent, and evaluated on an ongoing basis, actual results may differ materially from those estimates. The information below outlines several accounting policies applied by the Company in preparing its consolidated financial statements that involve complex situations and judgment in the development of significant estimates and assumptions.
Consolidation
The determination of whether or not to consolidate entities under U.S. GAAP requires significant judgment.
Subsidiaries are consolidated from the date of acquisition, being the date on which the Company obtains control, and continue to be consolidated until the date when such control ceases. The Company treats transactions with non-controlling interests that do not result in a loss of control as transactions with equity owners of the Company. A change in ownership interest results in an adjustment between the carrying amounts of the controlling and non-controlling interests to reflect their relative interests in the subsidiary. Any difference between the amount of the adjustment to non-controlling interests and any consideration paid or received is recognized in equity and attributable to the controlling interest.
In regards to the Company’s interests in entities that do not meet the requirements for consolidation, refer to Investments discussion later in this footnote.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Correction of Statement of Cash Flows Classification
Subsequent to the issuance of the Company’s financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company discovered an error in the statement of cash flows presentation of inventories acquired as part of the Herbal Bands acquisition (Note 8.), which were netted with the net cash paid for the acquisition within investing activities on the statement of cash flows. As a result, net cash used in operating activities was overstated and net cash used in investing activities was understated by approximately $3,800. The statement of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2019 has been restated to correct for this classification error. This error had no effect on the Company’s consolidated statements of financial position or consolidated statements of operations or the consolidated statements of shareholders' equity. In addition, net cash provided by financing activities and total cash flows, were not affected.
Foreign Currencies
The functional currency of the Company, and for each subsidiary, is the currency of the primary economic environment in which it operates. All figures presented in the consolidated financial statements are reflected in U.S. dollars, which is the functional currency of the Company and all of its subsidiaries.
Once the Company determines the functional currency of a subsidiary, it is consistently used unless there are significant and clear indications that the functional currency has changed in economic facts and circumstances. Previously issued financial statements are not restated for any change in the functional currency.
Any transactions not denominated in the Company’s functional currency are considered foreign currency transactions, and exchange differences arising from translation are recognized in profit or loss.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents are comprised of cash balances at financial institutions and highly liquid short-term investments with original maturities of three months or less that are readily convertible into known amounts of cash. Cash and cash equivalents are primarily held in United States dollars, Canadian dollars, Euros, and Colombian pesos.
Restricted Cash
Restricted cash is comprised of cash on deposit for payments related to the Herbal Brands Inc. acquisition and cash on deposit for certain of the Company's lease arrangements.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable represent payments due to the Company for previously recognized net sales, reduced by an allowance for doubtful accounts for balances which are estimated to be uncollectible at period end.
Concentrations of Credit Risk
Three of the Company’s customers accounted for an aggregate of approximately 74% of the Company’s outstanding trade receivable at December 31, 2020.
Prepaid Expenses and Deposits
Prepaid expenses, deposits, and advances primarily represent amounts previously paid to vendors for security deposits and supplies, leased premises, facility construction and expansion projects not yet delivered.
Other Receivables
Other receivables arise from transactions other than credit sales. Other receivables primarily relate to recoverable sales and other value added tax.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Inventories
Inventories consist of raw materials, work-in-progress, and finished goods, and are valued at the lower of cost and net realizable value. Cost is determined using the weighted average cost method. Net realizable value is equal to the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less estimated costs of sale or completion. Cost of inventories include all direct expenditures to get the inventory ready for sale, attributable overhead, and are determined as follows:
Raw materials
•Purchase costs on a weighted average cost basis.
•Consist of soil, fertilizers, seeds, and other supplies and consumables used in the cultivation and processing of cannabis. In addition, flavorings, sugars, vitamins, additives, and components used to manufacture finished goods including bottles, packaging, and shrink wrap are used in the production of the Company’s nutraceutical products.
Work-in-progress
•Costs of direct raw materials, labor, and attributable overhead incurred to cultivate cannabis plants, and process and develop cannabis derivatives, manufacture, handle and shipment of finished goods.
•Consist of cannabis buds currently in the propagation, vegetation, or flowering stages (i.e. cultivated cannabis), and any harvested dry cannabis to be used in the production of cannabis derivatives (i.e. harvested cannabis and extracts).
Finished goods
•Costs of direct raw materials, labor, and attributable overhead incurred based on normal operating capacity to complete finished goods.
•Consist of completed cannabis derivatives, such as cannabis oils and capsules (i.e. cannabis extracts); health and wellness supplements such as liquid and solid dose personal cleansing products, dietary supplements, and personal health care items.
The Company writes down inventory for any obsolescence during the period or when the net realizable value of inventory is less than the carrying value. These adjustments are estimates, which could vary significantly, either favorably or unfavorably, from the amounts that the Company may ultimately realize upon the disposition of inventories if future economic conditions, customer inventory levels, product discontinuances, sales return levels or competitive conditions differ from the Company’s estimates and expectations. Any inventory write downs to net realizable value are not reversed for subsequent recoveries in value, except in cases of changes in exchange rates.
Investments
The Company determines the appropriate classification of its equity investments at the date of purchase and reevaluates the classification at the statement of financial position date. The Company measures equity instruments at fair value and recognizes any changes in fair value in its consolidated statement of operations. The Company measures equity investments without a readily determinable fair value that do not qualify for the net asset value practical expedient under Topic 820 at its cost minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer.
In regards to the Company’s interests in entities that do not meet the requirements for consolidation, the Company uses either the cost method of accounting whereby it records the investments at historical cost (as a policy choice in accordance with ASC 321 measurement alternative) or the equity method of accounting whereby it records its share of the underlying income or loss of these entities, as well as adjustments for basis differences. The evaluation of whether the Company exerts control or significant influence over the financial and operational policies of an entity requires judgment based on the facts and circumstances surrounding each individual entity.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company’s financial instruments are measured and reported at fair value, which is the price receivable upon sale of an asset or payable upon transfer of a liability in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability, conducted in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Carrying amounts of certain financial instruments, including cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, and accounts payable (trade and accrued liabilities) approximate their fair value, as the time between initiation and the eventual realization of their value is relatively short-term in nature. Estimates of the fair value of an asset or liability consider the unique characteristics of the asset or liability, and consider inputs such as liquidity risk, foreign exchange risk, and volatility.
The fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement as a whole:
•Level 1 - Based on quoted (unadjusted) market prices in active markets using observable inputs, for identical assets or liabilities;
•Level 2 - Based on inputs other than quoted prices in active markets, that is significant to the fair value measurement is directly or indirectly observable;
•Level 3 - Based on unobservable inputs, where little to no market data exists, that is significant to the fair value measurement is unobservable and thus require more assumptions by the Company
For assets and liabilities recognized at fair value on a recurring basis, the Company reassesses categorization to determine whether changes have occurred between the hierarchy levels at the end of each reporting period.
Property, Plant and Equipment, Net
Property, plant and equipment, net is recorded at cost, net of accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses, if applicable. Attributed costs include the original cost of the item, any direct materials and labor to bring the asset into working condition, borrowing costs, and costs of replacing parts if the recognition criteria are met. All other repair and maintenance costs are recognized in the consolidated statement of operations as incurred.
Depreciation begins when the asset becomes available for use and is calculated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets, as follows:
The Company reviews the depreciation method, residual values, and useful lives of property, plant and equipment at least annually and adjusts prospectively, if appropriate.
The carrying amount of an asset and any significant part is derecognized on disposal of the asset, or when no future economic benefits are expected from its continued use. Any gain or loss arising on derecognition of the asset (equal to the difference between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount) is included in the consolidated statement of operations in the period of derecognition.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. If events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable, the Company estimates the undiscounted future cash flows (excluding interest) resulting from the use of the asset and its ultimate disposition. If the sum of the undiscounted cash flows (excluding interest) is less than the carrying value, the Company recognizes an impairment loss, measured as the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the asset. There were no impairment charges to long-lived assets during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Borrowing costs, which consist of interest and other costs incurred by the Company in connection with the borrowing of funds, are capitalized as part of the cost of a qualifying asset if it is directly attributable to the acquisition, construction or production of the respective asset. All other borrowing costs are expensed in the period in which they are incurred.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets include the licenses acquired as part of the acquisition of Herbal Brands and Clever Leaves through business combinations (Note 9.), as well as trade name, customer relationships, contracts and customer lists. Intangible assets acquired in a business combination are initially recognized as cost at their fair value based on the present value of expected future cash flows as at the date of acquisition. After initial measurement, intangible assets are carried at cost less accumulated amortization and any accumulated impairment losses. Costs of internally developed intangible assets are not capitalized, and related expenditures are recognized in profit or loss as incurred.
Intangible assets are assessed to determine whether they have finite or indefinite useful lives, and the carrying values and remaining estimated useful lives are subject to impairment testing to determine if events or circumstances warrant a revision.
Intangible Assets with Finite Useful Lives
Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their respective useful economic lives and assessed for impairment whenever there is an indication that the intangible asset may be impaired. The Company reviews the amortization period and the amortization method for an intangible asset with a finite useful life on an annual basis. Changes in the expected useful life or the expected pattern of consumption of future economic benefits embodied in the asset is accounted for by changing the amortization period or method, as appropriate, and are treated as changes in accounting estimates to be applied prospectively. The amortization expense on intangible assets with finite lives is recognized in profit or loss. The finite lived intangible assets acquired in the Herbal Brands acquisition and the related estimated useful lives at time of acquisition were as follows:
Amortization of finite lived intangibles is calculated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
Intangible Assets with Indefinite Useful Lives
Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized but are subject to impairment testing at least annually. The assessment of indefinite life is reviewed on an annual basis to determine whether the indefinite life is still appropriate. If not, the change in useful life from indefinite to finite is made on a prospective basis as a change in accounting estimate.
Intangible assets are not revalued subsequently. Intangible assets are subject to impairment testing at least annually and such test considers the estimated future cash flows expected to result from use of the intangible asset or asset group, and eventual disposal. An indefinite-life intangible asset is considered impaired if its fair value is less than its carrying amount.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Business Combinations and Goodwill
The Company accounts for an acquisition of a business using the acquisition method. When control of another entity is obtained, the Company measures the underlying transaction at fair value, and establishes the basis on which the assets, liabilities, and non-controlling interests of the acquired entity at the date of acquisition.
To be considered a business combination, the acquired entity must meet the definition of a business under Topic 805, which states that a business must include, at a minimum, an input and a substantive process that together significantly contribute to the ability to create outputs as a result of revenue-generating activities. If substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired (which excludes cash and cash equivalents, deferred tax assets and any goodwill created from recognition of deferred tax liabilities) is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or group of similar identifiable assets, the set is not a business and does not require further evaluation.
The consideration transferred to the acquirer is measured at fair value at the date of acquisition, and includes assets transferred and liabilities assumed by the Company upon acquisition. The identifiable assets and liabilities that are exchanged as part of the business combination, and which meet the definition of assets and liabilities, are recognized separately from goodwill at the date of acquisition and measured on the acquisition date at their fair values. The non-controlling interest in the acquiree is initially measured at fair value, including goodwill, at the date of acquisition. Any contingent consideration transferred is initially recognized at fair value and is remeasured at fair value each period until settled, with any identified changes in fair value to be recognized in profit or loss.
Goodwill is initially measured as a residual, recognized as an asset and represents the excess of the aggregate of consideration transferred in the business combination, the amount of any non-controlling interest in the acquire, and the fair value of any previously held equity interest in the acquirer at the acquisition date, over the net of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed. In cases where the acquisition occurred as a bargain purchase, the residual deficit would be recognized in profit or loss after reassessing the values used in the acquisition accounting. If the fair value of the net assets acquired is in excess of the aggregate consideration transferred, the gain is recognized in profit or loss.
After initial recognition, goodwill is not subject to amortization but rather is tested for impairment at least annually, or when an event or change in circumstance indicates that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable. See Note 10. for the Company's goodwill information.
Equity Method Investments
Investments are assessed to determine whether they qualify as an investment in an entity that does not represent a controlling financial interest but provides the Company with significant influence in the investee. The Company determines whether the equity investment is an in-substance common stock investment in the entity. This assessment considers subordination, risks and rewards of ownership, and obligation to transfer value in determining whether risks and reward characteristics that are substantially similar to the entity’s common stock. The Company applies judgment in considering various indicators of the ability to exercise significant influence over the investee, such as through ownership of 20% or more of the investee voting stock but not greater than 50%, board representation, and/or participation in the financial, operating, or governance decisions made by the investee.
Investments where the Company has the ability to exercise significant influence in the investee qualify for equity method accounting and are presented separately on the consolidated statements of financial position. The equity method investment is recognized using a cost accumulation model, based on the cost of consideration transferred and related transaction costs.
Leases
The determination of whether an arrangement is, or contains, a lease is based on the substance of the arrangement at inception and considers whether the arrangement is to be fulfilled through the use of a specific asset or assets, or whether the arrangement conveys a right to use the asset. Leases are classified as either operating leases or capital leases at lease inception, and this classification depends on the transfer of risks and rewards of ownership, along with several other criteria such as the transfer of ownership to the lessee, purchase options, or percentage of economic life of leased asset. This lease classification is not revised unless there is a modification to the lease agreement.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
At commencement, capital leases are recorded with a leased asset and a corresponding liability at an amount equal to the lower of the fair value of the leased assets at lease inception and the present value of the minimum lease payments (using the lower of the lessee’s incremental borrowing rate or interest rate implicit in the lease, if known).
Operating leases do not recognize a leased asset or liability in the statement of financial position. Rather, a lessee recognizes the operating expense in the consolidated statement of operations on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) ("ASU No. 2014-09"). The Company elected to use the practical expedient prescribed by the standard and applied the standard using a portfolio approach to contracts (or performance obligations) with similar characteristics, as the Company reasonably expects that the effects on the financial statements of applying this guidance to the portfolio would not differ materially from applying this guidance to the individual contracts (or performance obligations) within that portfolio.
In accordance with the guidance, the Company’s policy is to recognize revenue at an amount that reflects the consideration that the Company expects that it will be entitled to receive in exchange for transferring goods or services to its customers. The Company’s policy is to record revenue when control of the goods transfers to the customer. The Company evaluates the transfer of control through evidence of the customer’s receipt and acceptance, transfer of title, the Company’s right to payment for those products and the customer’s ability to direct the use of those products upon receipt. Typically, the Company’s performance obligations are satisfied at a point in time, and revenue is recognized, either upon shipment or delivery of goods. In instances where control transfers upon customer acceptance, the Company estimates the time period it takes for the customer to take possession and the Company recognizes revenue based on such estimates. The transaction price is typically based on the amount billed to the customer and includes estimated variable consideration where applicable.
In instances when the Company’s products are sold under consignment arrangements, the Company does not recognize revenue until control over such products has transferred to the end consumer.
The Company’s net revenues are comprised of gross revenues from sales of products less expected product returns, trade discounts and customer allowances, which include costs associated with mark-downs and other price reductions. Product returns are not material to Company net sales.
The Company incurs costs associated with product distribution, such as freight and handling costs. The Company has elected to treat these costs as fulfillment activities and recognizes these costs at the same time that it recognizes the underlying product revenue.
See Note 17. for disaggregated revenue data.
The adoption of ASU No. 2014-09 did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company grants share-based awards to employees, directors and consultants of the Company as compensation for services rendered or performance achieved. The Company estimates the fair value of equity classified stock options on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. The risk-free interest rate is based on the USD risk-free rates in effect at each grant issuance date with a term to maturity matching the expected option terms. The grant date share price is determined based on the underlying value of assets of the respective entity calculated using the income and market approaches. The expected dividend yield is determined based on the fact that the Company has not paid dividends historically. Furthermore, the Company has not announced and is not expecting to pay dividends in the near term. The volatility selected is based on consideration of historical industry company volatilities at the grant dates. The expected stock option term is calculated considering the weighted average mid-point of the vesting and expiry dates, compared to the grant date. For the option grants with vesting dependent on a trigger event, expected option term is calculated using a mid-point between the requisite service period (the longer of the service or performance periods) and the contract term.
The fair value is recognized as compensation expense over the requisite service period for all awards that vest. For performance-based stock options, compensation cost is recognized over the requisite service period if it is probable that the performance condition will be satisfied. Compensation costs for awards that cliff vest and for graded vesting awards based
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
solely on service conditions are recognized on a straight-line basis. Graded vesting based on performance conditions are recognized on a ratable basis over the requisite service period using the accelerated attribution model. For restricted stock, compensation cost is recognized over the original restriction period, which is typically two years after the service inception date. The Company accounts for forfeitures as they occur by reversing any expense recognized for unvested awards.
Reportable Segments
Refer to Note 17. for more information on the Company's operating segments.
Income Taxes
Current income tax assets and liabilities for the period are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the taxation authorities and includes foreign income taxes from the Company’s operations that are consolidated, combined, for accounted for under the equity method. The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are enacted at the reporting date in the countries where the Company operates and generates taxable income.
Management periodically evaluates positions taken in the tax returns with respect to situations in which applicable tax regulations are subject to interpretation and establishes provisions where appropriate.
The Company uses the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and the tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Management makes an assessment of the likelihood that the resulting deferred tax assets will be realized. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
The Company recognizes uncertain income tax positions at the largest amount that is more likely than not to be sustained upon audit by the relevant taxing authority. An uncertain income tax position will not be recognized if it has less than a 50% likelihood of being sustained. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which judgment occurs.
The Company recognizes any interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits on the income tax expense line in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Net Loss and Comprehensive Loss.
Net Loss Per Share
The Company applies the two-class method to compute basic and diluted net (loss) income per share attributable to the Company's common shareholders when shares meet the definition of participating securities. The two-class method determines net loss per share for each class of the Company’s common shares and preferred shares according to dividends declared or accumulated and participation rights in undistributed earnings. The two-class method requires (loss) income available to common shareholders of Clever Leaves Holdings Inc. for the period to be allocated between the Company’s common shares and preferred shares based upon their respective rights to share in the earnings as if all (loss) income for the period had been distributed.
Basic net loss per share attributable to Clever Leaves Holdings Inc. shareholders is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the period without consideration of potentially dilutive common shares.
Diluted net loss per share reflects the potential dilution that could occur if securities or other contracts to issue the Company’s common shares were exercised or converted into common shares or resulted in the issuance of common shares that then shared in the earnings of the Company unless inclusion of such shares would be anti-dilutive. For periods in which the Company reports net losses, diluted net loss per common share attributable to Clever Leaves Holdings Inc. common shareholders is the same as basic net loss because potentially dilutive common shares are not assumed to have been issued if their effect is anti-dilutive.
Emerging Growth Company
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
to, not being required to comply with the independent registered public accounting firm attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and Form 10-K, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of the Company’s financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-15, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other- Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40) ("ASU No. 2018-15"), which amends ASC 350-40 to address a customer’s accounting for implementation costs incurred in a cloud computing arrangement that is a service contract. ASU No. 2018-15 aligns the accounting for costs incurred to implement a cloud computing arrangement that is a service arrangement with the guidance on capitalizing costs associated with developing or obtaining internal-use software. Specifically, ASU No. 2018-15 amends ASC 350 to include in its scope implementation costs of a cloud computing arrangement that is a service contract and clarifies that a customer should apply ASC 350-40 to determine which implementation costs should be capitalized in a cloud computing arrangement that is considered a service contract. The Company adopted ASU No. 2018-15 on January 1, 2020 and the adoption did not have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In October 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-17, Consolidation (Topic 810) ("ASU No. 2018-17"), which amends two aspects of the related party guidance in Topic 810. Specifically, ASU No. 2018-17 creates an alternative accounting policy election to not apply VIE guidance to legal entities under common control and requires additional disclosures related to the private company’s involvement in and exposure to entities under this election. Additionally, ASU No. 2018-17 amends the guidance for determining whether payments to decision makers and service providers are variable interests by requiring consideration of indirect interests held through related parties. The Company adopted ASU No. 2018-17 on January 1, 2020 and the adoption did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) ("ASU No. 2016-02"), which supersedes the leasing guidance in Topic 840, Leases. ASU No. 2016-02 will require lessees to recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability for leases (other than leases that meet the definition of a short-term lease). The liability will be equal to the present value of lease payments. The asset will be based on the liability, subject to adjustment, such as for initial direct costs. For income statement purposes, a dual model was retained, requiring leases to be classified as either operating or finance leases. Operating leases will result in straight-line expense (similar to current operating leases) while finance leases will result in a front-loaded expense pattern (similar to current capital leases). Lessor accounting is similar to the current model but updated to align with certain changes to the lessee model (e.g., certain definitions, such as initial direct costs, have been updated) and the new revenue recognition standard. ASU No. 2016-02 will be effective for the Company beginning on January 1, 2022 and is required to be adopted using a modified retrospective approach. Early adoption is permitted. The Company is evaluating the impact of the adoption of ASU No. 2016-02 and anticipates recognition of additional assets and corresponding liabilities related to leases on its consolidated statement of financial position.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740) - Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU No. 2019-12"), which is intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. ASU No. 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
improve consistent application. ASU No. 2019-12 is effective for the Company beginning January 1, 2021. The Company is currently evaluating the effect of adopting ASU No. 2019-12.
In January 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-01, Investments - Equity Securities (Topic 321), Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323), and Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815) (“ASU No. 2020-01”), which is intended to clarify the interaction of the accounting for equity securities under Topic 321 and investments accounted for under the equity method of accounting in Topic 323 and the accounting for certain forward contracts and purchased options accounted for under Topic 815. ASU No. 2020-01 is effective for the Company beginning January 1, 2021. The Company is currently evaluating the effect of adopting ASU No. 2020-01.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt - (Topic 815) ("ASU No. 2020-06"), which simplifies an issuer’s accounting for convertible instruments and its application of the derivatives scope exception for contracts in its own equity. The amendments in ASU No. 2020-06 are effective for public companies, other than smaller reporting companies, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. For all other entities, the amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the effect of adopting ASU No. 2020-06.
In October 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-08, Codification Improvement - (Topic 310) ("ASU No. 2020-08"), which clarifies that an entity should reevaluate whether a callable debt security is within the scope of paragraph ASC 310-20-35-33 for each reporting period. The amendments in this ASU No. 2020-08 are effective for public companies, other than smaller reporting companies, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. For all other entities, the amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within fiscal years after December 15, 2022. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the effect of adopting ASU No. 2020-08.
In October 2020, the FASB issued this ASU No. 2020-09, Debt - (Topic 470) ("ASU No. 2020-09"), which clarifies, streamlines, and in some cases eliminates, the disclosures a registrant must provide in lieu of the subsidiary’s audited financial statements. The rules require certain enhanced narrative disclosures, including the terms and conditions of the guarantees and how the legal obligations of the issuer and guarantor, as well as other factors, may affect payments to holders of the debt securities. The amendments in ASU No. 2020-09 are effective January 4, 2021 and earlier compliance is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the effect of adopting ASU No. 2020-09.
In October 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-10, Codification Improvement - (Topic Various) ("ASU No. 2020-10"), which improves the codification for more consistent disclosures in the financial statements. The amendments in ASU No. 2020-10 are effective for public companies, other than smaller reporting companies, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. For all other entities, the amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2022. Early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the effect of adopting ASU No. 2020-10.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
4. FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
The following table provides the fair value measurement hierarchy of the Company’s assets and liabilities, except for those assets and liabilities that are short term in nature and approximate the fair values, as of the periods presented:
In September 2020, Lift & Co. ("Lift") filed for bankruptcy protection under Section 49 of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act of Canada. In connection with the filing, the Company fully impaired its investment in Lift and as a result, the carrying value of the Company's common stock and warrant ownership was $nil as of December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, there were no transfers between fair value measurement levels.
5. INVENTORY
Inventories are comprised of the following items as of the periods presented:
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company recorded approximately $399 and $nil, respectively, of inventory write-downs in cost of goods sold.
6. PREPAIDS, ADVANCES AND OTHER
Prepaids and advances are comprised of the following items as of the periods presented:
Prepayments and advances represent amounts previously paid to vendors for security deposits and supplies, leased premises, facility construction and expansion projects not yet delivered.
7. INVESTMENTS
Cansativa
On December 21, 2018, the Company, through its subsidiary Northern Swan Deutschland Holdings, Inc., entered into a seed investment agreement with the existing stockholders of Cansativa GmbH (“Cansativa”), a German limited liability company primarily focused on the import and sale of cannabis products for medical use and related supplements and nutraceuticals. Prior to the Company’s investment, Cansativa’s registered and fully paid-in share capital amounted to 26,318 common shares. Under the investment agreement, the Company has agreed with the existing stockholders to invest up to EUR 7,000 in Cansativa in three separate tranches of, respectively, EUR 1,000, EUR 3,000 and up to a further EUR 3,000. The first EUR 1,000 (specifically, EUR 999.915, approximately $1,075, or “Seed Financing Round”) was invested in Cansativa to subscribe for 3,096 newly issued preferred voting shares at EUR 322.97 per preferred share, and as cash contributions from the Company to Cansativa. The seed EUR 322.97 per share price was based on a fully diluted pre-money valuation for Cansativa of EUR 8,500, and the increase of Cansativa’s registered share capital by the 3,096 preferred shares in the Seed Financing Round provided the Company with 10.53% of the total equity ownership of Cansativa. The Company paid the seed investment subscription by, first, an initial nominal payment of EUR 3.1, (i.e., EUR 1.00 per share) upon signing the investment agreement to demonstrate the Company’s intent to invest, and the remainder of EUR 996.819 was settled in January 2019 to officially close the investment deal after certain closing conditions have been met by the existing stockholders and Cansativa. The Company accounts for its investment in Cansativa using the equity accounting method, due to the Company's significant influence, in accordance with ASC 323, Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures. The Company used the practical expedient available under ASU 2016-01 and measured the Tranche 2 Option of the Cansativa equity investments at cost for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The Company recorded its investment in Cansativa at the cost basis of an aggregated amount of EUR 999.915, approximately $1,075, which is comprised of EUR 3.096 for the initial nominal amount of the Seed Financing Round and EUR 996.819 for the remaining Seed Financing Round (i.e., Capital Reserve Payment), with no transaction costs. Subsequent to the Seed Financing Round, the Company has an option, within 18 months after the Signing Date, to increase its investment in Cansativa by subscribing to up to 9,289 newly issued (additional) preferred shares (“Tranche 2 Option”) for an amount of up to EUR 3,000.06833 based on the same seed share price of EUR 322.97. When the Tranche 2 Option is exercised from time to time, the Company is entitled to subscribe to a number of up to 578 additional Seed Preferred Shares (in case of full exercise of the Tranche 2 Option) for their respective nominal value of EUR 1.00. The Company estimated that the value of the Tranche 2 Option at the time of the initial investment was approximately EUR 419 ($450). The Company’s equity method investment at the time of Seed Financing Round was approximately 10.53% of the book value of Cansativa’s net assets of approximately EUR 1,100, and approximately EUR 465 of equity method goodwill, as Cansativa was a newly formed entity with limited identifiable assets to which a significant fair value could be applied. As of December 31, 2019, the Company’s options to
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
acquire additional shares in Cansativa are accounted for as equity instruments within the scope of ASC 321, Investments - Equity Securities.
In accordance with the seed investment agreement, in September 2019, the Company made an additional investment of approximately EUR 650, or approximately $722, for 2,138 shares in Cansativa, thereby increasing its equity ownership to 16.6% of the book value of Cansativa’s net assets of approximately EUR 1,233, and approximately EUR 1,122 of equity method goodwill as Cansativa was still in the process of getting the licenses and expanding its operations. Value of remaining Tranche 2 option was estimated at approximately EUR 322. As of September 30, 2020, balance of Tranche 2 option expired unexercised and as a result the Company recognized a loss on investment of approximately $370 in its Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Loss and the carrying value of the Tranche 2 option was reduced to nil.
In December 2020, Cansativa allocated shares of its common stock to a newly-installed employee-stock ownership plan (“ESOP”). As a result of the ESOP installment, the Company’s equity ownership of Cansativa, on a fully-diluted basis, decreased from 16.59% to 15.80% of the book value of Cansativa’s net assets. Additionally, Cansativa raised additional capital through the issuance of Series A preferred stock (“Cansativa Series A Shares”) to a third-party investor at a per share price of EURO 543.31. As a result of the Series A Share issuance, the Company’s equity ownership of Cansativa, on a fully diluted basis, decreased from 15.80% to 14.22% of the book value of Cansativa’s net assets. The Company accounted for the transaction as a proportionate sales of ownership share and recognized a gain of approximately $211 in its consolidated statement of operations within loss on investments line. This change did not impact the equity method classification.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company’s share of net losses from the investment were $4 and $96, respectively.
Lift & Co.
The Company has an equity investment comprised of common shares and warrants in Lift, a cannabis-focused technology and media company and a leading cannabis brand and product aggregator and reviewer in the cannabis market. Lift is publicly listed on the TSX Venture Exchange (TSXV: LIFT). This investment qualified for equity method accounting upon acquisition in August 2017 as the Company had significant influence through its board representation.
The Company recorded the carrying amount of the equity method investment equal to the cost basis of approximately $923, the cost of the consideration transferred equal to approximately 14% share of the book value of Lift’s net assets of approximately $876, and approximately $800 of equity method goodwill.
In September 2018, upon Lift’s initial public offering, the Company gave up its significant influence over Lift by forfeiting the board representation, and at such time the investment was no longer qualified to be accounted for under the equity method. As of December 31, 2019, the Company owned approximately 8% of Lift’s issued and outstanding common shares.
The Company has classified the investment as an equity instrument as of December 31, 2019 following the adoption of ASU 2016-01. As a result, for the period ending December 31, 2019 the Company had recorded loss on its Lift investment of approximately $756 and reclassified to opening retained earnings unrecognized gains of approximately $1,191, previously reported in accumulated other comprehensive income. The carrying value of the Company’s investment in the Lift shares at December 31, 2019 was approximately $319.
On January 19, 2019, the issuer-imposed sale or transfer restriction on the underlying stock in the warrants lapsed, at which time the warrants met the definition of a derivative to be accounted for under ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging. The Company performed a valuation of the warrants and recognized an asset for approximately $598. A gain of approximately $233, equal to the change in fair value from December 31, 2018 to January 19, 2019, was recognized in the consolidated statement of net income/loss. As the derivative did not meet the criteria for special hedge accounting and as a result the Company recognized the warrants as a derivative at fair value, with changes in fair value recognized in profit or loss. The fair value of the derivative instrument at December 31, 2019 was approximately $57 and as a result the Company recognized a loss in the warrant derivative of approximately $308 in its consolidated statement of net income/loss.
In September 2020, Lift filed for bankruptcy protection under Section 49 of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act of Canada. In connection with the bankruptcy filing, the Company wrote down its investment in Lift such that the carrying value of its
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
common share and warrant ownership was $nil as of December 31, 2020. No warrants were exercised as of December 31, 2020.
8. BUSINESS COMBINATIONS
Business Combination
On December 18, 2020, Clever Leaves and SAMA consummated the Business Combination contemplated by the Amended and Restated Business Combination Agreement, dated as of November 9, 2020, by and among SAMA, Clever Leaves, the Company and Merger Sub.
Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, each of the following transactions occurred in the following order: (i) pursuant to a court-approved Canadian plan of arrangement (the “Plan of Arrangement” and the arrangement pursuant to such Plan of Arrangement, the “Arrangement”), at 11:59 p.m., Pacific time, on December 17, 2020 (2:59 a.m., Eastern time, on December 18, 2020) (a) all of the Clever Leaves shareholders exchanged their Class A common shares without par value of Clever Leaves (“Clever Leaves common shares”) for our common shares without par value (“common shares”) and/or non-voting common shares without par value (“non-voting common shares”) (as determined in accordance with the Business Combination Agreement) and (b) certain Clever Leaves shareholders received approximately $3,100 in cash in the aggregate (the “Cash Arrangement Consideration”), such that, immediately following the Arrangement, Clever Leaves became our direct wholly-owned subsidiary; (ii) at 12:01 a.m., Pacific time (3:01 a.m. Eastern time), on December 18, 2020, Merger Sub merged with and into SAMA, with SAMA surviving such merger as our direct wholly-owned subsidiary (the “Merger”) and, as a result of the Merger, all of the shares of SAMA common stock were converted into the right to receive our common shares as set forth in the Business Combination Agreement; (iii) immediately following the consummation of the Merger, we contributed 100% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of SAMA (as the surviving corporation of the Merger) to Clever Leaves, such that, SAMA became a direct wholly-owned subsidiary of Clever Leaves; and (iv) immediately following the contribution of SAMA to Clever Leaves, Clever Leaves contributed 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of NS US Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Clever Leaves, to SAMA. Upon the closing of the Merger, SAMA changed its name to Clever Leaves US, Inc.
In connection with the closing of the Business Combination, the Company's bylaws were amended and restated to, among other things, provide for an unlimited number of common shares without par value, an unlimited number of non-voting common shares without par value and an unlimited number of preferred shares without par value.
In connection with the Business Combination, SAMA obtained commitments (the “Subscription Agreements”) from certain investors (the “Subscribers”) to purchase $8,881 in shares of SAMA common stock for a purchase price of $9.50 per share, in the SAMA PIPE. As part of the SAMA PIPE, certain Subscribers who are holders of the 2022 Convertible Notes agreed to purchase shares of SAMA common stock in exchange for the transfer of the PIK Notes received in satisfaction of approximately $2,881 of accrued and outstanding interest under the 2022 Convertible Notes from January 1 to December 31, 2020. Prior to the effective time of the Merger, SAMA issued an aggregate of 934,819 shares of SAMA common stock the Subscribers in the SAMA PIPE that were exchange for our common shares, on a one-for-one basis, in connection with the Closing.
The Business Combination is accounted for as a recapitalization in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Under this method of accounting, SAMA was treated as the "acquired" company for financial reporting purposes (see Note 1.). Accordingly, for accounting purposes, the Business Combination was treated as the equivalent of Clever Leaves issuing shares for the net assets of SAMA, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of SAMA are stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
The following table reconciles the elements of the Business Combination to the consolidated statement of cash flows and the consolidated statement of shareholders’ equity for the year ended December 31, 2020:
See Note 13. for more information on all capital stock issuances.
Herbal Brands, Inc. Acquisition
In order to expand in the U.S. market and gain manufacturing capabilities, on April 30, 2019, the Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary, Herbal Brands, Inc., entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with B.N.G. Enterprises Incorporated, an Arizona corporation (“BNG”), SupremeBeing, L.L.C., a Delaware limited liability company (“SupremeBeing”), Fusion Formulations, L.L.C., an Arizona limited liability company (“Fusion”), Acme Wholesale, L.L.C., a Nevada limited liability company (“Acme” and, collectively with BNG, SupremeBeing and Fusion, “Sellers”) and certain Sellers’ representative and other beneficial owners of BNG. BNG is engaged in the business of formulating, manufacturing, testing, marketing, selling, distributing and otherwise commercializing homeopathic and other natural remedies, wellness products, detoxification products, nutraceuticals and nutritional and dietary supplements (the “Business”). Under this agreement, the Company agreed to purchase and assume from each Seller, substantially all the assets, and certain specified liabilities, of the Sellers’ Business for the purchase price of $13,429 in cash. The integrated set of inputs (acquired assets) and processes (workforce and intact processes) are capable of being conducted and managed as a business by the Company. And since the organized workforce obtained by the Company within the set have the required skills, knowledge, and experience to perform the process and convert acquired inputs into outputs, the set (acquired input and processes) is capable of being conducted and managed as a business to create outputs, the Company accounted for the transaction as a business combination.
The Company partially financed the acquisition using the proceeds from a $8,500 non-revolving 4-year loan bearing interest at 8.00% annually (see Note 12.). The Company accounted for the acquisition as a business combination and, accordingly, the
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
total consideration of $13,429 was recorded based on the respective estimated fair values of the net assets acquired on the acquisition date with resulting goodwill, as follows:
The fair values of the net assets acquired were based on management’s estimates of the respective fair values of net assets.
Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired in the acquisition. Factors contributing to the recognition of goodwill include expanded product categories, channel diversification and a broader geographic footprint. The value of the acquiree’s workforce of approximately $550 was included in goodwill.
In determining the fair values of net assets acquired in the acquisition and resulting goodwill, the Company considered, among other factors, historical financial performance and an estimate of the future performance of the acquired business, as well as the intended use of the acquired assets.
The estimated fair value of inventory acquired in the acquisition was determined using a net realizable value approach, which calculates the estimated selling price of such inventory in the ordinary course of business, less the reasonable costs of completion, disposal and holding.
None of the goodwill recognized was deductible for income tax purposes.
The intangible assets acquired based on the estimate of the fair values of the identifiable intangible assets were as follows:
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
The Company reviewed the substance of the agreements, where applicable, and the projected cash flow expected from the intangible assets and based on this review it determined that straight-line amortization of the identified finite-lived intangible assets was reasonable.
Unaudited Pro Forma Results
The following table presents the Company’s pro forma consolidated net sales and loss from operations, before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019. The unaudited pro forma results include the historical consolidated statements of operations of the Company and Herbal Brands, giving effect to the Herbal Brands acquisition and related financing transactions as if they had occurred at the beginning of the earliest period presented.
The pro forma results, prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, include the following pro forma adjustments related to the Herbal Brands acquisition:
(i)as a result of the increase in the fair value of acquired inventory at the Acquisition Date, the pro forma adjustments include an adjustment to reverse the $2.2 million recognized in the year ended December 31, 2019 within cost of sales because it will not have a recurring impact;
(ii)$0.9 million of acquisition related costs recognized by the Company and Herbal Brands during the year ended December 31, 2019, which are non-recurring and included in the loss from operations as of December 31, 2019;
(iii)a pro forma increase in interest expense of approximately $0.3 million for the period January 1, 2019 through April 30, 2019 related to financing the Herbal Brands Acquisition and related debt transaction. Refer to Note 12, for further details on financing the Herbal Brands Acquisition and related debt transactions; and
(iv)a pro forma increase in amortization of approx. $0.3 million for the period January 1, 2019 through April 30, 2019, related to amortization of intangible assets acquired as part of the Herbal Brands Acquisition.
Eagle Canada Acquisition
Changes in the ownership interest in a subsidiary while control was retained
In January 2018, the Company entered into an agreement to invest in Ecomedics S.A.S., a start-up cannabis company in Colombia through a series of scheduled equity investments in Eagle Canada, an entity that controls Ecomedics. As of March 2018, the investment qualified for equity method accounting as the Company had gained significant influence through its investments and board representation. Following additional investments in 2018, the Company gained controlling interest in Eagle Canada and began consolidating effective on September 30, 2018.
In January 2019, the Company made an additional capital injection of $3,000 into Eagle Canada. The Company invested an additional $5,000 on March 18, 2019, $2,000 on April 4, 2019, $6,400 on June 5, 2019 and $5,000 on August 15, 2019. As such, the Company owned a total of 70% interest of Eagle Canada as of August 15, 2019. As a result of the transactions, the Company recorded an adjustment to non-controlling interest of approximately $1,752 and $19,648 the difference between the amount of the adjustment to non-controlling interest and the consideration paid, recognized in equity and attributable to the controlling interest.
On October 31, 2019, the Company entered into an agreement with the non-controlling interest holders of Eagle Canada (“NCI Holders”), which granted the NCI Holders “Exchangeable Class A Shares” of Eagle Canada (the “Agreement”). These shares were exchangeable for the common shares of the Company at a predetermined exchange price. Under the terms of the
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Agreement, each of NSI and the holders of Exchangeable Class A Shares had an option to require the exchange of the shares upon certain triggering events (such as an initial public offering), an offer to purchase 10% of the shares, or a change of control. There was also a “date certain” trigger event of January 12, 2022, ensuring that if none of the other trigger events occur beforehand, the exchange may still be carried out at either party’s election. Upon exercise of this option, NSI will acquire all outstanding securities of Eagle and the Company will issue common shares to NCI Holders. The Exchangeable Class A Shares were non-voting and had no economic participation in Eagle Canada, however these shares had participation rights in any dividends or distributions announced by the Company. No dividends or distributions were announced as of December 31, 2020.
The Agreement concurrently granted both the non-controlling interest holders options to sell their remaining interests in the subsidiary to the parent (i.e., put options from NSI’s perspective) and the parent options to acquire the remaining interests held by the non-controlling interest holders (i.e., call options from NSI’s perspective). Based on the Company’s analysis of the facts of the Agreement, the options were deemed equity contracts embedded with the redeemable non-controlling interests, which do not meet the definition of a derivative under ASC 815 and were classified as equity. In addition, since the redeemable non-controlling interests are exchanged with Clever Leaves’s own shares, rather than cash or other assets, in accordance with ASC 815, the Company determined that the redeemable non-controlling interests were classified in permanent equity as of December 31, 2019. Following the Company's business combination in December 2020, the redeemable non-controlling interest were converted to 1,562,339 of the Company's common shares, adjusted to reflect the secondary sale of 287,564 of the Company's common shares. As a result of the transactions, the Company recorded an adjustment to non-controlling interest of $4,695 and recognized approximately $10,928, the difference between the amount of the adjustment to non-controlling interest and the consideration paid in the form of exchangeable Class A shares, in equity and attributable to the controlling interest.
9. INTANGIBLE ASSETS
The Company has acquired cannabis-related licenses as part of a business combination with a gross value of approximately $19,000, which have indefinite useful lives as they are expected to generate economic benefit to the Company in perpetuity. In addition, during 2019 the Company acquired finite-lived intangible assets with a gross value of approximately $7,091 as part of its Herbal Brands acquisition (Note 8.). During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 the Company recorded approximately $1,231 and $581, respectively, of amortization related to its finite-lived intangible assets.
The following tables present details of the Company’s total intangible assets as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The value of product formulation intangible asset is included in the value of Brand:
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Interim impairment Testing
In conjunction with the impairment testing performed as of March 31, 2020 (refer to Note 10. for more detail) the Company reviewed finite-lived intangible assets for impairment. In performing such review, the Company made judgments about the recoverability of purchased finite lived intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment may exist. The Company recognizes an impairment if the carrying amount of the long-lived asset group exceeds the Company’s estimate of the asset group’s undiscounted future cash flows.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets, consisting of certain of the Company’s licenses, were reviewed as part of the impairment assessment during the first quarter of 2020 similar to goodwill, in accordance with ASC 350.
The Company did not recognize an impairment related to the carrying value of any of the Company’s finite or indefinite-lived intangible assets as a result of the impairment assessments performed as of March 31, 2020.
Annual impairment Testing
In conjunction with the annual impairment testing, see Note 10., the Company reviewed finite-lived intangible assets for impairment. In performing such review, the Company makes judgments about the recoverability of purchased finite lived intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment may exist. The Company recognizes an impairment if the carrying amount of the long-lived asset group exceeds the Company’s estimate of the asset group’s undiscounted future cash flows.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets, consisting of certain of the Company’s licenses, were reviewed for the annual impairment assessment during the fourth quarter of 2020 similar to goodwill, in accordance with ASC 350.
For each of 2020 and 2019, no impairment was recognized related to the carrying value of any of the Company’s finite or indefinite-lived intangible assets as a result of the annual impairment testing.
GNC Holdings, Inc. Bankruptcy
On June 23, 2020, GNC Holdings, Inc. (“GNC”) and its affiliates filed voluntary petitions for relief pursuant to chapter 11 of title 11 of the United States Code (the “Bankruptcy Code”) in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware. In September 2020, a bankruptcy court judge approved the sale of GNC to an investor with the transaction expected to close by the end of the year. Herbal Brands has engaged legal counsel to provide advice with respect to Herbal Brands’ rights under the Bankruptcy Code, prepare and file proof(s) of claim by the applicable bar date established by the Court, and otherwise enforce
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Herbal Brands’ rights in the Court and in connection with any sale transaction or plan of reorganization pursued by GNC. The Company also reviewed the unpaid inventory balances at GNC and determined that a reserve of approximately $86 was necessary for the inventory, which the Company recorded during the second quarter of 2020. Additionally, the Company reviewed the useful life of a finite-lived intangible asset related to the GNC contract, which was acquired during the Herbal Brands acquisition. Following the review, the Company determined that accelerating the period over which the useful life of this intangible asset is amortized was appropriate following its impairment analysis in the first quarter of 2020. The life of the finite lived intangible asset related to the GNC contract was reduced to 12 months from the date of the bankruptcy filing given the uncertainty around the future of GNC. During the third quarter of 2020, the Company was able to recover balances due from GNC and as a result no reserves were recorded as of December 31, 2020. In the third quarter of 2020, substantially all of the assets of GNC were sold to Harbin Pharmaceutical Group Holding Corp. Ltd., and GNC emerged from Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code.
Amortization Expense
The following table reflects the estimated future amortization expense for each period presented for the Company’s finite-lived intangible assets as of December 31, 2020:
10. GOODWILL
The following table presents the changes in goodwill by segment:
Interim impairment Testing
The Company assesses whether there were events or changes in circumstances that would indicate that a reporting, or group of reporting units, were impaired. The Company considers external and internal factors, including overall financial performance and relevant entity specific factors, as part of this assessment.
As of March 31, 2020, the Company recognized the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact as a negative indicator to its business performance. As a result, the Company performed an assessment to determine whether goodwill was impaired. Based upon such assessment, the Company determined that it was more likely than not that only the carrying value of its non-cannabinoid operating segment exceeded the fair value as of March 31, 2020.
Following the results of such assessment, the Company recorded an impairment for the full carrying value of the operating segment’s goodwill carrying value. The Company calculated the fair value of the operating segment using discounted estimated
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
future cash flows. The weighted-average cost of capital used in testing the reporting unit for impairment was 19%, with a perpetual growth rate of 2%. As a result of this interim impairment testing, the Company recognized a $1,682 non-cash goodwill impairment charge related to the non-cannabinoid operating segment in the first quarter of 2020. Following the recognition of this non-cash goodwill impairment charge, the operating segment’s goodwill was $nil.
Annual Impairment Testing
For 2020, the Company performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether indicators of impairment existed. The Company considered, among other factors, the financial performance, industry conditions, as well as macroeconomic developments. Based upon such assessment, the Company determined that it was not more-likely-than-not that an impairment existed as of December 31, 2020.
11. PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT, NET
The Company has property, plant, and equipment related to land, buildings and warehouses, leasehold improvements, laboratory, and construction in progress. The additions, disposals, depreciation, and net book values are as follows:
(a) Includes approximately $1,050 and $685 of depreciation included in inventory and cost of goods sold, respectively.
(b) Includes approximately $100 and nil of depreciation included in inventory and cost of goods sold, respectively.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Construction in progress primarily relate to on-going construction of the Company's Colombian facilities.
Certain amounts may not add due to rounding.
12. DEBT
____________
(a)Net of debt issuance costs of $741 and $1,183 in 2020 and 2019.
Series C Convertible Debentures
In October 2018, the Company completed a private placement of Convertible Debentures as part of its Series C round of fundraising. This financing was a non-brokered private placement of non-interest bearing convertible unsecured debentures, which raised approximately $18,000 in convertible unsecured debentures by the closing date October 31, 2018, and these debentures had a maturity date September 30, 2021. There was no liquidation preference of this debt.
Each debenture was convertible upon the following events:
•Qualified financing - where the Company issued one or more financings by issuance of equity at a fixed pre-money valuation (including an initial public offering) completed by the Company in a subsequent transaction or series of related transactions resulting in aggregate gross proceeds of not less than $5,000. In such an event, the debenture was automatically convertible into the financing securities (i.e. the type of securities issued in a Qualified financing).
•Liquidity event - where there was a change in control or going public transaction resulting in the business or assets of the Company being listed on any North American or Australian stock exchange. In such an event, the debenture was automatically convertible into common stock.
The conversion price was at a 20% discount (or 30% subsequent to the penalty date starting on September 30, 2019) to the lowest price per financing security (i.e. common stock) in the case of a qualified financing event, or to the price per common stock in a liquidity event.
The conversion feature was considered an embedded derivative (“Series C derivative”) within the Series C convertible debenture with the debt instrument being the host instrument.
The fair value of the derivative feature was estimated at approximately $3,900, considering the conversion probability at 80%. The difference between the proceeds allocated to the hybrid debt instrument and the fair value of the embedded derivative instrument was assigned as the carrying value of the host debt instrument, which at the date of issuance was approximately $14,000.
As of December 31, 2018, the note was not converted and had an estimated fair value of $4,400.
The issuance of Series D’s Class C Preferred Shares and convertible notes met the definition of a qualified financing trigger event under the terms of the Series C non-interest bearing convertible unsecured debentures, as the Company issued equity at a fixed pre-money valuation resulting in an aggregate gross proceeds exceeding $5,000. As a result, the Series C debentures were automatically convertible and approximately $17,890 of Series C debt was converted into 2,546,670 of Class C preferred stock.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
As a result of this transaction, the Company recognized approximately $300 of interest expense on its Series C debt for the year ended December 31, 2019, as well as approximately $3,374 of loss on debt extinguishment.
In addition, the Company remeasured to fair value immediately prior to extinguishment of the Series C derivative, which resulted in approximately $133 of loss on fair value measurement. Further, upon conversion the Company reclassified into equity the carrying amount of the derivative instrument of approximately $4,475.
Series D Convertible Notes due March 2022
In March 2019 and in connection with the Company's Series D fundraising, the Company issued secured convertible notes totaling $27,750, with maturity date of March 30, 2022 (“2022 Convertible Notes”). The 2022 Convertible Notes bear interest of 8.00% per annum, payable quarterly in arrears, and are secured through collateral, guarantee, and pledge agreements signed between the Company, the noteholders, and an appointed paying and collateral agent. Specifically, the 2022 Convertible Notes are guaranteed by the Company’s subsidiaries and secured by 1,300,002 common shares of pledged equity interests in specific subsidiaries.
A noteholder may convert the principal amount, in whole or in part, at a minimum of $1,000 into common shares at a conversion price of $11 per share. The Company may issue financing securities (common shares) upon the exercise of the conversion options within each convertible note, in part or in whole, at the option of the holder at any time or at the option of the issuer subsequent to a trigger event (i.e., a qualified IPO at greater than or equal to $13.54 per common share, or a non-qualified IPO with a 10-day trailing volume weighted average price exceeding $13.54 per common share). The Company is contractually restricted from prepaying the obligations prior to the maturity date except in the case of (1) conversion of the whole or part of the principal amount or (2) a change in control which would trigger immediate repayment in full.
In its assessment to determine the accounting treatment for the Class C Preferred Shares and 2022 Convertible Notes, the Company reviewed the guidance in ASC 480 - Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. Based on the analysis the Company deemed that the: 1) Class C Preferred Shares meet the criteria for a freestanding equity classified instrument that are initially measured at fair value sand subsequent changes to their fair are not recognized; and 2) 2022 Convertible Notes are debt-like in nature. In its assessment, the Company considered the terms and features within the hybrid instrument, including redemption consideration, the preferred shares’ cumulative dividend, voting rights, contingent and optional conversion feature, as well as the liquidation rights, prior to concluding on the classification. Following the review, no features were segregated, and no derivative instruments or beneficial conversion features were recognized. As a result, upon issuance, the Company recognized approximately $30,258 of Class C Preferred Shares and approximately $27,750 of Series D convertible debt on its statement of financial position.
In March 2020, the Company amended certain terms of its 2022 Convertible Notes. As a result of this amendment the Company amended the 2022 Convertible Notes to provide for an increase in the rate of interest payable on the principal amount to 10% and to provide that such interest may be payable in-kind at maturity. In addition, the Company amended the restrictive covenants to allow for the creation, incurrence or assumption of certain additional debt, as well as to extend the date on which the Company is required to deliver its audited year-end financial statements. The amendments were accounted for as debt modification.
In connection with the Business Combination (Note 8.) and effective on the Closing Date, Clever Leaves and the holders of the 2022 Convertible Notes agreed to amend the terms of the notes as follows: (i) decrease the interest rate to 8%, commencing January 1, 2021, and provide that such interest is to be paid in cash, quarterly in arrears; (ii) provide for the cancellation of all accrued and outstanding interest from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 in exchange for the PIPE Shares to be issued as part of the Agreed SAMA pursuant to the terms of the Subscription Agreements; (iii) at the option of Clever Leaves, satisfy the payment of quarterly interest by issuing Holdco common shares to the noteholders, at a price per share equal to 95% of the 10-day volume weighted average trading price of the Holdco common shares ending three trading days prior to the relevant interest payment date (the “10-Day VWAP”); (iv) at the option of Clever Leaves, prepay, in cash, any or all amounts outstanding under the 2022 Convertible Notes at any time without penalty; (v) at the option of Clever Leaves on each quarterly interest payment date, repay up to the lesser of (a) $2,000, or (b) an amount equal to four times the average value of the daily volume of Holdco common shares traded during the 10-Day VWAP period, of the total amounts outstanding under the 2022 Convertible Notes at such time by issuing Holdco common shares to the noteholders at a price per share equal to 95% of the 10-Day VWAP; and (vi) at the option of each noteholder, in the event, following the Merger Effective Time, Clever Leaves, Holdco or any of their respective affiliates proposes to issue equity securities for cash or cash equivalents (the “Equity Financing”) (save and except
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
for certain exempt issuances) at any time after Clever Leaves, Holdco or any of their respective affiliates completes one or more equity financings raising, in aggregate, net proceeds of $25,000 (net of reasonable fees, including reasonable accounting, advisory and legal fees, commissions and other out-of-pocket expenses and inclusive of net cash retained as a result of the Business Combination on the Merge Effective Time), convert an amount of principal and/or accrued interest owing under the 2022 Convertible Notes into subscriptions to purchase up to the noteholder’s pro rata share of 25% of the total securities issued under such Equity Financing on the same terms and conditions as such Equity Financing is offered to subscribers; provided, however, that if the noteholder does not elect to participate in such Equity Financing through the conversion of amounts owing under the 2022 Convertible Notes, then Clever Leaves shall be required to repay, in cash within five (5) business days following the closing of such Equity Financing, an amount equal to the noteholder’s pro rata share of 25% of the total net proceeds raised from such Equity Financing (collectively, the “November 2020 Amendments”). The amendments were accounted as debt modification. As of closing of the Business Combination, the conversion price was changed from $11 to $30.62 per share.
In connection with the November 2020 Amendments, the Required Holders (as that term is defined in the amended and restated intercreditor and collateral agency agreement, dated as of May 10, 2019, in respect of the 2022 Convertible Notes) have agreed to waive Clever Leaves’ required compliance with certain restrictive covenants set forth in the 2022 Convertible Notes solely for the purposes of allowing Clever Leaves, Holdco and their affiliates to complete the Business Combination, and have agreed to direct GLAS Americas LLC, as collateral agent in respect of the 2022 Convertible Notes, to further provide its consent therefor.
In accordance with the terms of the 2022 Convertible Notes and in connection with the November 2020 Amendments, Holdco, 1255096 B.C. Ltd. and SAMA (as the surviving corporation of the Merger) each entered into a guarantee agreement in favor of the collateral agent in respect of the 2022 Convertible Notes (the “Guarantees”) and become guarantors thereunder. Further, the terms of the amended and restated pledge agreement, dated as of May 10, 2019, made by Clever Leaves in favor of the collateral agent will be amended such that Holdco and certain of its subsidiaries, as the case may be, will, in connection with the Business Combination, pledge all of the shares in the capital of each of Clever Leaves, 1255096 B.C. Ltd., SAMA (as the surviving corporation of the Merger), Northern Swan International, Inc. and NS US Holdings, Inc. to the collateral agent.
Herbal Brands Loan due May 2023
In April 2019 and in connection with the Herbal Brands acquisition (see Note 8.), the Company entered into a loan agreement with Rock Cliff Capital under which the Company secured a non-revolving loan of $8,500 (the "Herbal Brands Loan"). The Herbal Brands Loan bears interest at 8.00% per annum, calculated based on the actual number of days elapsed, due and payable in arrears on the first day of each fiscal quarter commencing July 1, 2019. The Herbal Brands Loan is to be repaid or prepaid prior to its maturity date May 2, 2023 and requires the Company to repay, on a quarterly basis, 85% of positive operating cash flows. The Company can also choose to prepay a portion of or the full balance of loan, subject to a fee equal to the greater of (i) zero, and (ii) $2,338, net of interest payments already paid on such prepayment date. This loan is secured by inventory, property plant and equipment and other assets as collateral.
In connection with the Herbal Brands Loan, the Company issued equity-classified warrants for Class C preferred shares to Rock Cliff Capital (the "Rock Cliff Warrants") with an initial fair value of $717, which was reflected in additional paid-in capital, with an initial expiration date of May 3, 2021. See Note 13. for further details regarding the Rock Cliff Warrants.
The Herbal Brands Loan and Rock Cliff Warrants were deemed freestanding financial instruments with the loan accounted for as debt, subsequently measured using amortized cost, and the Rock Cliff Warrants, representing a written call option, accounted for as an equity-classified contract with subsequent changes in fair value not recognized as long as warrants continue to be classified as equity. Using a relative fair value method, at the time of issuance the Company recognized approximately $7,783 as loans and borrowings and approximately $717 in additional paid-in capital for the equity classified warrant.
In August 2020, the Company amended certain terms of the Herbal Brands Loan to provide for additional interest of 4.00% per annum, compounding quarterly and payable in-kind at maturity. In addition, the Company extended the expiration date of the Rock Cliff Warrants to May 3, 2023. As part of the amendment, the parties agreed to defer the covenant testing under the Herbal Brands Loan until September 30, 2021. The Company accounted for the amendment to the Herbal Brands Loan as a debt modification. Due to the extension of the warrants expiration, the Company reviewed the fair value of the options before and after the amendment, as a result the Company recognized approximately $400 of additional debt issuance costs related to
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
the increase in the fair value of the warrants in its statement of financial position. Such costs will be amortized on a straight-line basis through the amended expiration date of the Rock Cliff Warrants.
Following the closing of the Business Combination and pursuant to the terms, the holder of the Rock Cliff Warrants can purchase 63,597 of the Company's common shares at a strike price of $26.73 per share.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company recognized interest expense of approximately $704 and $456, respectively, and repaid approximately $1,191 and $622, respectively, of the Herbal Brands Loan in accordance with the terms of the loan agreement. The Company expects to repay approximately $1,000 to $1,300 of the Herbal Brands Loan in 2021.
Series E Convertible Debentures
In July 2020 and in connection with its Series E fundraising, the Company issued convertible debentures in an aggregate principal amount of $4,162 (the "Series E Convertible Debentures"). The Series E Convertible Debentures mature on June 30, 2023 and bear interest of 8.00% per annum, commencing June 30, 2021 and payable semi-annually in arrears. At the discretion of the Company and in lieu of being paid to the holders of the Series E Convertible Debentures in cash, any interest accrued and payable on the Series E Convertible Debentures may be added to the outstanding principal balance of the Series E Convertible Debentures.
At any time prior to the Maturity Date or a Debenture Liquidity Event, a holder of the Series E Convertible Debentures may elect to convert the principal amount of the Series E Convertible Debentures and accrued and unpaid interest thereon into common shares of Clever Leaves, at a price per share equal to $5.95. The Series E Convertible Debentures, including any accrued and unpaid interest, will be automatically converted into Clever Leaves common shares at a price per Clever Leaves common share equal to 70% of the price attributable to the Clever Leaves common shares upon occurrence of a Debenture Liquidity Event ("Redemption Feature"), subject to adjustment in the event of the subdivision or consolidation of the outstanding Clever Leaves common shares, the issue of Clever Leaves common shares or securities convertible into Clever Leaves common shares by stock dividend or distribution, or the issue or distribution of rights, options, or warrants to all or substantially all of the holders of Clever Leaves common shares in certain circumstances. For purposes of the Series E Convertible Debentures, a “Liquidity Event” means (1) the listing of Clever Leaves common shares on a recognized securities exchange or market, either by way of initial public offering or direct listing, (2) any transaction whereby all of the outstanding Clever Leaves common shares are sold, transferred, or exchanged for listed securities of a resulting issuer whose equity securities are listed on recognized securities exchange or market, (3) any merger, plan of arrangement, or any other similar business combination or transaction whereby the Company merges or combines with an entity whose securities are listed for trading on a recognized securities exchange or market and all of the outstanding Clever Leaves common shares are sold, transferred or exchanged for such listed securities, or (4) any event as a result of or following which any person or group beneficially owns over an aggregate of more than 50% of the then outstanding Clever Leaves common shares or the sale or other transfer of all or substantially all of the consolidated assets of the Company.
The Company incurred approximately $181 in debt issuance costs related to the Series E Convertible Debentures.
The embedded conversion feature was not deemed to be a derivative instrument and as a result no portion of the proceeds from the debt issuance were allocated to the conversion feature at issuance. The Redemption Feature within Series E Convertible Debentures was considered an embedded derivative with the debt instrument being the host instrument. Under ASC 815, redemption features such as the one in the June 2023 Convertible Debentures, which may accelerate the repayment of principal on debt would also not be considered clearly and closely related to the debt host because the debt involves a substantial premium (resulting from the 30% discount on future conversion price).
ASC 815 requires embedded derivatives that do not meet requirements for hedge accounting to be recorded as a liability at fair value in accordance with ASC 820. The fair value of the derivative was estimated at approximately $1,705, considering the conversion probability at 90%. The difference between the proceeds allocated to the hybrid debt instrument and the fair value of the embedded derivative instrument was assigned as the carrying value of the host debt instrument, which at the date of issuance was approximately $2,457.
The Business Combination qualified as a Debenture Liquidity Event and the $4,162 in Series E Convertible Debentures converted to Clever Leaves class A common shares at a conversion price of $2.303 per share, which were exchanged for
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Holdco common shares at the Exchange Rate. Upon redemption of the convertible debentures through conversion into and settlement in Clever Leaves class A common shares, the Company issues a total fair value of $5,950 in common shares. The Company accounted for the conversion of the Series E Convertible Debentures as a debt extinguishment and recognized a non-cash loss on extinguishment of debt $1,705 and a loss on fair value of derivative instrument of $85.
October 2020 Convertible Debenture Financing
In October 2020, the Company completed the first tranche of a financing pursuant to which it issued $1,230 aggregate principal amount of convertible debentures due September 30, 2023 (the “September 2023 Convertible Debentures”). The September 2023 Convertible Debentures mature on September 30, 2023 (the “September 2023 Maturity Date”) and bear interest of 8.00% per annum, commencing September 30, 2021, payable semi-annually in arrears. At the discretion of the Company, any interest accrued and payable in respect of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures may, in lieu of being paid to the holders of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures, be added to the principal amount outstanding under the September 2023 Convertible Debentures. Provided that no Debenture Liquidity Event has occurred, on the September 2023 Maturity Date, the principal aggregate amount of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures and the accrued and unpaid interest thereon will be payable in cash. At any time prior to the September 2023 Maturity Date or a Debenture Liquidity Event, a holder of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures may elect to convert its principal amount of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures and the accrued and unpaid interest thereon into Clever Leaves common shares, at a price per share equal to $5.95 (subject to adjustment). The September 2023 Convertible Debentures, including any accrued and unpaid interest, will be automatically converted into Clever Leaves common shares at a price per Clever Leaves common share equal to 70% of the price attributable to the Clever Leaves common shares upon occurrence of a Debenture Liquidity Event, subject to adjustment in the event of the subdivision or consolidation of the outstanding Clever Leaves common shares, the issue of Clever Leaves common shares or securities convertible into Clever Leaves common shares by stock dividend or distribution, or the issue or distribution of rights, options, or warrants to all or substantially all of the holders of Clever Leaves common shares in certain circumstances.
In November 2020 in connection with the Business Combination, certain subscribers in the SAMA PIPE signed subscription agreements with Clever Leaves to invest $1,500 in the aggregate in additional September 2023 Convertible Debentures (the “September 2023 Convertible Debenture Investment”).
The two issuances were completed very close to one another and had identical terms. The embedded conversion feature was not deemed to be a derivative instrument and as a result no portion of the proceeds from the debt issuance were allocated to the conversion feature at issuance. The redemption feature within the September 2023 Convertible Debentures was considered an embedded derivative with the debt instrument being the host instrument. The fair value of the derivative feature was estimated at approximately $570, considering the conversion probability of approximately 43%. The difference between the proceeds allocated to the hybrid debt instrument and the fair value of the embedded derivative instrument was assigned as the carrying value of the host debt instrument, which at the date of issuance was approximately $2,160.
The Business Combination qualified as a Debenture Liquidity Event and the $2,730 in September 2023 Convertible Debentures converted to Clever Leaves class A common shares at a conversion price of $2.303 per share, which were exchanged for Holdco common shares at the Exchange Rate. The Company accounted for the conversion of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures as a debt extinguishment and recognized a non-cash loss on extinguishment of debt of $570 and a loss on fair value of derivative instrument of approximately $600.
Neem Holdings Convertible Note and Neem Holdings Warrants
On November 9, 2020, Clever Leaves and the Company entered into an unsecured subordinated convertible note (the “Neem Holdings Convertible Note”) with a principal amount of $3,000 in favor of Neem Holdings, LLC (“Neem Holdings”), a shareholder of Clever Leaves. Clever Leaves is required to repay the Neem Holdings Convertible Note within 10 business days after the closing of the Business Combination, and the Company has agreed to promptly satisfy this obligation in full. If the Business Combination Agreement is terminated, Clever Leaves will be required to issue to Neem Holdings 194,805 fully paid and non-assessable Clever Leaves Class D preferred shares within 10 business days of termination. The Neem Holdings Convertible Note was interest free and was repaid on December 23, 2020.
In addition, the Company issued to Neem Holdings, as part of the Neem Holdings Convertible Note, a warrant (the “Neem Holdings Warrants”) to purchase the number of common shares (the “Warrant Shares”) that would entitle Neem Holdings to receive 300,000 common shares in the Arrangement for an aggregate purchase price of $3. The Neem Holdings Warrants are
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
exercisable for all, but not less than all, of the Warrant Shares and expire at the earlier of (i) the date and time that the Business Combination Agreement is terminated in accordance with its terms; and (ii) the Arrangement Effective Time. The Neem Holdings Warrants were exercised prior to the Arrangement Effective Time.
The two instruments were deemed freestanding as they were legally detachable and separately exercisable. The allocation of the proceeds to the two instruments was based on their respective fair values at issuance. At the time of issuance, the Company determined that the fair value of the debt instrument was $3,000 and as a result the initial carrying amounts of Neem Holdings Convertible Note and Neem Holdings Warrants were $3,000 and nil, respectively. Upon consummation of the Business Combination, the Company repaid the Neem Holdings Convertible Note in full and Neem Holdings exercised the Neem Holdings Warrants.
13. CAPITAL STOCK
Common Shares
As of December 31, 2020, the Company's amended and restated articles provided for an unlimited number of voting common shares without par value and an unlimited number of non-voting common shares without par value.
Preferred Shares
As of December 31, 2020, the Company's amended and restated certificate of incorporation provided for an unlimited number of preferred shares without par value. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no preferred shares issued and outstanding.
In April 2020 and in connection with the initial closing of the Series E fundraising, Clever Leaves issued 1,308,733 Class D convertible preferred shares ("Class D Preferred Shares") (2,015,449 shares of Holdco common share on an as-converted, post-Exchange Rate basis) at a price of $11.00 per share, resulting in gross proceeds to the Company of $14,396. In connection with the Series E fundraising, the Company granted an investor a right to cause the Company to purchase up to 711,035 Clever Leaves' Class C convertible preferred shares (the “Put Right”) (233,788 Holdco common shares on an as-converted, post-Exchange Rate basis) of the investor’s previously purchased at the investor’s original purchase price of $8.79 per share.
In April 2020, the investor exercised the Put Right in full and the Company paid the investor $6,250 in exchange for the Company’s purchase and cancellation of 711,035 Class C convertible preferred shares (233,788 Holdco common shares on an as-converted, post-Exchange Rate basis). The initial closing of the Series E fundraising and the exercise of the investor's Put Right resulted in net proceeds to the Company of $7,771, inclusive of Class D Preferred Shares issuance costs of approximately $375.
In July 2020 and in connection with a subsequent closing of the Series E fundraising, the Company issued 363,636 Class D Preferred Shares (559,999 Holdco common shares on an as-converted, post-Exchange Rate basis) at a price of $11.00 per share, resulting in gross proceeds to the Company of $4,000. As part of the July 2020 portion of the Series E fundraising, three investors, in aggregate, exchanged 848,363 Clever Leaves' Class C convertible preferred shares (278,942 Holdco common shares on an as-converted, post-Exchange Rate basis) for 646,846 Class D Preferred Shares (996,143 Holdco common shares on an as-converted, post-Exchange Rate basis). Issuance costs associated with the subsequent closing of Class D Preferred Shares were immaterial.
Class D Preferred Shares vote together with the Clever Leaves common shares, and are not considered a separate class for voting purposes, except as required by law or in cases of dissolution, liquidation, windup or bankruptcy proceedings which require the consent of a majority of the shareholders of Class D Preferred Shares. The Class D Preferred Shares carries a liquidation preference (the “Class D Liquidation Preference”) of 1.4 times the original issue price of $11.00 for the one-year period following the original issue date, increasing by 0.02 times quarterly to a maximum of 1.75 times the original issue price, in each case subject to anti-dilution adjustments. The Class D Liquidation Preference is payable on a liquidation or merger with, reverse takeover of, or other business combination with, a public company, provided that such transaction does not provide for the conversion of Class D Preferred Shares into Clever Leaves common shares, or certain other deemed liquidation events (the “Class D Liquidation Event”). The Class D Preferred Shares are not redeemable but are convertible at any time, at the option of the holders, into Clever Leaves common shares on a 1:1 basis, subject to anti-dilution adjustments. Automatic conversion into Clever Leaves common shares shall occur at the applicable conversion price which takes into account the Class D Liquidation
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Preference in the event of (1) the holders of at least a majority of the outstanding Class D Preferred Shares consenting to such conversion, (2) an initial public offering or direct listing of Clever Leaves common shares on Nasdaq, NYSE or TSX, or (3) completion of a merger with, reverse takeover of or other business combination with a public company, provided that such transaction provides for the conversion of Class D Preferred Shares into Clever Leaves common shares (otherwise such transaction will trigger the payment of the Class D Liquidation Preference).
The Business Combination qualified as an automatic conversion and the Class D Preferred Shares were converted into 3,571,591 Holdco common shares in accordance with the terms of the agreement. As a result of this conversion, the Company recognized approximately $10,219 of non-cash accretion expense in additional paid-in capital related to the difference between the fair value and the carrying value of the Class D Preferred Shares.
Business Combination
In connection with the Business Combination, the consolidated statement of shareholders' equity has been retroactively restated to reflect the number of shares received in the Business Combination. The consolidated statement of shareholders' equity as of December 31, 2020 reflects the following transactions consummated in connection with the Business Combination in regards to outstanding instruments of Clever Leaves: (i) the conversion of the Series E Convertible Debentures to 984,567 of the Company's common shares, (ii) the conversion of the redeemable non-controlling interest of Eagle Canada (see Note 8.) to 1,562,339 of the Company's common shares, adjusted to reflect the secondary sale of 287,564 of the Company's common shares, (iii) the automatic conversion, on a one-for-one basis, of Clever Leaves' Class C convertible preferred shares to 1,456,439 of the Company's common shares triggered by the consummation of the Business Combination, (iv) the automatic conversion, at the liquidation preference of 1.4x and conversion price per share of $3.288, of Class D Preferred Shares to 3,571,591 of the Company's common shares triggered by the consummation of the Business Combination (a Class D Liquidation Event), (v) the exercise of the Neem Holdings Warrants for 300,000 of the Company's common shares, and (vi) the recapitalization of 1,168,421 shares and 8,486,300 shares of outstanding SAMA founders stock and SAMA common stock, respectively, to 9,654,721 of the Company's common shares.
In addition, SAMA founders received 1,140,423 common shares in exchange for their SAMA common stock as earnout shares. Under the terms these shares would be released from escrow as follows: (i) shares constituting 50% of the common shares reserve will be released to the Sponsor if the closing price of the Company's common shares on Nasdaq equals or exceeds $12.50 per share (as adjusted for shares splits, reverse splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations) for any 20 trading days within any consecutive 30 trading day period on or before the second anniversary of the Closing, and (ii) shares constituting the remaining 50% of the common shares reserve will be released to the Sponsor if the closing price of the Company's common shares on Nasdaq equals or exceeds $15.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, reverse splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations) for any 20 trading days within any consecutive 30 trading day period on or before the fourth anniversary of the Closing. As of December 31, 2020, the shares were legally outstanding, however since none of the the performance condition were met, no shares have been in the Company's statement of shareholders equity. During the 1st quarter of 2021, condition for the first 50% of the share reserve was met.
Warrants
As of December 31, 2020, excluding the Neem Holdings Warrants, the Company had 17,900,000 warrants to acquire common shares issued and outstanding. Each warrant entitles the holder to purchase one common share at an exercise price of $11.50 per share commencing 30 days after the closing of the Business Combination and will expire on December 18, 2025, at 5:00 p.m., New York City time, or earlier upon redemption. Once the warrants are exercisable, the Company may redeem the outstanding public warrants at a price of $0.01 per warrant if the last reported sales price of the Company’s common shares equals or exceeds $18.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within a 30 trading day period ending on the third trading day prior to the date on which the Company will send the notice of redemption to the warrant holders. The terms of the warrants may be amended in a manner that may be adverse to holders with the approval of the holders of at least a majority 50.1% of the then outstanding warrants.
As of Mar 26th, 2021, the Company received a total proceeds of $1,410 from the exercise of 122,640 of its warrants by their holders.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Herbal Brands Acquisition
In April 2019, the Company issued the Rock Cliff Warrants to purchase 193,402 Clever Leaves Class C convertible preferred shares on a 1:1 basis, at a strike price of $8.79 per share. The fair value of the Rock Cliff Warrants was $717. The warrants can be exercised in part or in whole at any time prior to the expiration date of May 3, 2021, and are not assignable, transferable, or negotiable.
In August 2020 and in connection with the Company's modification to the Herbal Brands Loan, the Company extended the expiration date of the Rock Cliff Warrants to May 3, 2023. Refer to Note 8. and 12. for more information. Following the closing of the Business Combination and pursuant to the terms, the holder of the Rock Cliff Warrants can purchase 63,597 of the Company's common shares at a strike price of $26.73 per share.
Neem Holdings Warrants
In November 2020, Clever Leaves issued to Neem Holdings Warrants to purchase the number of Clever Leaves common shares that would entitle Neem Holdings to receive 300,000 Holdco common shares. Warrants were exercisable for all, but not less than all, of the Warrant Shares and expire at the earlier of (i) the date and time that the Business Combination Agreement is terminated in accordance with its terms; and (ii) the Closing Date. Following the successful closing of the Business Combination Agreement, Neem Holdings exercised their right and as a result the Company issued 300,000 Holdco common shares for an aggregate purchase price of $3. Refer to Note 12. for more information on the Neem Holdings Convertible Note.
14. GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATION
The components of general and administrative expenses were as follows:
15. SHARE-BASED COMPENSATION
Northern Swan Holdings, Inc. 2018 Omnibus Incentive Compensation Plan
The Northern Swan Holdings, Inc. 2018 Omnibus Incentive Compensation Plan, as amended (the “2018 Plan”) provides for the Company to grant incentive stock options, nonqualified stock options, restricted share units ("RSUs") and other stock-based awards to its employees, directors, officers, outside advisors and non-employee consultants.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has reserved 4,500,000 common shares for issuance to its employees, directors, outside advisors and non-employee consultants pursuant to the 2018 Plan. Unless otherwise provided, at the time of grant, the options issued pursuant to the 2018 Plan expire ten years from the date of grant and generally vest over four years, with 25% of the award vesting in four equal installments. As of December 31, 2020, no new awards will be issued under the 2018 Plan.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Clever Leaves Holdings Inc. 2020 Incentive Award Plan
In connection with the Business Combination, the Company adopted the Clever Leaves Holdings Inc. 2020 Incentive Award Plan (the “2020 Plan”) which provides for the Company to grant incentive stock options, nonqualified stock options, restricted share units and other shares-based awards to its employees, directors, officers, outside advisors and non-employee consultants.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has reserved 2,813,215 common shares for issuance to its employees, directors, outside advisors and non-employee consultants pursuant to the 2020 Plan. Unless otherwise provided, at the time of grant, the options issued pursuant to the 2020 Plan generally expire ten years from the date of grant and generally vest over four years, with 25% of the award vesting in four equal installments. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, 2,813,215 and nil shares, respectively, were available for future grants of the Company’s common shares under the 2020 Plan.
Clever Leaves Holdings Inc. 2020 Earnout Award Plan
In connection with the Business Combination, the Company adopted the Clever Leaves Holdings Inc. 2020 Earnout Award Plan (the “Earnout Plan”). The purpose of the Earnout Plan is to provide equity awards following the Closing Date to certain directors, employees and consultants that have contributed to the Business Combination. Under the Earnout Plan, (i) shares constituting 50% of the share reserve will be issued only if the closing price of the Company's common shares on Nasdaq equals or exceeds $12.50 per share (as adjusted for shares splits, reverse splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations or any similar event) for any 20 trading days within any consecutive 30 trading day period on or before the second anniversary of the Closing, and (ii) shares constituting the remaining 50% of the share reserve will be issued only if the closing price of the Company's common shares on Nasdaq equals or exceeds $15.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, reverse splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations or any similar event) for any 20 trading days within any consecutive 30 trading day period on or before the fourth anniversary of the Closing. Equity awards granted prior to these hurdles being met will vest only if the applicable hurdles are achieved; equity awards granted following the hurdles being achieved need not include the hurdles. In addition, the Company’s board of directors may choose to impose additional vesting conditions. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, 1,440,000 and no shares, respectively, were available for future grants of the Company’s common shares under the Earnout Plan. As of December 31, 2020, no shares have been granted under the Earnout Plan.
The 2018 Plan, 2020 Plan, and Earnout Plan are administered by the Company’s board of directors or, at the discretion of the Company’s board of directors, by a committee thereof. The exercise prices, vesting and other restrictions are determined at the discretion of the Company’s board of directors, or its committee if so delegated. The Company’s board of directors values the Company’s common shares, taking into consideration the most recently available valuation thereof performed by third parties, as well as additional factors which may have changed since the date of the most recent contemporaneous valuation through the date of grant.
Stock Option Valuation
The following table presents the weighted-average assumptions used in the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options and RSUs granted during periods presented:
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Stock Options
The following table summarizes the Company’s stock option activity since December 31, 2019:
The aggregate intrinsic value of stock options is calculated as the difference between the exercise price of the stock options and the fair value of the Company’s common shares for all stock options that had exercise prices lower than the fair value of the Company’s common shares.
The weighted-average grant-date fair value per share of stock options granted during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $2.02 and $2.64, respectively.
Restricted Share Units
The following table summarizes the Company’s restricted share unit activity since December 31, 2019:
The total fair value of restricted share units vested during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $51 and $nil, respectively.
Share-Based Compensation Expense
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized share-based compensation expense related to its stock options of $1,366 and $1,522, respectively, in general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of operations. The stock-based compensation expense related to unvested stock option awards not yet recognized as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $2,276 and $4,477, respectively, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.9 years and 2.7 years, respectively.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized share-based compensation expense related to its restricted share units of $286 and $nil, respectively, in general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
operations. The total compensation cost related to unvested restricted share unit awards not yet recognized as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $521 and $nil, respectively, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.3 years and 0.0 years, respectively.
The Company recognized total share-based compensation expense of $1,652 and $1,522 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, in general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of operations. Share-based compensation costs were not tax deductible for the periods presented.
16. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
The Company entered into a guaranty (the “Guaranty”) in favor of Rock Cliff on May 3, 2019 in connection with the Herbal Brands Loan to its subsidiary Herbal Brands, Inc. The Guaranty was a condition of the Herbal Brands Loan, which enabled the Herbal Brands acquisition. Pursuant to the Guaranty, the Company guaranteed Herbal Brands’ payment obligations under the Herbal Brands Loan and related loan documents, including the payment of the $8,500 principal amount of the Herbal Brands Loan, the interest at the 8% rate, as well as the payment of Rock Cliff ’s related out-of-pocket fees and expenses.
As part of the Herbal Brands acquisition financing, the Company also issued warrants to Rock Cliff, to purchase 193,402 Class C preferred shares of Clever Leaves on a 1:1 basis, at a strike price of $8.79 per share, with a relative fair value of approximately $717. The warrants can be exercised in part or in whole at any time prior to the expiration date of May 3, 2023, and are not assignable, transferable, or negotiable. Following the closing of the Business Combination and pursuant to the terms, the holder of the Rock Cliff Warrants can purchase 63,597 of the Company's common shares at a strike price of $26.73 per share.
Refer to Note 8., Note 12., and Note 13. for more information on the Herbal Brands acquisition and related financing.
On November 9, 2020, Clever Leaves and the Company entered into the Neem Holdings Convertible Note and the Neem Holdings Warrants with Neem Holdings, a shareholder of the Company. Upon consummation of the Business Combination, the Company repaid the Neem Holdings Convertible Note in full and Neem Holdings exercised the Neem Holdings Warrants. See Note 12. for more information.
On October 31, 2019, the Company entered into an Agreement with the NCI Holders, which granted the NCI Holders Exchangeable Class A Shares. Refer to Note 8. for more information on the Agreement.
17. SEGMENT REPORTING
Operating segments include components of an enterprise about which separate financial information is available that is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker (the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, “CEO”) in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing the Company’s performance.
Operating segments for the Company are organized by product type and managed by segment managers who are responsible for the operating and financial results of each segment. Due to the similarities in the manufacturing and distribution processes for the Company’s products, much of the information provided in these consolidated financial statements and the footnotes to the consolidated financial statements, is similar to, or the same as, that information reviewed on a regular basis by the Company’s CEO.
The Company’s management evaluates segment profit/loss for each of the Company’s operating segments. The Company defines segment profit/loss as income from continuing operations before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, share-based compensation expense, gains/losses on foreign currency fluctuations, gains/losses on the early extinguishment of debt and miscellaneous expenses. Segment profit/loss also excludes the impact of certain items that are not directly attributable to the reportable segments’ underlying operating performance. Such items are shown below in the table reconciling segment profit to consolidated income from continuing operations before income taxes. The Company does not have any material inter-segment sales. Information about total assets by segment is not disclosed because such information is not reported to or used by the
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Company’s CEO. Segment goodwill and other intangible assets, net, are disclosed in Note 10. Goodwill and Note 9. Intangible Assets, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s operations were organized in the following two reportable segments:
1.The Cannabinoid operating segment: comprised of the Company’s cultivation, extraction, manufacturing and commercialization of cannabinoid products. This operating segment is in the early stages of commercializing cannabinoid products internationally pursuant to applicable international and domestic legislation, regulations, and other permits. The Company’s principal customers and sales for its products will initially be outside of the U.S.
2.Non-Cannabinoid operating segment: comprised of the brands acquired as part of the Herbal Brands acquisition in April 2019. The segment is engaged in the business of formulating, manufacturing, marketing, selling, distributing, and otherwise commercializing homeopathic and other natural remedies, wellness products, detoxification products, nutraceuticals, and nutritional and dietary supplements. The Company’s principal customers for its Herbal Brands products include mass retailers, specialty and health retailer and distributors in the U.S.
The following table is a comparative summary of the Company’s net sales and segment profit for by reportable segment for the periods presented:
During 2020, revenues from GNC and its affiliates accounted for approximately 10.1% of the Company’s net sales; the net sales attributable to the GNC are reflected in the non-cannabinoid segment. During 2019, GNC and its affiliates and Pattern, Inc. accounted for approximately 32% and 12%, respectively, of the Company's total net sales and were reflected in the non-cannabinoid segment net sales. During 2020 and 2019, the Company's net sales for the cannabinoid segment were in the U.S.; non-cannabinoid net sales were outside of the U.S., primarily in Colombia.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
____________
(a)“Other” includes long-lived assets primarily in the Company’s corporate offices.
Long-lived assets consist of non-current assets other than goodwill; intangible assets, net; deferred tax assets; investments in unconsolidated subsidiaries and equity securities; and financial instruments. The Company’s largest markets in terms of long-lived assets are Colombia and Portugal.
The following table disaggregates the Company’s revenues by channel for the for the periods presented:
18. INCOME TAX
Income tax recognized in the statement of operations:
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
The reconciliation of income tax expense attributable to loss before income taxes differs from the amounts computed by applying the combined federal and provincial combined tax rate of 27% (2019 - 27%) of pre-tax loss as a result of the following:
(a)Loss before income taxes of $36,671 plus loss from equity investment of $4.
(b)Loss before income taxes of $45,884 plus loss from equity investment of $96.
(c)Due to the substantial alignment of the taxable income base between Canada and its provinces, the combined federal and provincial rate has been used as the reconciliation rate.
The following net deferred tax assets are not recognized in the consolidated financial statements due to the unpredictability of future income as of the periods presented:
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
As at December 31, 2020, the Company has operating losses, which may be carried forward to apply against future year’s income tax for income tax purposes, subject to final determination by taxation authorities and expiring as follows:
Should all of the deferred tax assets be recognized as an asset in the future, approximately $390 of the benefit would be credited to share capital. Due to the losses sustained by the Company in the current and prior periods, no amount of deferred tax related to investments in subsidiaries has been recognized.
Uncertain Tax Benefits
The Company has recorded no provisions for, or reserved amounts related to unrecognized deferred tax assets in respect of, uncertain tax benefits (2019- $0) and there are no foreseeable changes for the twelve months following December 31, 2020. The Company did not record any expenses related to interest or penalties related to income taxes (2019 - $0). All years since the incorporation of the Company and its subsidiaries remain open to be audited by tax authorities.
19. NET LOSS PER SHARE
Basic net loss per share is calculated by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during the year, without consideration for common share equivalents. Diluted net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of common share equivalents outstanding for the year determined using the treasury-stock method. For purposes of this calculation, common share warrants and stock options are considered to be common share equivalents and are only included in the calculation of diluted net loss per share when their effect is dilutive.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
The following table sets forth the computation of basic and diluted net loss and the weighted average number of shares used in computing basic and diluted net loss per share:
The Company's potentially dilutive securities, which include common stock warrants, stock options, and unvested restricted stock have been excluded from the computation of diluted net loss per share as the effect would be to reduce the net loss per share. Therefore, the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding used to calculate both basic and diluted net loss per share attributable to common shareholders is the same.
The Company excluded the following potential common shares, presented based on amounts outstanding at December 31, 2020 and 2019, from the computation of diluted net loss per share attributable to common shareholders because including them would have had an anti-dilutive effect:
20. CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS
Lease Commitments
The Company and its subsidiaries lease its office facilities and cannabis related facilities in Canada, the United States and Colombia under non-cancellable operating lease agreements.
CLEVER LEAVES HOLDINGS INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(Amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars, except share and per share amounts and where otherwise noted)
Undiscounted future minimum annual lease payments for the next five years and thereafter are as follows:
Purchase Commitments
The Company does not have any commitments to purchase raw materials at specific prices under any supplier contracts. Additionally the Company is committed to pay approximately $2,800 on account of insurance coverage. See Note 12. for information on the Company's debt obligations.
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosures
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
Evaluation of Controls and Procedures
Our management, with the participation of our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act, as of December 31, 2020. Our disclosure controls and procedures are designed to ensure that information we are required to disclose in the reports we file or submit under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosures, and is recorded, processed, summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms.
Based on that evaluation, our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures as of December 31, 2020 were not effective due to a material weakness as described below.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
This annual report on Form 10-K does not include a report of management’s assessment regarding internal control over financial reporting or an attestation report of the Company’s registered public accounting firm due to a transition period established by rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission for newly public companies.
As discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Company completed the Business Combination on December 18, 2020. Prior to the Business Combination, the Company was a private corporation with limited accounting personnel and other supervisory resources necessary to adequately execute its accounting processes and address its internal controls over financial reporting requirements. As a result, previously existing internal controls are no longer sufficient. The design and implementation of internal control over financial reporting for the Company’s post-Business Combination has required and will continue to require significant time and resources from management and other personnel.
In connection with the audit of the Company’s financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020, our management identified a material weakness in its internal control over financial reporting. A material weakness is a deficiency, or combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of our annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. The material weakness identified relates to the fact that the Company has not yet designed and maintained an effective control environment commensurate with its financial reporting requirements, including a) lack of a sufficient number of trained professionals with an appropriate level of accounting knowledge, training and experience to appropriately analyze, record and disclose accounting matters timely and accurately, and to allow for proper segregation of duties b) lack of structures, reporting lines and appropriate authorities and responsibilities to achieve financial reporting objectives, and c) lack of evidence to support the performance of controls and the adequacy of review procedures, including the completeness and accuracy of information used in the performance of controls.
Remediation Plan
Management is committed to taking the steps necessary to remediate the control deficiencies that constituted the above material weakness. During 2020, we made the following enhancements to our control environment:
a.We added accounting and finance personnel to the Company and one of our key subsidiaries to strengthen our internal accounting team, to provide additional individuals to allow for segregation of duties in the preparation and review of schedules, calculations, and journal entries that support financial reporting, to provide oversight, structure and reporting lines, and to provide additional review over our disclosures;
b.We enhanced our controls to improve the preparation and review over complex accounting measurements, and the application of GAAP to significant accounts and transactions, and our financial statement disclosures; and,
c.We engaged outside consultants to assist us in our evaluation of the design, implementation, and documentation of internal controls that address the relevant risks, and that provide for appropriate evidence of performance of our internal controls (including completeness and accuracy procedures).
Our remediation activities are ongoing during 2021. In addition to the above actions, we expect to engage in additional activities, including, but not limited to:
a.Adding more technical accounting resources to enhance our control environment;
b.Until we have sufficient technical accounting resources, engaging external consultants to provide support and to assist us in our evaluation of more complex applications of GAAP, and to assist us with documenting and assessing our accounting policies and procedures; and,
c.Engaging outside consultants to assist us in providing technical Sarbanes-Oxley Act training to individuals throughout the organization that are responsible for executing internal controls.
Under the direction of the audit committee of the board of directors, management will continue to take measures to remediate the material weakness in 2021. As such, we will continue to enhance corporate oversight over process-level controls and structures to ensure that there is appropriate assignment of authority, responsibility, and accountability to enable remediation of our material weakness. We believe that our remediation plan will be sufficient to remediate the identified material weakness and strengthen our internal control over financial reporting.
We believe the corrective actions and controls need to be in operation for a sufficient period for management to conclude that the control environment is operating effectively and has been adequately tested through audit procedures. Therefore, the material weakness has not been remediated as of the date of this report.
As we continue to evaluate, and work to improve, our internal control over financial reporting, management may determine that additional measures to address control deficiencies or modifications to the remediation plan are necessary.
Attestation report of the registered public accounting firm
Not applicable
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
The Company is in the process of implementing certain changes in its internal controls to remediate the material weakness described above. Except as noted above, no change to our internal control over financial reporting occurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Item 9B. Other Information
Not applicable.
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Information required by this item is incorporated by reference to Clever Leaves Holdings Inc.’s Proxy Statement for its 2021 Annual Shareholder Meeting to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Item 11. Executive Compensation
Information required by this item is incorporated by reference to Clever Leaves Holdings Inc.’s Proxy Statement for its 2021 Annual Shareholder Meeting to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owner and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
Information required by this item is incorporated by reference to Clever Leaves Holdings Inc.’s Proxy Statement for its 2021 Annual Shareholder Meeting to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
Information required by this item is incorporated by reference to Clever Leaves Holdings Inc.’s Proxy Statement for its 2021 Annual Shareholder Meeting to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services
Information required by this item is incorporated by reference to Clever Leaves Holdings Inc.’s Proxy Statement for its 2021 Annual Shareholder Meeting to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
The following documents are filed as a part of the report:
(1) The financial statements filed as part of this report are listed in the “Index to Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
(2) Financial statement schedules have been omitted, since the required information is not applicable or is not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the information required is included in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in this Form 10-K.
(3) The following exhibits are filed as part of this Report:
__________
† Certain exhibits and schedules to this exhibit have been omitted pursuant to Item 601(a)(5) of Regulation S-K. The Registrant hereby agrees to furnish a copy of any omitted exhibits or schedules to the Commission upon request
* Indicates management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement
** Filed herewith
*** Furnished herewith
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary
None
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
Clever Leaves Holdings Inc.
March 30, 2021
By: /s/ Kyle Detwiler
Name: Kyle Detwiler
Title: Chief Executive Officer
Power of Attorney
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the Registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title
Date
/s/ Kyle Detwiler
Director and Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
March 30, 2021
Kyle Detwiler
/s/ Henry R. Hague, III
Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Financial Officer and Principal Accounting Officer)
March 30, 2021
Henry R. Hague, III
/s/ Etienne Deffarges
Director
March 30, 2021
Etienne Deffarges
/s/ Elisabeth DeMarse
Director
March 30, 2021
Elisabeth DeMarse
/s/ Andres Fajardo
Director
March 30, 2021
Andres Fajardo
/s/ Gary M. Julien
Director
March 30, 2021
Gary M. Julien