ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
References to the “Company,” “Deerfield Healthcare Acquisitions Corp.,” “DFHT”, “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Deerfield Healthcare Acquisitions Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to the Risk Factors section of the Company’s final prospectus for its initial public offering filed with the SEC. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on May 8, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our Sponsor is DFHTA Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for the initial public offering was declared effective on July 16, 2020. On July 21, 2020, we consummated the initial public offering of 14,375,000 units, including the issuance of 1,875,000 units as a result of the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $143.75 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $7.5 million, inclusive of approximately $4.4 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 2,916,667 private placement warrants, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds to us of approximately $4.4 million.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering and the Private Placement, $143.75 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in the Trust Account and was invested in permitted United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act that invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
We will only have 24 months from the closing of the initial public offering, or July 21, 2022, to complete our initial business combination (the “Combination Period”). If we do not complete a Business Combination within this period of time, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purposes of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares for a per share pro rata portion of the Trust Account, including interest and not previously released to us to fund our working capital requirements (subject to an annual limit of $500,000) (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of such net interest to pay dissolution expenses) and (iii) as promptly as possible following such redemption, dissolve and liquidate the balance of our net assets to our remaining stockholders, as part of our plan of dissolution and liquidation. Our Sponsor and our executive officers and independent director nominees (the “initial stockholders”) entered into a letter agreement with us, pursuant to which they have waived their rights to participate in any redemption with respect to their founder shares; however, if the initial stockholders or any of our officers, directors or affiliates acquire shares of common stock in or after the initial public offering, they will be entitled to a pro rata share of the Trust Account upon our redemption or liquidation in the event we do not complete a Business Combination within the required time period. In the event of such distribution, it is possible that the per share value of the residual assets remaining available for distribution (including Trust Account assets) will be less than the initial public offering price per unit in the initial public offering.
Proposed Business Combination
As more fully described in Note 1 to the financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, on December 18, 2020, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement (the “Business Combination Agreement”) by and among us, the entities listed in Annex I to the Business Combination Agreement (collectively, the “CareMax Group”), IMC Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“IMC Parent” and, together with the CareMax Group, each a “Seller” and any other party that subsequent to the date of the Business Combination Agreement executes a joinder in form and substance reasonably acceptable to us, collectively, the “Sellers”), CareMax Medical Group, LLC, a Florida limited liability company (“CareMax”), IMC Medical Group Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“IMC” and, together with CareMax, each a “Company” and collectively, the “Companies”), and Deerfield Partners, L.P. (“Deerfield Partners”) (solely for purposes of certain exclusivity and non redemption provisions). The Business Combination Agreement provides for (a) the sale and transfer of 100% of the equity interests in CareMax by members of the CareMax Group in favor of DFHT and (b) the sale and transfer of 100% of the equity interests in IMC by IMC Parent in favor of DFHT, as a result of which, upon consummation of the Business Combination, CareMax and IMC will become wholly-owned subsidiaries of DFHT.
In connection with the Business Combination Agreement, we entered into a lock-up agreement, and amended and restated our Registration Rights Agreement. In addition, we, Deerfield Partners and our Sponsor entered into a Consent and Waiver Letter. In addition, we entered into subscription agreements with each of Deerfield Partners, our sponsor and certain third party investors with respect to the private purchase of an aggregate of 41,000,000 shares of our Class A common stock for a purchase price of $10 per share (the “PIPE”). In addition, we received a commitment letter from certain lending affiliates of Royal Bank of Canada to syndicate and arrange $125 million senior secured credit facilities for the benefit of the Company in connection with the Business Combination.
The Business Combination Agreement and other agreements were filed as Exhibits to a Current Report on Form 8-K/A that we filed with the SEC on December 21, 2020. On January 20, 2021, we also filed a preliminary prospectus with the SEC related to the proposed Business Combination.
Liquidity and Going Concern Consideration
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $0.9 million in our operating bank account, approximately $87,000 in investment income held in the Trust Account available to pay franchise tax, and a working capital deficit of approximately $2.6 million.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection an intended business combination, our Sponsor may, but is not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans (see Note 4). Up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans to date. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no Working Capital Loans outstanding.
Prior to the completion of the initial public offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of founder shares, and a $200,000 Note issued to our Sponsor, which was repaid by the Company on July 16, 2020 (Note 4). After the consummation of the initial public offering on August 25, 2020, our liquidity needs had been satisfied with the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account.
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our Sponsor, an affiliate of our Sponsor, or our officers or directors. Our officers, directors and Sponsor, or their affiliates, may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet the Company’s working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that these conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through the Combination Period, which is the date we are required to cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up if we have not completed a business combination. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2020 was in preparation for our formation, the initial public offering, and since the closing of our initial public offering, a search for business combination candidates. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income and dividends on investments held in Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from May 8, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $3.9 million which consisted of approximately $3.8 million in general and administrative expenses, related party administrative fees of $105,000, and approximately $130,000 in franchise tax expense, partially offset by income from our investments held in the Trust Account of approximately $87,000.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities are first listed on Nasdaq, we agreed to pay the Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team. Upon completion of the initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying such monthly fees. We incurred and paid $60,000 in these expenses for the period from May 8, 2020 through December 31, 2020, included in general and administrative expenses - related party on the accompanying statement of operations.
Wolfe Strategic Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on Nasdaq, we agreed to pay our Chief Financial Officer, Christopher Wolfe, $7,500 per month for his services prior to the initial business combination. We incurred $45,000 in connection with such services for the period from May 8, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, included in general and administrative expenses - related party on the accompanying statements of operations. No amounts were due as of December 31, 2020.
Registration Rights
The initial stockholders and holders of the private placement warrants are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The initial stockholders and holders of the private placement warrants are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements. Our registration rights greement was restated and amended in connection with the Proposed Business Combination as described in Note 1 to the financials statements contained herein as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and will become effective upon the closing of the Business Combination, if consummated. If the Business Combination is not consummated, the existing registration rights agreement will remain in full force and effect.
.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to 1,875,000 additional units to cover any over-allotments, at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The warrants that were issued in connection with the 1,875,000 over-allotment units are identical to the public warrants and have no net cash settlement provisions. The underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full on July 21, 2020.
We paid an underwriting discount of 2.0% of the per unit offering price, or approximately $2.5 million in the aggregate at the closing of the initial public offering and agreed to pay an additional fee (the “Deferred Underwriting Fees”) of 3.5% of the gross offering proceeds, or approximately $4.4 million in the aggregate upon the Company’s completion of an Initial Business Combination. The Deferred Underwriting Fees will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event the Company completes its initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in gain on marketable securities, dividends and interest held in Trust Account in the accompanying unaudited condensed statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account were determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 13,544,233 Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share
Net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of common stock outstanding during the periods. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the initial public offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 5,791,667 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted earnings per share is the same as basic earnings per share for the periods presented.
Our statements of operations include a presentation of income per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net loss per share, basic and diluted for Class A common stock is calculated by dividing the investment income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable income and franchise taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding since the initial issuance. Net loss per share, basic and diluted for Class B common stock is calculated by dividing the net income, less income attributable to Class A common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B common stock outstanding for the period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.