Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto of Cambium Networks Corporation (“Cambium”, “we”, “our”, or “us”) included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materiality from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly those discussed under Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
We provide fixed wireless broadband and Wi-Fi networking infrastructure solutions for network operators, including medium-sized wireless internet service providers, enterprises, mobile network operators and government agencies, communities and cities worldwide. Our scalable, reliable and high-performance solutions enable the creation of a purpose-built wireless fabric that connects people, places and things with a unified wireless fabric that spans multiple standards and frequencies of fixed wireless and Wi-Fi, all managed centrally via the cloud, deployed indoors and outdoors. Our multi-gigabit wireless fabric offers a compelling value proposition to traditional fiber and alternative wireless solutions mobile infrastructure.
Our wireless fabric includes intelligent radios, smart antennas, radio frequency, or RF, algorithms, wireless-aware switches and our on-premises or cloud-based network management software. Our embedded proprietary RF technology and software enables automated optimization of data flow at the outermost points in the network, which we refer to as the “intelligent edge.” This intelligent edge offers network operators increased performance, visibility, control and management, as well as the ability to efficiently transfer large amounts of data back to enterprise data centers for fast and efficient analysis and decision-making even in conditions characterized by a high degree of interfering signals generated both within the network or from outside sources, which we refer to as noise. Our products support licensed and unlicensed spectrum, tailored for many frequency bands. We provide deep technical and operational expertise based on years of deploying networks, resulting in ease of use of our products, and all Cambium Networks solutions are backed by our global organization that provides 24/7 support services tailored to meet the business needs of our end users.
We were formed in 2011 when Cambium Networks acquired the Point-to-Point, or PTP, and Point-to-Multi-Point, or PMP, businesses from Motorola Solutions. Prior to the acquisition, Motorola Solutions had invested over a decade in developing the technology and intellectual property assets that formed the foundation for our business, having launched the Canopy PMP business in 1999 and having acquired the Orthogon Systems PTP business in 2006. Following the acquisition, we renamed the business Cambium Networks and we leveraged the technology to continue to develop and offer an extensive portfolio of reliable, scalable and secure enterprise-grade fixed wireless broadband and PTP and PMP platforms, Wi-Fi, switch and IIoT solutions.
We offer our fixed wireless broadband and Wi-Fi solutions in three categories:
•
PTP: We offer PTP solutions that are designed to operate in unlicensed spectrum from 900 MHz to 5.9 GHz and in licensed spectrum from 6-38 and 71-86 GHz. In addition, our PTP 700 operates in NATO Band IV from 4.4-5.9 GHz, as well as in the 7 GHz and 8 GHz bands, and meets stringent federal operating, performance and security standards. The mainstay of our backhaul offering is the PTP 670 for commercial applications and PTP 700 for defense and national security applications. In addition, our PTP 820 series offers carrier-grade microwave backhaul in licensed spectrum, and our PTP 550 offers price-performance leadership in spectral efficiency in sub-6GHz unlicensed spectrum.
•
PMP: Our PMP portfolio ranges from our top-of-the-line PMP 450 series to our ePMP solutions for network operators that need to optimize for both price and performance to our cnReach family of narrow-bandwidth connectivity products for industrial communications. The PMP 450 series is optimized for performance in high-density and demanding physical environments, and includes the PMP 450m with integrated cnMedusa massive multi-user multiple input/multiple output, or MU-MIMO, technology. The PMP 450 product line also supports the FCC’s Citizen Broadband Radio Service, or CBRS. The FCC completed the auction of CBRS Priority Access Licenses, or PAL, in the third quarter of 2020, complementing the existing availability of General Authorized Access, or GAA, licenses. Network operators are adopting the PMP 450 solution to exercise both PAL and GAA licenses. For less demanding environments, ePMP provides a high-quality platform at a more affordable price. The ePMP 3000 supports 4x4 MU-MIMO and is complemented by a broad portfolio of ePMP Force 300 subscriber radios. cnReach products enables IIoT applications, such as supervisory control and data acquisition, or SCADA, processes in the oil and gas, electric utility, water, railroad and other industrial settings. In September 2020, we announced the pending availability of the 60 GHz cnWave solution. cnWave, which began shipping in volume in the fourth quarter of 2020, enables multi Gbps networking using the 60 GHz band and includes Facebook Terragraph technology.
•
Wi-Fi: Our Wi-Fi portfolio includes our cnPilot cloud-managed Wi-Fi solutions, our cnMatrix cloud-managed wireless-aware switching solution, and our Xirrus Wi-Fi solutions. cnPilot is for indoor and outdoor enterprise, small business and home applications and offers a range of Wi-Fi access points and RF technology that enable network optimization based on desired geographic coverage and user density. cnMatrix provides the intelligent interface between wireless and wired networks. cnMatrix’s policy-based configuration accelerates network deployment, mitigates human error, increases security, and improves reliability. Xirrus has a portfolio of high performance enterprise Wi-Fi access points and cloud based subscription services. In June 2020, we introduced our first Wi-Fi 6 access point, the XV3-8, which supports both cnPilot and Xirrus solutions. Additional Wi-Fi 6 access points are under development to meet diverse user cases.
We generate a substantial majority of our sales through our global channel distribution network, including, as of December 31, 2020, approximately 170 distributors that we sell to directly, together with over 9,000 value added resellers and system integrators supplied by these distributors, for further sales to end-users. Our channel partners provide lead generation, pre-sales support and product fulfillment, along with professional services for network design, installation, commissioning and on-going field support. Although we fulfill sales almost exclusively through our channel partners, through our global sales team we engage directly with network operators in our key vertical markets including service providers, enterprises, industrials, defense and national security entities, and state and local governments. Our sales team responds to bids or requests for quotes, typically in collaboration with a channel partner. Our distributors carry inventory of our products for resale, and generally have stock rotation rights only if they simultaneously place an off-setting order for product. As such, we generally recognize revenue from sales to distributors on a sell-in basis, and manage our finished goods inventory to plan for distributor demand.
We outsource production to third-party manufacturers, who are responsible for purchasing and maintaining inventory of components and raw materials and, in certain cases, we resell third-party products on a white-label basis. We believe that this approach gives us the advantages of relatively low capital investment and significant flexibility in scheduling production, managing inventory levels and providing a comprehensive solution to meet network operator demand. The majority of our products are delivered to us at one of three distribution hubs, where we have outsourced the warehousing and delivery of our products to a third-party logistics provider and from which we manage worldwide fulfillment.
Trends and the impact of COVID-19
Although the outbreak of COVID-19 has resulted and is likely to continue to result in disruption to our business and operations as well as the operations of our customers and suppliers, the severity of the impact has lessened, and our markets are recovering as the need for additional connectivity grows. We have experienced increases in customer demand, as a result of strong demand for PMP products as the need for connectivity grows, as schools, businesses, and enterprises continue to operate remotely, and increased PTP revenues from improved federal business. In addition, we have seen a strong recovery in enterprise Wi-Fi solutions driven by improved field deployments and the transition to Wi-Fi 6 solutions. We also experienced increases in product sales in connection with our wireless broadband solutions for customers accessing the CBRS band. We have benefitted from investments we have made over the past few years in fixed wireless infrastructure technologies in such areas as PMP, including CBRS-compatible products in the U.S. and in new opportunities such as gigabit wireless solutions with our 60 GHz millimeter wave products, our new enterprise Wi-Fi 6, and cloud-enabled wireless switching products. Our forthcoming 5G 28 GHz millimeter wave products are expected in 2021, further accelerating this trend as we enter markets demanding higher broadband performance, and in the U.S. the first phase of the Rural Digital Opportunity Fund, or RDOF, launched by the Federal Communications Commission, or FCC, is expected to accelerate the provision of high-speed broadband service to millions of underserved communities in the U.S. over the next ten years.
However, we expect that continued social distancing measures, continuing shutdowns globally that impact the ability of our end user customers to deploy our products, and continued restrictions and even cessation in travel impacting our sales activities, and general business uncertainty will continue to negatively impact demand in several of our markets. In addition, although all of our major suppliers are currently operating, reductions in production due to mandated closures of or labor restrictions as our third-party manufacturers continue to battle the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our supply operations remain impacted by COVID-19. For example, at least one of our mechanical suppliers has ceased operating, causing us to move production to an alternative supplier. In addition, we are experiencing component part shortages, as the global integrated circuit supply is under pressure as demand surpasses supply capacity for certain chipsets, causing foundries to allocate existing supply among their customers. Logistics challenges have arisen as container shortages in China lengthen availability times of containers and carriage, resulting in increases in relevant freight costs, all at a time when demand across many of our product lines has increased. As a result, we are experiencing increased lead times for the supply of some of our products. We are working with our suppliers to meet our forecasted demand.
Our suppliers and third-party manufacturers could continue to be disrupted by parts and component shortages, workers absenteeism, quarantines, office and factory closures, disruptions to ports and other shipping infrastructure, or other travel or health-
related restrictions. If our supply chain operations continue to be affected or are curtailed by the outbreak of diseases such as COVID-19, our supply chain, manufacturing, and product shipments will be delayed, which could adversely affect our business, operations and customer relationships. We have and may continue to need to seek alternate sources of supply which may be more expensive, unavailable or may result in delays in shipments to us and from our supply chain and subsequently to our customers.
We have experienced and expect to continue to experience an increase in certain costs, particularly transportation and logistics expenses. Freight and logistics constraints caused in part by restrictions imposed by governments to combat the COVID-19 pandemic, have increased costs and constrained available transport, for us and our channel partners. The pandemic could lead to an extended disruption of economic activity and the impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position and cash flows could be material.
We are focused on making sure our employees are safe and continue to operate with a substantial portion of our workforce working from home. We continue to evaluate our timing to open our offices based on the availability and deployment of vaccines among our workforce. We have extended remote working for the first half of 2021and will monitor conditions for extending this further into 2021. While we continue to significantly reduce travel, with the opening in certain countries and the easing of shutdowns in many locations, we are allowing select travel to meet customer needs. The third parties that perform our manufacturing, assembly, packaging and shipping have generally remained operational. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration, severity and spread of the pandemic, related restrictions on travel and transportation and other actions that may be taken by governmental authorities and the impact to the business of our suppliers or customers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
In addition, a substantial portion of our Wi-Fi products are manufactured in China, and we continue to monitor tensions between the U.S. and China and their potential impact on our ability to produce and ship our products. To date, no disruption in production or shipments have occurred since China re-opened facilities following the COVID-19 induced shutdown at the end of 2019, other than capacity constraint caused by component shortages. We have, however, continued to incur costs related to increased tariffs for China-manufactured goods, and should tensions escalate, our ability to manufacture our products in China could be affected, causing disruptions in our supply chain, and requiring us to seek other sources of supply.
With respect to liquidity, we believe our balance sheet will provide us the necessary capital to navigate the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, during 2020, we implemented several initiatives to conserve cash and optimize profitability, including limiting discretionary spending, temporarily reducing personnel costs, eliminating non-essential travel, delaying or reducing hiring activities, deferring certain discretionary capital expenditures.
Xirrus acquisition
In August 2019, we acquired select assets and assumed select liabilities of the Xirrus Wi-Fi products and cloud services business from Riverbed Technology, Inc. Xirrus has a portfolio of high performance enterprise Wi-Fi access points and subscription services. We paid $2.0 million upon closing and the agreement provided for additional $3.0 million of contingent consideration subject to Xirrus attaining certain booking targets. As of December 31, 2019, all booking targets were met and we paid the full $3.0 million of consideration through February 2020. This acquisition is intended to enhance and accelerate our existing network service application capabilities.
We account for business combinations in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations. We recorded the acquisition using the acquisition method of accounting and recognized assets and liabilities at their fair value as of the date of acquisition. We based the preliminary allocation of the purchase price on estimates and assumptions known at the date of acquisition that are subject to change within the purchase price allocation period, which is generally one year from the acquisition date. Our review of the purchase price allocation was completed in the period ended June 30, 2020. We determined the estimated fair value of identifiable intangible assets acquired primarily using an income approach.
Basis of presentation
Revenues
Our revenues are generated primarily from the sale of our products, which consist of hardware with essential embedded software. Our revenues also include limited amounts for software products, extended warranty on hardware products and subscription services. We generally recognize product revenues at the time of shipment, provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have been met. Revenues are recognized net of estimated stock returns, volume-based rebates and cooperative marketing allowances that we provide to distributors. We recognize subscription services revenue ratably over the term in which the services are provided and our performance obligation is satisfied. We provide a standard warranty on our hardware products, with the term depending on the product, and record a liability for the estimated future costs associated with potential warranty claims. In addition, we also offer extended warranties for purchase and represents a future performance obligation for us. The extended warranty is included in deferred
revenues and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the extended warranty. We provide our cnMaestro, LINKPlanner and cnArcher applications as supplemental tools to help network operators design, install, and manage their networks, and as a means of driving sales of our hardware products.
Cost of revenues and gross profit
Our cost of revenues is comprised primarily of the costs of procuring finished goods from our third-party manufacturers, third-party logistics and warehousing provider costs, freight costs and warranty costs. We outsource our manufacturing to third-party manufacturers located primarily in Mexico, China, Israel and Taiwan. Cost of revenues also includes costs associated with supply operations, including personnel related costs, provision for excess and obsolete inventory, third-party license costs and third-party costs related to services we provide. From and after our initial public offering in June 2019, cost of revenues also includes share-based compensation expense.
Gross profit has been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including changes in product mix. The margin profile of products within each of our core product categories can vary significantly depending on the operating performance, features and manufacturer of the product. Generally, our gross margins on backhaul and fixed wireless access point products are greater than those on our customer premise equipment (“CPE”) products. Because the ratio of CPE to PTP and PMP access points typically increases as network operators build out the density of their networks, increases in follow-on sales to network operators as a percentage of our total sales typically have a downward effect on our overall gross margins. Finally, gross margin will also vary as a function of changes in pricing due to competitive pressure, our third-party manufacturing and other production costs, cost of shipping and logistics, provision for excess and obsolete inventory and other factors. We expect our gross margins will fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay of these various factors.
Operating expenses
We classify our operating expense as research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expense. Personnel costs are the primary component of each of these operating expense categories, which consist of cash-based personnel costs, such as salaries, sales commissions, benefits and bonuses. Immediately prior to the completion of our initial public offering (“IPO”), we effected a recapitalization, which among other things, exchanged the vested share-based compensation awards held by our employees for our shares and unvested share-based compensation awards for restricted share awards or restricted share units issued by us, in each case on a value-for-value basis (the “Recapitalization”) and resulted in one-time share-based compensation expenses recognized in June 2019. From and after the Recapitalization and IPO in June 2019, our operating expenses include share-based compensation expense as well as other costs associated with being a public company. In addition, we separate depreciation and amortization in their own category.
Research and development
In addition to personnel-related costs, research and development expense consists of costs associated with design and development of our products, product certification, travel and recruiting. We generally recognize research and development expense as incurred. For certain of our software projects under development, we capitalize the development cost during the period between determining technological feasibility of the product and commercial release. We amortize the capitalized development cost upon commercial release, generally over three years. We typically do not capitalize costs related to the development of first-generation product offerings as technological feasibility generally coincides with general availability of the software. Although research and development expenses decreased in 2020 related to lower contractor spend and travel as a result of restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as these restrictions are lifted, we expect research and development expense to increase as we continue to invest in our future products and services.
Sales and marketing
In addition to personnel costs for sales, marketing, service and product line management personnel, sales and marketing expense consists of our training programs, trade shows, marketing programs, promotional materials, demonstration equipment, national and local regulatory approval on our products, travel and entertainment, and recruiting. In 2020, we experienced a decrease in payroll related costs driven by a reduction in headcount as part of the restructuring announced in November 2019 and February 2020. In addition, in 2020 we experienced a reduction in travel and entertainment and marketing related spending as a result of restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect sales and marketing expense to begin to increase as these restrictions are lifted and we increase the size of our sales, marketing, service, and product line management organization to support our growth, and, in particular, as we continue to expand our global distribution network.
General and administrative
In addition to personnel costs, general and administrative expense consists of professional fees, such as legal, audit, accounting, information technology and consulting costs, insurance, facilities and other supporting overhead costs. We expect general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to incur additional costs associated with being a public company, partially offset by the absence of financing and management fees previously paid to Vector Capital, which ended in the second quarter of 2019.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense consist of depreciation related to fixed assets such as computer equipment, furniture and fixtures, and testing equipment, as well as amortization related to acquired and internal use software and definite lived intangibles.
Provision for income taxes
Our provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in the jurisdictions in which we conduct business. As we have expanded our international operations, we have incurred additional foreign tax expense, and we expect this to continue. Management assesses our deferred tax assets in each reporting period, and if it is determined that it is not more likely than not to be realized, we will record a valuation allowance in that period.
Results of operations
The following table presents the consolidated statements of operations, as well as the percentage relationship to total revenues for items included in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020:
The following is a discussion and analysis of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. As permitted by the SEC under the FAST Act Modernization and Simplification of Regulation S-K, we have elected to omit the discussion of the earliest period (2018) presented as it was included in our MD&A in our 2019 Form 10-K filed on March 24, 2020, incorporated by reference from Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” thereto.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
Change
(dollars in thousands)
$
%
Revenues
$
267,028
$
278,459
$
11,431
4.3
%
Revenues increased $11.4 million, or 4.3%, from $267.0 million in 2019 to $278.5 in 2020, which was attributable to increased demand for our point-to-multi-point products due to increased network traffic and demand for CBRS technology, and our Wi-Fi products, which benefitted from new Wi-Fi 6 products and a full year of Xirrus revenue, partially offset by decreased sales of our Point-to-Point products due to decrease demand in the defense sector. Complementing this overall trend, revenue growth in 2020 also benefitted from continued expansion of our channel, with total registered channel partners of more than 9,000 as of December 31, 2020.
Revenues by product category
Point-to-Multi-Point
Our PMP product line comprised 58% of total revenues for 2019 and 62% of total revenues for 2020. PMP revenue growth was attributable to continued growth in core PMP products from increased network traffic and demand for our CBRS solutions, as well as the benefit from new product introductions.
Point-to-Point
PTP revenue decreased due to softer demand in the defense sector.
Wi-Fi
Wi-Fi revenue increased primarily as a result of recent new product introductions, including Wi-Fi 6 and cnMatrix, as well as a full year of sales of Xirrus products and services which was acquired in August 2019.
Revenues by geography
Revenues increased in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting higher revenue in North America partially offset by decreases in all other regions. North America contributed 53% of total revenues in 2020 compared with 46% in 2019 due to increased revenues of 20.2% in 2020. The increased revenues in North America was driven by higher revenues for PMP, Wi-Fi and Other products, driven mostly by higher PMP revenues due to increased demand for CBRS and robust network traffic, partially offset by decreased PTP revenues due to the softer demand in the defense industry. Europe, Middle East, Africa revenues decreased mostly due to a technology transition resulting in lower PMP sales to a large customer in Italy partially offset by increases in revenues of Wi-Fi products. Caribbean and Latin America revenues decreased due to lower PMP revenues as a result of adverse economic conditions and currency exchange rates and the impact from business shutdowns and other restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease in Asia Pacific revenues was driven by lower revenue across all product categories due to softened demand along with the impact of business shutdowns and other restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of revenues and gross margin
Cost of revenues increased $3.2 million, or 2.4%, from $135.8 million for 2019 to $139.0 million for 2020. The increase in cost of revenues was primarily due to increased product and freight costs as a result of increased revenues.
Gross margin increased from 49.1% in 2019 to 50.1% in 2020. The increase was driven by higher volumes, improved mix of higher margin products, and the initiatives we put in place focused on cost reductions and supply chain efficiencies, partially offset by higher shipping costs.
Operating expenses
Research and development
Research and development expense decreased $4.5 million, or 9.4%, from $47.7 million in 2019 to $43.2 million in 2020. As a percentage of revenues, research and development expenses decreased from 17.9% in 2019 to 15.5% in 2020. Research and development expense decreased mainly due to a $3.8 million reduction in share-based compensation mostly due to one-time expense recorded in connection with our Recapitalization and IPO in June 2019. The remaining decrease is driven by lower contractor costs of $3.0 million due to fewer contractors and lower negotiated rates in 2020, higher capitalized labor costs of $1.3 million, and lower travel costs of $0.8 million due to reductions in non-essential travel as a result of restrictions on travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These decreases were partially offset by $4.1 million higher bonus expense due to improved financial results and higher restructuring costs of $0.5 million in 2020.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expense decreased $9.5 million, or 20.5%, from $46.3 million in 2019 to $36.8 million in 2020. As a percentage of revenues, sales and marketing expense decreased from 17.3% in 2019 to 13.2% in 2019. Sales and marketing expense decreased mainly due to a $3.2 million reduction in share-based compensation mostly due to one-time expense recorded in connection with our Recapitalization and IPO in June 2019. The remainder of the decrease is driven by lower travel spend of $3.5 million due to reduction in non-essential travel as a result of restrictions on travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic, lower payroll related costs of $2.2 million driven by a reduction in headcount, lower marketing related spend of $1.9 million also as a result of restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These decreases are partially offset by higher bonus expense of $1.6 million due to improved financial results in 2020.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense decreased $1.3 million, or 4.2%, from $30.1 million in 2019 to $28.8 million in 2020. As a percentage of revenues, general and administrative expense decreased from 11.3% in 2019 to 10.4% in 2020. The decrease in general and administrative expense is mainly due to lower share-based compensation of $7.1 million, mostly reflecting one-time expense recorded in connection with our Recapitalization and IPO in June 2019. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in bonus expense of $2.5 million, increase in directors and officers insurance of $1.7 million and higher legal fees of $1.6 million. The higher bonus expense reflected improved financial results in 2020 and additional employees included in our bonus program. The higher directors and officers insurance was due to a full year of directors and officers premiums in 2020 compared with six months in 2019.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $0.8 million, or 13.3%, from $5.9 million in 2019 to $6.7 million in 2020. The increase in depreciation and amortization was mostly driven by the addition of assets related to the Xirrus acquisition completed in August 2019, comprising of $0.6 million of intangible amortization related to the intangibles recognized and $0.1 million of higher depreciation related to the assets acquired, along with the addition of amortization of leasehold improvement of $0.1 million.
Interest expense, net
Change
(dollars in thousands)
$
%
Interest expense, net
$
8,076
$
5,326
$
(2,750
)
(34.1
)%
Interest expense decreased $2.8 million, or 34.1% from $8.1 million in 2019 to $5.3 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower debt balances in 2020 compared with 2019 reflecting payments on the term loan and revolver with proceeds from our IPO in June 2019 and scheduled principal payments on the term loan during 2019 and 2020. In addition, the decrease resulted from lower interest rates on the term loan beginning in January 2020.
Other expense, net
Change
(dollars in thousands)
$
%
Other expense, net
$
$
$
(55
)
(10.1
)%
Other expense remained relatively flat from 2019 to 2020, and was primarily associated with foreign currency fluctuations.
Provision (benefit) for income taxes
Our tax expense changed from a tax provision of $10.3 million in 2019 to a tax benefit of ($0.4) million for 2020. The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 were (140.4)% and (2.4)%, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our income tax provision (benefit) changed by $10.7 from the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to an establishment of a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets recognized of $9.6 million during 2019, versus net utilization of valuation allowance in 2020 of $1.2 million. The Company’s effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to the recognition of a valuation allowance against our UK deferred tax assets, taxation of pre-IPO management incentive unit equity awards, tax benefits on research and development, and tax benefits on foreign derived intangible
income. The Company’s effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to a benefit on research and development credit, a benefit on the partial release of a valuation allowance, and partially offset by the tax expense due to the increase of the tax rate applied to UK deferred tax assets. See Note 14 - Income taxes in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information related to income taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had a cash balance of $62.5 million. Our primary liquidity needs are: (i) to fund normal operating expenses; (ii) to meet interest and principal requirements of our outstanding indebtedness; and (iii) to fund capital expenditures. We believe these needs will be satisfied over at least the next 12 months using cash flow generated by our operations and our available borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Our future capital requirements may vary materially from those currently planned and will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the timing of new product introductions, market acceptance of our products and overall economic conditions. We expect to regularly assess market conditions and may raise additional equity or incur additional debt if and when our board of directors determines that doing so is in our best interest.
In accordance with the terms of our secured credit facility, we are required to repay a portion of our outstanding principal under our secured credit facility pursuant to the annual excess cash flow provision of the loan agreement. As a result of our cash flow as of December 31, 2020, pursuant to the terms of this excess cash flow provision, we expect to repay $19.7 million of the outstanding principal on our term loan by June 3, 2021, and the $19.7 million is included in the current portion of long-term debt included in current liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2020. This payment will be funded from cash on hand along with additional cash flow generated by our operations during the first five months of 2021.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth summarized cash flow data for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2019 of $3.6 million consisted primarily of a net loss of $17.6 million, adjustments for share-based compensation expense of $17.7 million, depreciation and amortization of $7.5 million and changes in deferred tax assets of $7.4 million along with changes in operating assets and liabilities that resulted in net cash outflows of $11.8 million. The changes in operating assets and liabilities consisted primarily of a $7.6 million increase in inventories as we procured additional inventory of new products in anticipation of increased sales, reduced accounts payable of $2.1 million and reduced accrued payables to Vector Capital of $5.5 million as we paid the accrued Vector Capital management fees following the IPO in June 2019.
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2020 of $56.9 million consisted primarily of net income of $18.6 million, adjustments for depreciation and amortization of $7.8 million, share-based compensation expense of $3.4 million, and increase in provision for inventory excess and obsolescence of $1.9 million along with changes in operating assets and liabilities that resulted in net cash inflows of $25.7 million. The changes in operating assets and liabilities consisted primarily of a $11.1 million increase in accrued employee compensation related to higher bonus due to improved financial results in 2020, which amounts will be paid in 2021, higher accounts payable of $6.1 million due to timing of purchases and payments, lower inventories of $5.7 million as we implemented inventory management strategies in 2020, along with a reduction in accounts receivable of $3.2 million due to stronger cash collections.
Cash flows from investing activities
Our investing activities for both periods presented consisted of capital expenditures for property, equipment and software in support of the growth of our business. Our investing activities in 2019 also included $2.0 million of cash paid for the acquisition of select assets and assumption of select liabilities of the Xirrus Wi-Fi business and a $2.7 million contingent consideration paid in November 2019 related to the acquisition. Our investing activities in 2020 included the remaining $0.3 million contingent consideration payment for the Xirrus acquisition in February 2020.
Cash flows from financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $20.0 million for 2019 was primarily due to $66.0 million in proceeds received from the issuance of shares in our IPO, net of underwriters commissions, paid down $30.7 million in principal under our term loan and revolving loan facilities, payment of $9.5 million in scheduled principal payments due under our term loan facility, and payment of $4.6 million of deferred issuance costs related to our IPO.
Net cash used in financing activities of $8.4 million for 2020 was primarily due to payment of $10.0 million in scheduled principal payments due under our term loan facility offset by $1.6 million in proceeds from the exercise of share options.
Debt
We had outstanding external debt on our term loan of $65.3 million and $55.3 million, including the current portions of $10.0 million and $29.7 million at December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively. We had no outstanding debt balance on our revolving credit facility at December 31, 2019 and 2020. The current portion of debt at December 31, 2020 includes $19.7 million related to a required repayment in principal in accordance with the excess cash flow provision of the term loan agreement, based on our calculation of cash flow at December 31, 2020, which we expect to pay by June 3, 2021. We have classified this $19.7 million required payment as a current liability rather than long-term debt and is included in the current portion of long-term debt on our consolidated balance sheets.
On June 28, 2019, we entered into a Third Amendment to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Third Amendment”). The Third Amendment amends the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated December 21, 2017, as amended by that Waiver and First Amendment to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of November 21, 2018 and as further amended by the Consent, Waiver and Second Amendment to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of April 26, 2019 (as amended, amended and restated, supplemented, restructured or otherwise modified, renewed or replaced from time to time, the “Credit Agreement”).
Pursuant to the Third Amendment, certain actions taken by us in connection with our June 2019 IPO were consented to by Silicon Valley Bank and the Lenders, including (i) the exchange of outstanding vested and unvested Class B units and phantom units in VCH L.P. for ordinary shares in us (in exchange for vested units) and restricted stock awards (for unvested Class B units) and restricted stock units (for unvested phantom units) and the adoption of the employee share incentive plan and employee share purchase plan and forms of award agreement thereunder by us; (ii) the payment of accrued and unpaid management fees owed to an affiliate of VCH, L.P.; and (iii) the entering into of the Shareholder Agreement by and between VCH, L.P. as a guarantor and loan party and terminated the guaranty granted by an affiliate of VCH, L.P. In addition, the prior two tranches under the loan were combined, with only one tranche of term loan remaining. The minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio for the trailing twelve-month period ending December 31, 2019 and each trailing twelve-month quarterly period ending thereafter was amended to 1.25:1.00. All other financial covenants remained the same.
On July 1, 2019, we repaid $30.7 million to the Lenders out of the net proceeds of our IPO, comprised of $20.7 million repayment of the term loan and repayment of all outstanding amounts under the revolving credit facility, leaving an available revolving commitment of $10.0 million.
The Credit Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and affirmative and negative covenants. We are required to maintain a quarterly minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio and minimum consolidated leverage ratio, and a monthly minimum adjusted quick ratio. As of December 31, 2019 and 2020, we were in compliance with all affirmative and negative covenants.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
We lease office space and equipment under operating leases that run through 2026. Additionally, our Credit Agreement matures in December 2022.
Contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are as follows (in thousands):
(1)
Based upon the Credit Agreement debt outstanding, principal payments and interest rate in effect on December 31, 2020, of 5.5%.
(2)
Consists primarily of inventory commitments
(3)
Comprises liabilities recorded on the balance sheet of $104.7 million and obligations not recorded on the balance sheet of $29.2 million.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We do not engage in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as variable interest entities, structured finance, or special purpose entities, as part of our ongoing business. Accordingly, our operating results, financial condition and cash flows are not subject to off-balance sheet risks.
Recent accounting pronouncements
We have reviewed all recently issued accounting standards and have disclosed in Note 1 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K the results of our review and assessment of the impact of each of the standards on our consolidated financial statements.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expense and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these judgments and estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates. For a summary of all of our accounting policies, including the accounting policies discussed below, see Note 1, Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recognition of revenues
Our revenues are generated primarily from the sale of hardware products, with essential embedded software. Our revenues also include limited amounts for software products, extended warranty on hardware products and subscription services. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products. We generally recognize product revenues at the time of shipment, provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have been met. Revenues are recognized net of estimated stock returns, volume-based rebates and cooperative marketing allowances that we provide to distributors. We recognize revenues on extended warranty on a straight-line basis over the term of the extended warranty. We recognize subscription services revenue ratably over the term in which the services are provided and our performance obligation is satisfied. We determine the appropriate revenue recognition for our contracts with customers by analyzing the type, terms and conditions of each contract or arrangement. Certain of our contracts have multiple performance obligations for which we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on the standalone selling price of each distinct product or service in the contract. The standalone selling price is the price at which we expect to be entitled to in exchange for transferring the promised good or service to the customer. The best evidence of standalone selling price is the observable price of a product or service when the Company sells that product or service separately in similar circumstances and to similar customers. In certain cases, the standalone sales price is not directly observable, and we estimate the transaction price allocated to each performance obligation using the expected cost plus margin approach. When, or as, a performance obligation is satisfied, we recognize as revenue
the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to that performance obligation. The transaction price recognized excludes an estimate for the consideration related to products we expect to be returned or amounts we expect to refund.
Inventory and inventory valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. In determining the cost of raw materials, consumables and goods purchased for resale, the weighted average purchase price is used. For finished goods, cost is computed as production cost including capitalized inbound freight costs.
The valuation of inventory requires us to estimate excess or obsolete inventory. The determination of excess or obsolete inventory is estimated based on a comparison of the quantity and cost of inventory on hand to our forecast of customer demand. The actual amount of inventory written off in future periods will likely differ from the inventory excess and obsolete provisions reflected in our consolidated balance sheets due to difference between estimated and actual future demand, which could have a material effect on our net inventory as reported in our consolidated financial statements. Any adjustments to the valuation of inventory are included in cost of revenues.
Product warranties
We provide a standard warranty on our products, with the term depending on the product, and record a liability for the estimated future costs associated with potential warranty claims at the time products are sold. Our responsibility under our standard warranty is the repair or replacement of in-warranty defective product, or to credit the purchase price of the defective product, at our discretions, without charge to the customer. Our estimate of future warranty costs is largely based on historical experience factors, including product failure rates, material usage, and service delivery cost incurred in correcting product failures. These provisions are reviewed and adjusted by management periodically to reflect actual and anticipated experience. The warranty costs are reflected in our consolidated statements of operations within cost of revenues.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in our consolidated financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the differences between the financial statement carrying amount and the tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted income tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in income tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
We recognize deferred tax assets to the extent that we believe these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. If we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax asset in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, we would make an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
We may be subject to income tax audits in all the jurisdictions in which we operate and, as a result, we must also assess exposures to any potential issues arising from current or future audits of current and prior years’ tax returns. Accordingly, we must assess such potential exposures and, where necessary, provide a reserve to cover any expected loss. We recognize the benefit of a tax position if it is more likely than not to be sustained. Recognized tax positions are measured at the largest amount more likely than not of being realized upon settlement. To the extent that we establish a reserve, our income tax expense would be increased. If we ultimately determine that payment of these amounts is unnecessary, we reverse the liability and recognize an income tax benefit during the period in which new information becomes available indicating the liability is no longer necessary. We record an additional income tax expense in the period in which new information becomes available indicating the tax liability is greater than our original estimate.
Share-based compensation
We recognize all share-based compensation expense as a cost in the consolidated financial statements. Equity classified awards are measured at the grant date fair value of the award and expense is recognized, net of estimated forfeitures, on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for each separately vesting portion of the award and forfeiture rates are periodically updated for actual experience over the vesting term. We estimate the fair value of share options granted using the Black-Sholes option pricing model. We use the Monte-Carlo simulation model to determine the grant date fair value for share awards with a market condition.
Business Combinations
We apply the provisions of ASC 805, Business Combinations, in the accounting for our acquisitions. Assets and liabilities assumed are recognized at their acquisition date fair values. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the excess of consideration transferred and the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. Estimates are used in valuing certain intangible assets and include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows as well as assumptions about the period to be used and discount rates. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, any adjustments to the value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the consolidated statements of operations.
JOBS Act accounting election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, are subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.