ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this annual report, including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this annual report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this annual report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We operate a global network of professionally run content houses, each of which has its own brand, influencer cohort and production capabilities. Our Company offers management, production and deal-making services to our handpicked influencers, a management division for individual influencer clients, and an investment arm for joint ventures and acquisitions for companies in the social media influencer space. Our management team consists of successful entrepreneurs with financial, legal, marketing, and digital content creation expertise.
Through our subsidiary, West of Hudson Group, Inc., or WOHG, we currently generate revenues primarily from talent management of social media influencers residing in our Clubhouses and for paid promotion by companies looking to utilize such social media influencers to promote their products or services. We solicit companies for potential marketing collaborations and cultivated content creation, work with the influencers and the marketing entity to negotiate and formalize a brand deal and then execute the deal and receive a certain percentage from the deal. In addition to the in-house brand deals, we generate income by providing talent management and brand partnership deals to external influencers not residing in our Clubhouses.
We were incorporated under the laws of the State of Nevada on December 19, 2006 with the name Tongji Healthcare Group, Inc. by Nanning Tongji Hospital, Inc. (“NTH”). On the same day, Tongji, Inc., our wholly owned subsidiary, was incorporated in the State of Colorado. Tongji, Inc. was later dissolved on March 25, 2011.
NTH was established in Nanning in the province of Guangxi of the People’s Republic of China (“PRC” or “China”) by the Nanning Tongji Medical Co. Ltd. and an individual on October 30, 2003.
NTH was a designated hospital for medical insurance in the city of Nanning and Guangxi province with 105 licensed beds. NTH specializes in the areas of internal medicine, surgery, gynecology, pediatrics, emergency medicine, ophthalmology, medical cosmetology, rehabilitation, dermatology, otolaryngology, traditional Chinese medicine, medical imaging, anesthesia, acupuncture, physical therapy, health examination, and prevention.
On December 27, 2006, Tongji, Inc. acquired 100% of the equity of NTH pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger, pursuant to which NTH became a wholly owned subsidiary of Tongji Inc. Pursuant to the Agreement and Plan of Merger, we issued 15,652,557 shares of common stock to the shareholders of NTH in exchange for 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock of NTH. The acquisition of NTH was accounted for as a reverse acquisition under the purchase method of accounting since the shareholders of NTH obtained control of the entity. Accordingly, the reorganization of the two companies was recorded as a recapitalization of NTH, with NTH being treated as the continuing operating entity. The Company, through NTH, thereafter operated the hospital, until we eventually sold NTH, as described below.
Effective December 31, 2017, under the terms of a Bill of Sale, we agreed to sell, transfer convey and assign forever all of its rights, title and interest in its equity ownership interest in its subsidiary, NTH, to Placer Petroleum Co., LLC, an Arizona limited liability company. Pursuant to the Bill of Sale, consideration for this sale, transfer conveyance and assignment is Placer Petroleum Co, LLC assuming all assets and liabilities of NTH as of December 31, 2017. As a result of the Bill of Sale, the related assets and liabilities of Nanning Tongji Hospital, Inc. was reported as discontinued operations effective December 31, 2017. Thereafter, the Company had minimal operations.
On May 20, 2019, pursuant to Case Number A-19-793075-P, Nevada’s 8th Judicial District, Business Court entered and Order Granting Application of Joseph Arcaro as Custodian of Tongji Healthcare Group, Inc. pursuant to NRS 78.347(1)(b), pursuant to which Joseph Arcaro was appointed custodian of the Company and given authority to reinstate the Company with the State of Nevada under NRS 78.347. On May 23, 2019, Joseph Arcaro filed a Certificate of Reinstatement of the Company with the Secretary of State of the State of Nevada. In addition, on May 23, 2019, Joseph Arcaro filed an Annual List of the Company with the Secretary of State of the State of Nevada, designating himself as President, Secretary, Treasurer and Director of the Company for the filing period of 2017 to 2019. On November 13, 2019, Mr. Arcaro filed a Motion to Terminate Custodianship of Tongji Healthcare Group, Inc. pursuant to NRS 78.650(4) with the District Court in Clark County Nevada. On December 6, 2019, the court granted Mr. Arcaro’s motion, and the custodianship was terminated.
Effective May 29, 2020, Joseph Arcaro, our Chief Executive Officer, President, Secretary, Treasurer and sole director and the beneficial owner, through his ownership of Algonquin Partners Inc. (“Algonquin”), of 65% of the Company’s common stock, entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Stock Purchase Agreement”) by and among West of Hudson Group, Inc., the Company, Algonquin, and Mr. Arcaro. Pursuant to the terms of the SPA, WOHG agreed to purchase, and Algonquin agreed to sell, 30,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock in exchange for payment by WOHG to Algonquin of $240,000 (the “Stock Purchase”). Thereafter, WOHG distributed the 30,000,000 shares of the Company among the shareholders of WOHG. The Stock Purchase closed on June 18, 2020, resulting in a change of control of the Company.
On July 7, 2020, we amended our articles of incorporation to increase our authorized capital stock to 550,000,000 shares, comprised of 500,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.001 per share, and 50,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.001 per share.
On August 11, 2020, we entered into the Share Exchange Agreement with (i) WOHG, (ii) each of the WOHG Shareholders and (iii) Mr. Ben-Yohanan as the Shareholders’ Representative.
Pursuant to the Share Exchange Agreement, the parties agreed that at the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Share Exchange Agreement, which occurred on November 12, 2020 (the “WOHG Closing”), the Company would acquire 100% of WOHG’s issued and outstanding capital stock, in exchange for the issuance to the WOHG Shareholders of a number of shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share to be determined at the WOHG Closing.
Recent Developments
For a detailed description of recent developments of the Company, see “Item 1. Business-Recent Developments”.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $1,010,405 from $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to the commencement of our operations in 2020, as compared to Clubhouse Media Group, Inc.’s status as a shell company in 2019 with no operations.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $579,855 from $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to the commencement of our operations in 2020, as compared to Clubhouse Media Group, Inc.’s status as a shell company in 2019 with no operations. Cost of sales were mainly commissions paid to social influencers for their performance according to the management agreement.
Gross profit was $430,550 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a gross profit of $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The gross profit percentage was 42.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 0% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2,725,105 as compared to $74,764 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The variances were as follows: (i) an increase in rent and utilities expense of $1,069,934 ;(iii) an increase in consultant fees of $269,436; (iv) an increase in sales and marketing expenses of $27,810; (v) an increase in legal fees of $318,928; (vi) an increase in office expense of $112,310; and (vii) an increase of production expense of $237,791. As part of the general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded public relations, investor relations or business development expenses of $108,081 and $0, respectively. The overall increase in general and administrative expenses resulted from the commencement of our operations in 2020, as compared to Clubhouse Media Group, Inc.’s status as a shell company in 2019 with no operations.
Non-cash operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $442,549 including (i) depreciation of $14,945; (ii) amortization of debt discounts of $26,993; (iii) stock-based compensation of $160,611; and (iv) impairment of goodwill of $240,000.
Non-cash general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 was stock-based compensation of $15,000.
Other (Income) Expenses
Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $283,166, as compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 included (i) change in fair value derivative liability of $61,029 and (ii) interest expense of $222,207. The change in derivative liability is the non-cash change in the fair value and relates to our derivative instruments. Interest expense of $222,207 was mostly comprised of non-cash interest of $87,213 from imputed interest and $108,000 from interest expense in excess of derivative liability.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2,577,721 as compared to $74,764 for the for the year ended December 31, 2019 for the reasons discussed above.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern, which requires that management evaluate whether there are relevant conditions and events that, in the aggregate, raise substantial doubt about the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern and to meet its obligations as they become due within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern. While the Company is attempting to generate additional revenues, the Company’s cash position may not be significant enough to support the Company’s daily operations. Management intends to raise additional funds by way of a public or private offering. Management believes that the actions presently being taken to further implement its business plan and generate revenues provide the opportunity for the Company to continue as a going concern. While the Company believes in the viability of its strategy to generate revenues and in its ability to raise additional funds, there can be no assurances to that effect. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to further implement its business plan and generate revenues. We will require additional cash funding to fund operations. Therefore, we concluded there was substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
To fund further operations, we will need to raise additional capital. We may obtain additional financing in the future through the issuance of its common stock, or through other equity or debt financings. Our ability to continue as a going concern or meet the minimum liquidity requirements in the future is dependent on its ability to raise significant additional capital, of which there can be no assurance. If the necessary financing is not obtained or achieved, we will likely be required to reduce its planned expenditures, which could have an adverse impact on the results of operations, financial condition and our ability to achieve its strategic objective. There can be no assurance that financing will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. The financial statements contain no adjustments for the outcome of these uncertainties. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and have a material adverse effect on our future financial results, financial position and cash flows.
The Company received additional funds after December 31, 2020 from issuance of convertible promissory notes from the following convertible promissory note holders:
Convertible Promissory Note - ProActive Capital SPV I, LLC
On January 20, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “ProActive Capital SPA”) with ProActive Capital SPV I, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“ProActive Capital”), pursuant to which, on same date, the Company (i) issued a convertible promissory note to ProActive Capital the aggregate principal amount of $250,000 for a purchase price of $225,000, reflecting a $25,000 original issue discount (the “ProActive Capital Note”), and in connection therewith, sold to ProActive Capital 50,000 shares of Company Common Stock at a purchase price of $0.001 per share. In addition, at the closing of this sale, the Company reimbursed ProActive Capital the sum of $10,000 for ProActive Capital’s costs in completing the transaction, which amount ProActive Capital withheld from the total purchase price paid to the Company.
The ProActive Capital Note has a maturity date of January 20, 2022 and bears interest at 10% per year. No payments of the principal amount or interest are due prior to the maturity date other than as specifically set forth in the ProActive Capital Note, and the Company may prepay all or any portion of the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest at any time without penalty.
The ProActive Capital Note (and the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest) is convertible into shares of Company Common Stock at ProActive Capital’s election at any time following the time that the SEC qualifies the Company’s offering statement related to the Regulation A Offering, at a conversion price equal to 70% of the Regulation A Offering Price of the Company Common Stock in the Regulation A Offering, and is subject to a customary beneficial ownership limitation of 9.99%, which may be waived by ProActive Capital on 61 days’ notice to the Company. The conversion price is subject to customary adjustments for any stock splits, etc. which occur following the determination of the conversion price.
Convertible Promissory Notes- GS Capital Partners
On February 19, 2021, the Company entered into another securities purchase agreement with GS Capital, pursuant to which, on same date, the Company issued a convertible promissory note to GS Capital the aggregate principal amount of $577,778 for a purchase price of $520,000, reflecting a $57,780 original issue discount, and in connection therewith, sold to GS Capital 100,000 shares of Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share at a purchase price of $100, representing a per share price of $0.001 per share. In addition, at the closing of this sale, the Company reimbursed GS Capital the sum of $10,000 for GS Capital’s costs in completing the transaction, which amount GS Capital withheld from the total purchase price paid to the Company.
The GS Capital Note has a maturity date of February 19, 2022 and bears interest at 10% per year. No payments of the principal amount or interest are due prior to the maturity date other than as specifically set forth in the GS Capital Note, and the Company may prepay all or any portion of the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest at any time without penalty.
The GS Capital Note (and the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest) is convertible into shares of the Company Common Stock at GS Capital’s election at any time following the time that the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) qualifies the Company’s offering statement related to the Company’s planned offering of Company Common Stock pursuant to Regulation A under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Regulation A Offering”). At such time, the GS Capital Note (and the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest) will be convertible at a conversion price equal to 70% of the initial offering price of the Company Common Stock in the Regulation A Offering, subject to a customary beneficial ownership limitation of 9.99%, which may be waived by GS Capital on 61 days’ notice to the Company. The conversion price is subject to customary adjustments for any stock splits, etc. which occur following the determination of the conversion price.
On January 25, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “GS Capital SPA”) with GS Capital Partners, LLC (“GS Capital”), pursuant to which, on same date, the Company (i) issued a convertible promissory note to GS Capital the aggregate principal amount of $288,889 for a purchase price of $260,000, reflecting a $28,889 original issue discount (the “GS Capital Note”), and in connection therewith, sold to GS Capital 50,000 shares of Company Common Stock at a purchase price of $0.001 per share. In addition, at the closing of this sale, the Company reimbursed GS Capital the sum of $10,000 for GS Capital’s costs in completing the transaction, which amount GS Capital withheld from the total purchase price paid to the Company.
The GS Capital Note has a maturity date of January 25, 2022, and bears interest at 10% per year. No payments of the principal amount or interest are due prior to the maturity date other than as specifically set forth in the GS Capital Note, and the Company may prepay all or any portion of the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest at any time without penalty.
The GS Capital Note (and the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest) is convertible into shares of Company Common Stock at GS Capital’s election at any time following the time that the SEC qualifies the Company’s offering statement related to the Regulation A Offering, at a conversion price equal to 70% of the Regulation A Offering Price of the Company Common Stock in the Regulation A Offering, and is subject to a customary beneficial ownership limitation of 9.99%, which may be waived by GS Capital on 61 days’ notice to the Company. The conversion price is subject to customary adjustments for any stock splits, etc. which occur following the determination of the conversion price.
Convertible Promissory Note - Tiger Trout Capital Puerto Rico
On January 29, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Tiger Trout SPA”) with Tiger Trout Capital Puerto Rico, LLC, a Puerto Rico limited liability company (“Tiger Trout”), pursuant to which, on same, date, the Company (i) issued a convertible promissory note in the aggregate principal amount of $1,540,000 for a purchase price of $1,100,000, reflecting a $440,000 original issue discount (the “Tiger Trout Note”), and (ii) sold to Tiger Trout 220,000 shares Company common stock for a purchase price of $220.00. As of February 8, 2021, the Company has not issued the 220,000 shares of Company common stock to Tiger Trout.
The Tiger Trout Note has a maturity date of January 29, 2022, and bears interest at 10% per year. No payments of the principal amount or interest are due prior to the maturity date other than as specifically set forth in the Tiger Trout Note, and the Company may prepay all or any portion of the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest at any time without penalty, provided however, that if the Company does not pay the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest by July 2, 2021, an additional $50,000 is required to be paid to Tiger Trout at the time the Tiger Trout Note is repaid, if the Company repays the Tiger Trout Note prior to its maturity date.
If the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest under the Tiger Trout Note has not been repaid on or before the maturity date, that will be an event of default under the Tiger Trout Note. If an event of default has occurred and is continuing, Tiger Trout may declare all or any portion of the then-outstanding principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest under the Tiger Trout Note (the “Indebtedness”) due and payable, and the Indebtedness will become immediately due and payable in cash by the Company. Further, Tiger Trout will have the right, until the Indebtedness is paid in full, to convert all, but only all, of the then-outstanding Indebtedness into shares of Company common stock at a conversion price of $0.50 per share, subject to customary adjustments for stock splits, etc. occurring after the issuance date. The Tiger Trout Note contains a customary beneficial ownership limitation of 9.99%, which may be waived by Tiger Trout on 61 days’ notice to the Company.
Convertible Promissory Note - Labrys Fund, LP
On March 11, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Labrys SPA”) with Labrys Fund, LP (“Labrys”), pursuant to which the Company issued a 10% promissory note (the “Labrys Note”) with a maturity date of March 11, 2022 (the “Labrys Maturity Date”), in the principal sum of $1,000,000. In addition, the Company issued 125,000 shares of its common stock to Labrys as a commitment fee pursuant to the Labrys SPA. Pursuant to the terms of the Labrys Note, the Company agreed to pay to $1,000,000 (the “Principal Sum”) to Labrys and to pay interest on the principal balance at the rate of 10% per annum. The Labrys Note carries an original issue discount (“OID”) of $100,000. Accordingly, on the Closing Date (as defined in the Labrys SPA), Labrys paid the purchase price of $900,000 in exchange for the Labrys Note. Labrys may convert the Labrys Note into the Company’s common stock (subject to the beneficial ownership limitations of 4.99% in the Labrys Note) at any time at a conversion price equal to $10.00 per share.
The Company may prepay the Labrys Note at any time prior to the date that an Event of Default (as defined in the Labrys Note) occurs at an amount equal to 100% of the Principal Sum then outstanding plus accrued and unpaid interest (no prepayment premium) plus $750.00 for administrative fees. The Labrys Note contains customary events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults, breach of representations and warranties, and breach of provisions of the Labrys Note or Labrys SPA.
Upon the occurrence of any Event of Default, the Labrys Note shall become immediately due and payable and the Company shall pay to Labrys, in full satisfaction of its obligations hereunder, an amount equal to the Principal Sum then outstanding plus accrued interest multiplied by 125% (the “Default Amount”). Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default, additional interest will accrue from the date of the Event of Default at the rate equal to the lower of 16% per annum or the highest rate permitted by law.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,967,551. This amount was primarily related to a net loss of $2,577,721 and (i) net working capital increase of $88,621; and offset by (ii) non-cash expenses of $698,791 including (iii) depreciation and amortization of $41,938; (iv) imputed interest of $87,213; (v) stock-based compensation of $160,611; (vi) impairment of goodwill of $240,000; (vii) non-cash interest expense in excess of derivative liability of $108,000; and (viii) change in fair value of derivative liability of $61,029.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $30,488. This amount was primarily related to a net loss of $74,764 and offset by (i) net working capital increase of $29,276 and (ii) stock compensation expense of $15,000.
Investment Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $319,737 and $0, respectively. The 2020 amount related to the cash paid in the public shell company of $240,00 and acquisition of $79,737 of fixed assets.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $2,325,062 and $30,488, respectively. The 2020 amount related to proceeds from our chief executive officer and chairman of the Board of $2,162,562 and convertible notes payable of $162,500. The 2019 amount related to $30,488 borrowing from the former chief executive officer, Joseph Arcaro who resigned after change of control in June 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
In preparing the consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“ GAAP”), management makes estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the dates of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates and assumptions made by management include, but are not limited to, revenue recognition, the allowance for bad debt, useful life of fixed assets, income taxes and unrecognized tax benefits, valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, and assumptions used in assessing impairment of long-lived assets. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Reverse Merger Accounting
The Merger was accounted for as a reverse-merger and recapitalization in accordance with GAAP. WOHG was the acquirer for financial reporting purposes and Clubhouse Media Group, Inc. was the acquired company. Consequently, the assets and liabilities and the operations that are reflected in the historical financial statements prior to the Merger will be those of WOHG and will be recorded at the historical cost basis of WOHG. The consolidated financial statements after completion of the Merger include the assets and liabilities of the Company and WOHG, historical operations of WOHG and operations of the Company from the closing date of the Merger. Common stock and the corresponding capital amounts of the Company pre-merger have been retroactively restated as capital stock shares reflecting the exchange ratio in the Merger. In conjunction with the Merger, WOHG received no cash and assumed no liabilities from Clubhouse Media Group, Inc. All members of the Company’s executive management are from WOHG.
Lease
On January 2, 2020, the Company adopted FASB ASC Topic 842, Leases, or ASC 842, using the modified retrospective transition method with a cumulative effect adjustment to accumulated deficit as of January 1, 2019, and accordingly, modified its policy on accounting for leases as stated below. As described under “Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements,” below, the primary impact of adopting ASC 842 for the Company was the recognition in the consolidated balance sheet of certain lease-related assets and liabilities for operating leases with terms longer than 12 months. The Company elected to use the short term exception and does not records assets/liabilities for short term leases as of December 31, 2020.
The Company’s leases primarily consist of facility leases which are classified as operating leases. The Company assesses whether an arrangement contains a lease at inception. The Company recognizes a lease liability to make contractual payments under all leases with terms greater than twelve months and a corresponding right-of-use asset, representing its right to use the underlying asset for the lease term. The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments over the lease term using the collateralized incremental borrowing rate since the implicit rate is unknown. Options to extend or terminate a lease are included in the lease term when it is reasonably certain that the Company will exercise such an option. The right-of-use asset is initially measured as the contractual lease liability plus any initial direct costs and prepaid lease payments made, less any lease incentives. Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Leased right-of-use assets are subject to impairment testing as a long-lived asset at the asset-group level. The Company monitors its long-lived assets for indicators of impairment. As the Company’s leased right-of-use assets primarily relate to facility leases, early abandonment of all or part of facility as part of a restructuring plan is typically an indicator of impairment. If impairment indicators are present, the Company tests whether the carrying amount of the leased right-of-use asset is recoverable including consideration of sublease income, and if not recoverable, measures impairment loss for the right-of-use asset or asset group.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014 the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), which supersedes all existing revenue recognition requirements, including most industry specific guidance. This new standard requires a company to recognize revenues when it transfers goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that the company expects to receive for those goods or services. The FASB subsequently issued the following amendments to ASU No. 2014-09 that have the same effective date and transition date: ASU No. 2016-08, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Principal versus Agent Considerations; ASU No. 2016-10, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Identifying Performance Obligations and Licensing; ASU No. 2016-12, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Narrow-Scope Improvements and Practical Expedients; and ASU No. 2016-20, Technical Corrections and Improvements to Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The Company adopted these amendments with ASU 2014-09 (collectively, the new revenue standards).
Under the new revenue standards, the Company recognizes revenues when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which it expects to receive in exchange for those goods. The Company recognizes revenues following the five step model prescribed under ASU No. 2014-09: (i) identify contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenues when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligation. The Company recognized revenue from providing temporary and permanent staffing solutions and sale of consumer products.
The Company generates revenue from its managed services when a marketer (typically a brand, agency or partner) pays the Company to provide custom content, influencer marketing, amplification or other campaign management services (“Managed Services”).
The Company maintains separate arrangements with each marketer and content creator either in the form of a master agreement or terms of service, which specify the terms of the relationship and access to its platforms, or by statement of work, which specifies the price and the services to be performed, along with other terms. The transaction price is determined based on the fixed fee stated in the statement of work and does not contain variable consideration. Marketers who contract with the Company to manage their advertising campaigns or custom content requests may prepay for services or request credit terms. The agreement typically provides for either a non-refundable deposit, or a cancellation fee if the agreement is canceled by the customer prior to completion of services. Billings in advance of completed services are recorded as a contract liability until earned. The Company assesses collectability based on a number of factors, including the creditworthiness of the customer and payment and transaction history.
For Managed Services Revenue, the Company enters into an agreement to provide services that may include multiple distinct performance obligations in the form of: (i) an integrated marketing campaign to provide influencer marketing services, which may include the provision of blogs, tweets, photos or videos shared through social network offerings and content promotion, such as click-through advertisements appearing in websites and social media channels; and (ii) custom content items, such as a research or news article, informational material or videos. Marketers typically purchase influencer marketing services for the purpose of providing public awareness or advertising buzz regarding the marketer’s brand and they purchase custom content for internal and external use. The Company may provide one type or a combination of all types of these performance obligations on a statement of work for a lump sum fee. The Company allocates revenue to each performance obligation in the contract at inception based on its relative standalone selling price. These performance obligations are to be provided over a stated period that generally ranges from one day to one year. Revenue is accounted for when the performance obligation has been satisfied depending on the type of service provided. The Company views its obligation to deliver influencer marketing services, including management services, as a single performance obligation that is satisfied at the time the customer receives the benefits from the services.
Based on the Company’s evaluations, revenue from Managed Services is reported on a gross basis because the Company has the primary obligation to fulfill the performance obligations and it creates, reviews and controls the services. The Company takes on the risk of payment to any third-party creators and it establishes the contract price directly with its customers based on the services requested in the statement of work. The contract liabilities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $73,643 and $0, respectively.
Goodwill Impairment
We test goodwill at least annually for impairment at the reporting unit level. We recognize an impairment charge if the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value. When a portion of a reporting unit is disposed, goodwill is allocated to the gain or loss on disposition based on the relative fair values of the business or businesses disposed and the portion of the reporting unit that will be retained.
For other intangible assets that are not deemed indefinite-lived, cost is generally amortized on a straight-line basis over the asset’s estimated economic life, except for individually significant customer-related intangible assets that are amortized in relation to total related sales. Amortizable intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. In these circumstances, they are tested for impairment based on undiscounted cash flows and, if impaired, written down to estimated fair value based on either discounted cash flows or appraised values.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, which include property, plant and equipment and intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.
Recoverability of long-lived assets to be held and used is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the assets. Fair value is generally determined using the asset’s expected future discounted cash flows or market value, if readily determinable. Based on its review, the Company believes that, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no impairment loss of its long-lived assets.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the Company’s financial statements or tax returns. In estimating future tax consequences, the Company generally considers all expected future events other than enactments of changes in the tax law. For deferred tax assets, management evaluates the probability of realizing the future benefits of such assets. The Company establishes valuation allowances for its deferred tax assets when evidence suggests it is unlikely that the assets will be fully realized.
The Company recognizes the tax effects of an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not to be sustained based solely on its technical merits as of the reporting date and then only in an amount more likely than not to be sustained upon review by the tax authorities. Income tax positions that previously failed to meet the more likely than not threshold are recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is met. Previously recognized tax positions that no longer meet the more likely than not threshold are derecognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is no longer met. The Company classifies potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss) as income tax expense.
The Company has not completed a full fiscal year, post-recapitalization and has not filed an income tax return and incurred net operating losses from inception to December 31, 2020. The net operating losses that has future benefits will be recorded as $773,921 deferred tax assets, but net with 100% valuation allowance until the Company expected to realize this deferred tax assets in the future.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying value of cash, accounts receivable, other receivable, note receivable, other current assets, accounts payable, and accrued expenses, if applicable, approximate their fair values based on the short-term maturity of these instruments. The carrying amounts of debt were also estimated to approximate fair value.
The Company utilizes the methods of fair value (“FV”) measurement as described in ASC 820 to value its financial assets and liabilities. As defined in ASC 820, FV is based on the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In order to increase consistency and comparability in FV measurements, ASC 820 establishes a FV hierarchy that prioritizes observable and unobservable inputs used to measure FV into three broad levels, which are described below:
Level 1: Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for assets or liabilities. The FV hierarchy gives the highest priority to Level 1 inputs.
Level 2: Observable prices that are based on inputs not quoted on active markets, but corroborated by market data.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs are used when little or no market data is available. The FV hierarchy gives the lowest priority to Level 3 inputs.
The Company used Level 3 inputs for its valuation methodology for the derivative liabilities for conversion feature of the convertible notes in determining the fair value the weighted-average Binomial option pricing model following assumption inputs. The fair value of derivative liability as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $304,490 and $0, respectively.
Stock based Compensation
Stock based compensation cost to employees is measured at the date of grant, based on the calculated fair value of the stock-based award, and will be recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the award). Share-based compensation awards issued to non-employees for services rendered are recorded at either the fair value of the services rendered or the fair value of the share-based payment, whichever is more readily determinable.
Derivative instruments
The fair value of derivative instruments is recorded and shown separately under liabilities. Changes in the fair value of derivatives liability are recorded in the consolidated statement of operations under other (income) expense.
Our Company evaluates all of its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the consolidated statements of operations. For stock-based derivative financial instruments, the Company uses binomial option-pricing model to value the derivative instruments at inception and on subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Related Parties
The Company follows subtopic 850-10 of the FASB ASC for the identification of related parties and disclosure of related party transactions. Pursuant to Section 850-10-20 related parties include:
a. affiliates of the Company;
b. entities for which investments in their equity securities would be required, absent the election of the FV option under the FV Option Subsection of Section 825-10-15, to be accounted for by the equity method by the investing entity;
c. trusts for the benefit of employees, such as pension and profit-sharing trusts that are managed by or under the trusteeship of management;
d. principal owners of the Company;
e. management of the Company;
f. other parties with which the Company may deal if one party controls or can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the other to an extent that one of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests; and
g. other parties that can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the transacting parties or that have an ownership interest in one of the transacting parties and can significantly influence the other to an extent that one or more of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests.
The financial statements shall include disclosures of material related party transactions, other than compensation arrangements, expense allowances, and other similar items in the ordinary course of business. However, disclosure of transactions that are eliminated in the preparation of financial statements is not required in those statements.
The disclosures shall include: a. the nature of the relationship(s) involved; b. a description of the transactions, including transactions to which no amounts or nominal amounts were ascribed, for each of the periods for which income statements are presented, and such other information deemed necessary to an understanding of the effects of the transactions on the financial statements; c. the dollar amounts of transactions for each of the periods for which income statements are presented and the effects of any change in the method of establishing the terms from that used in the preceding period; and d. amounts due from or to related parties as of the date of each balance sheet presented and, if not otherwise apparent, the terms and manner of settlement.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”). ASU 2016-13 requires companies to measure credit losses utilizing a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires a consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. ASU 2016-13 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including those interim periods within those fiscal years. We did not expect the adoption of this guidance have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.