Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is a combined report of CMS Energy and Consumers.
Executive Overview
CMS Energy is an energy company operating primarily in Michigan. It is the parent holding company of several subsidiaries, including Consumers, an electric and gas utility; CMS Enterprises, primarily a domestic independent power producer and marketer; and EnerBank, an industrial bank located in Utah. Consumers’ electric utility operations include the generation, purchase, distribution, and sale of electricity, and Consumers’ gas utility operations include the purchase, transmission, storage, distribution, and sale of natural gas. Consumers’ customer base consists of a mix of primarily residential, commercial, and diversified industrial customers. CMS Enterprises, through its subsidiaries and equity investments, is engaged in domestic independent power production, including the development and operation of renewable generation, and the marketing of independent power production. EnerBank provides primarily unsecured, fixed-rate installment loans throughout the U.S. to finance home improvements.
CMS Energy and Consumers manage their businesses by the nature of services each provides. CMS Energy operates principally in four business segments: electric utility; gas utility; enterprises, its non-utility operations and investments; and EnerBank. Consumers operates principally in two business segments: electric utility and gas utility. CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ businesses are affected primarily by:
•regulation and regulatory matters
•state and federal legislation
•economic conditions
•weather
•energy commodity prices
•interest rates
•their securities’ credit ratings
COVID-19 Pandemic
CMS Energy and Consumers continue to respond to the public health emergency caused by the COVID-19 pandemic by instituting and maintaining measures consistent with guidance provided by local, state, and federal agencies. CMS Energy and Consumers maintain over 60 departmental business continuity plans; these plans were reviewed and enhanced in early 2020 to ensure readiness for the COVID-19 pandemic. CMS Energy and Consumers continue to take steps to protect the safety of employees, customers, and contractors, and have executed their business continuity plans to ensure the continued delivery of critical energy services. Additionally, CMS Energy and Consumers have mitigated the potential impact of the pandemic on their liquidity by completing financing transactions and reducing the need for additional external funding.
The COVID-19 pandemic is a continually evolving situation. As a result of the pandemic, Consumers has experienced a decline in electric deliveries to commercial and industrial customers, offset partially by an increase in deliveries to residential customers. It has also experienced increased uncollectible accounts and workforce-related expenses, among other cost increases directly attributable to the pandemic. Consumers anticipates that these trends will continue in the near term. In April 2020, the MPSC issued an
order authorizing Consumers to defer incremental uncollectible accounts expense associated with the pandemic.
Additionally, EnerBank anticipates it could experience slower lending growth, higher loan write-offs, and increased loan modifications in the future as a result of the pandemic. The companies cannot predict the long-term impact of the pandemic on their business, results of operations, financial condition, capital investment program, liquidity, and cash flows. More detailed discussion of the near-term impacts of and future uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic can be found in Item 1A. Risk Factors and throughout this Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The Triple Bottom Line
CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ purpose is to achieve world class performance while delivering hometown service. In support of this purpose, the companies employ the “Consumers Energy Way,” a lean operating model designed to improve safety, quality, cost, delivery, and employee morale.
CMS Energy and Consumers measure their progress toward the purpose by considering their impact on the “triple bottom line” of people, planet, and profit, which is underpinned by performance; this consideration takes into account not only the economic value that the companies create for customers and investors, but also their responsibility to social and environmental goals. The triple bottom line balances the interests of the companies’ employees, customers, suppliers, regulators, creditors, Michigan’s residents, the investment community, and other stakeholders, and it reflects the broader societal impacts of the companies’ activities.
Consumers’ Sustainability Report, which is available to the public, describes the company’s progress toward world class performance measured in the areas of people, planet, and profit.
People: The people element of the triple bottom line represents CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ commitment to their employees, their customers, the residents of local communities in which the companies do business, and other stakeholders.
The safety of employees, customers, and the general public is a priority of CMS Energy and Consumers. Accordingly, CMS Energy and Consumers have worked to integrate a set of safety principles into their business operations and culture. These principles include complying with applicable safety, health, and security regulations and implementing programs and processes aimed at continually improving safety and security conditions. Over the last ten years, Consumers’ OSHA recordable incident rate has decreased by over 53 percent.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, CMS Energy and Consumers have issued a response plan that is focused on the health, safety, and well-being of their co-workers, customers, and communities. CMS Energy and Consumers have aligned with safety and health guidelines from the CDC, OSHA, and the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services in order to protect their employees, customers,
and contractors to ensure the continued delivery of critical energy services. To align with, and in addition to, these guidelines, CMS Energy and Consumers have:
•secured the supply chain necessary to provide front-line workers with appropriate personal protective equipment and cleaning supplies
•worked with local health departments and hospital systems to begin administering vaccinations to essential front-line employees
•when necessary, sequestered employees with critical roles at generating plants, gas compression facilities, and electric control rooms
•implemented a paid self-quarantine requirement for employees who are exhibiting symptoms of COVID-19 or who have come into contact with a person suspected to have COVID-19
•prohibited business-related international travel and instituted a mandatory ten-day work remote period for employees who return from personal travel to heavily impacted areas
•required employees to work remotely when possible
•when necessary, reduced service at 13 direct payment offices to drop box and drive-through services only
•initially adjusted work to focus on emergent and critical activities such as electric outages, gas leaks, and other public safety and reliability work; as work restrictions have gradually lifted in Michigan, the companies have resumed normal work with safety measures in place
•contracted a chief medical officer to guide the companies’ response and provide rapid support and supplies for the workforce
•limited access to company facilities, enhanced cleaning protocols, and established a mask-wearing policy
•offered additional paid leave to employees to alleviate child care-related burdens and implemented other interim workforce policies to offer flexibility and reduce employee concerns
In response to the pandemic, CMS Energy and Consumers initially suspended shut-offs of service for non-payment and extended payment protection plans for low-income and senior customers. CMS Energy and Consumers slowly began resuming shut-offs of service for non-payment in late July 2020 for commercial and industrial customers and in October 2020 for residential customers. CMS Energy and Consumers remain committed to assisting customers impacted by the pandemic. During 2020, Consumers provided $12 million to help Michigan residents and small businesses who had experienced difficulty paying their energy bill due to the pandemic. Additionally, in December 2020, Consumers donated another $3 million to agencies that provide energy bill assistance to low-income households.
CMS Energy and Consumers also place a high priority on customer value and on providing a hometown customer experience. Consumers’ customer-driven investment program is aimed at improving safety and increasing electric and gas reliability, which has resulted in measurable improvements in customer satisfaction.
Central to Consumers’ commitment to its customers are the initiatives it has undertaken to keep electricity and natural gas affordable, including:
•replacement of coal-fueled generation and PPAs with a cost-efficient mix of renewable energy and energy waste reduction and demand response programs
•targeted infrastructure investment to reduce maintenance costs and improve reliability and safety
•supply chain optimization
•information and control system efficiencies
•employee and retiree health care cost sharing
•workforce productivity enhancements
In addition, Consumers’ gas commodity costs declined by 66 percent from 2010 through 2020, due not only to a decrease in market prices but also to Consumers’ improvements to its gas infrastructure and optimization of its gas purchasing and storage strategy. These gas commodity savings are passed on to customers.
Planet: The planet element of the triple bottom line represents CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ commitment to protect the environment. This commitment extends beyond compliance with various state and federal environmental, health, and safety laws and regulations. Management considers climate change and other environmental risks in the companies’ strategy development, business planning, and enterprise risk management processes.
CMS Energy and Consumers continue to focus on opportunities to protect the environment and to reduce their carbon footprint. As a result of actions already taken by CMS Energy and Consumers, the companies have:
•decreased their combined percentage of electric supply (self-generated and purchased) from coal by 21 percentage points since 2015
•reduced carbon dioxide emissions by over 35 percent since 2005
•reduced the amount of water used to generate electricity by over 30 percent since 2012
•reduced landfill waste disposal by over 1.5 million tons since 1992
•reduced methane emissions by 17 percent since 2012
Additionally, over the last 20 years, Consumers has reduced its sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide, particulate matter, and mercury emissions by over 90 percent. Presented in the following illustration are Consumers’ reductions in these emissions (Consumers began tracking mercury emissions in 2007):
The 2016 Energy Law:
•raised the renewable energy standard to 12.5 percent in 2019 and 15 percent in 2021; Consumers met the 12.5-percent requirement in 2019 and 2020 with a combination of newly generated RECs and previously generated RECs carried over from prior years
•established a goal of 35 percent combined renewable energy and energy waste reduction by 2025; Consumers has achieved 25 percent combined renewable energy and energy waste reduction through 2020
•authorized incentives for demand response programs and expanded existing incentives for energy efficiency programs, referring to the combined initiatives as energy waste reduction programs
•established an integrated planning process for new generation resources
In 2019, the MPSC approved the IRP that Consumers filed in 2018, which details its Clean Energy Plan. Under its Clean Energy Plan, Consumers will meet the requirements of the 2016 Energy Law using its clean and lean strategy, which focuses on increasing the generation of renewable energy, helping customers use less energy, and offering demand response programs to reduce demand during critical peak times. Further, Consumers plans to replace its coal-fueled generation predominantly with investment in renewable energy, which will enable Consumers to meet and exceed the 2016 Energy Law renewable energy requirements and fulfill increasing customer demand for renewable energy. The Clean Energy Plan will also allow Consumers to achieve a breakthrough goal of at least 50 percent combined renewable energy and energy waste reduction by 2030.
In February 2020, Consumers announced a goal of achieving net-zero carbon emissions from its electric business by 2040. This goal includes not only emissions from Consumers’ owned generation, but also emissions from the generation of power purchased through long-term PPAs and from the MISO energy market. Consumers expects to reduce carbon emissions of its owned generation by more than 90 percent from its 2005 levels by 2040 through execution of its Clean Energy Plan. The remaining emissions will be offset through alternative measures including, but not limited to, carbon sequestration, landfill methane emission capture, and large-scale tree planting.
Presented in the following illustration is Consumers’ 2020 capacity portfolio and its future capacity portfolio as projected in the IRP. This illustration includes the effects of purchased capacity and energy waste reduction and uses the nameplate capacity of renewable energy sources:
In September 2020, Michigan’s Governor signed an executive order creating the Michigan Healthy Climate Plan, which outlines goals for Michigan to achieve economy-wide net-zero greenhouse gas emissions and to be carbon neutral by 2050. The executive order aims for a 28-percent reduction below 2005 levels of greenhouse gas emissions by 2025. Consumers has already surpassed the 28-percent reduction milestone for its owned electric generation and previously announced, in February 2020, a goal of achieving net-zero carbon emissions from its electric business by 2040.
In addition to Consumers’ efforts to reduce the electric utility’s carbon footprint, it is also making efforts to reduce the gas utility’s methane footprint. In 2019, Consumers released its Methane Reduction Plan, which set a goal of net-zero methane emissions from its natural gas delivery system by 2030. Consumers plans to reduce methane emissions from its system by about 80 percent by accelerating the replacement of aging pipe, rehabilitating or retiring outdated infrastructure, and adopting new technologies and practices. The remaining emissions will be offset by purchasing and/or producing renewable natural gas.
Additionally, to advance its environmental stewardship in Michigan and to minimize the impact of future regulations, Consumers announced the following five-year targets during 2018:
•to reduce its water use by one billion gallons; since 2017, Consumers reduced its water usage by over 880 million gallons cumulatively
•to enhance, restore, or protect 5,000 acres of land; since 2017, Consumers enhanced, restored, or protected over 4,600 acres of land cumulatively
•to reduce the amount of waste taken to landfills by 35 percent; compared to 2017, Consumers reduced its waste to landfills by 54 percent in 2020
CMS Energy, through CMS Enterprises, continues to pursue further opportunities for the development of renewable generation projects. In July 2020, CMS Enterprises purchased an ownership interest in Aviator Wind, a 525-MW wind generation project in Coke County, Texas. The project was completed and became operational in September 2020.
CMS Energy and Consumers are monitoring numerous legislative, policy, and regulatory initiatives, including those to regulate greenhouse gases, and related litigation. While CMS Energy and Consumers cannot predict the outcome of these matters, which could have a material effect on the companies, they intend to continue to move forward with their clean and lean strategy.
Profit: The profit element of the triple bottom line represents CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ commitment to meeting their financial objectives and providing economic development opportunities and benefits in the communities in which they do business. CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ financial strength allows them to maintain solid investment-grade credit ratings and thereby reduce funding costs for the benefit of customers and investors, to preserve and create jobs, and to reinvest in the communities they serve.
In 2020, CMS Energy’s net income available to common stockholders was $755 million, and diluted EPS were $2.64. This compares with net income available to common stockholders of $680 million and diluted EPS of $2.39 in 2019. In 2020, the benefits from gas and electric rate increases and lower operating and maintenance expenses were offset partially by higher depreciation and property taxes reflecting higher capital spending, lower gas sales due primarily to unfavorable weather, and higher donations. A more detailed discussion of the factors affecting CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ performance can be found in the Results of Operations section that follows this Executive Overview.
Consumers has experienced a decline in electric deliveries to commercial and industrial customers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Over the next five years, Consumers expects weather-normalized electric and gas deliveries to remain stable relative to 2020. This outlook reflects the effects of energy waste reduction programs offset largely by modest growth in electric and gas demand.
Performance: Impacting the Triple Bottom Line
CMS Energy and Consumers remain committed to achieving world class performance while delivering hometown service and positively impacting the triple bottom line of people, planet, and profit. During 2020, CMS Energy and Consumers:
•realized over $100 million in cost reductions by leveraging the Consumers Energy Way and through other initiatives
•named a Chief Diversity Officer responsible for setting and monitoring the companies’ diversity, equity, and inclusion strategy
•completed a 90-mile gas pipeline construction project to upgrade gas pipelines and infrastructure throughout three Michigan counties
•announced a new parental leave policy for employees, allowing six months of paid leave to mothers and four months of paid leave to a nonbirthing parent
•pledged to join five other energy companies in facilitating the construction of a Midwest electric vehicle charging network
CMS Energy and Consumers will continue to utilize the Consumers Energy Way to enable them to achieve world class performance and positively impact the triple bottom line. Consumers’ investment plan and the regulatory environment in which it operates also drive its ability to impact the triple bottom line.
Investment Plan: Consumers expects to make capital investments of $25 billion over the next ten years. Over the next five years, Consumers expects to make significant expenditures on infrastructure upgrades and replacements and electric supply projects. While it has a large number of potential investment opportunities that would add customer value, Consumers has prioritized its spending based on the criteria of enhancing public safety, increasing reliability, maintaining affordability for its customers, and advancing its environmental stewardship. Consumers’ investment program is expected to result in annual rate-base growth of six to eight percent. This rate-base growth, together with cost-control measures, should allow Consumers to maintain affordable customer prices.
Presented in the following illustration are planned capital expenditures of $13.2 billion that Consumers expects to make from 2021 through 2025:
Of this amount, Consumers plans to spend $10.0 billion over the next five years to maintain and upgrade its gas infrastructure and electric distribution systems in order to enhance safety and reliability, improve customer satisfaction, reduce energy waste on those systems, and facilitate its clean energy transition. The gas infrastructure projects comprise $5.3 billion to sustain deliverability, enhance pipeline integrity and safety, and reduce methane emissions. The electric distribution projects comprise $4.7 billion to strengthen circuits and substations, replace poles, and interconnect clean energy resources. Consumers also expects to spend $2.4 billion for new clean generation, which includes investments in wind, solar, and hydro electric generation resources, and $0.8 billion for other electric supply projects. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Consumers has rescheduled some capital investment projects, but has not made any changes to its long-term capital investment program at this time.
Regulation: Regulatory matters are a key aspect of Consumers’ business, particularly rate cases and regulatory proceedings before the MPSC, which permit recovery of new investments while helping to ensure that customer rates are fair and affordable. Important regulatory events and developments not already discussed are summarized below.
•2019 Gas Rate Case: In December 2019, Consumers filed an application with the MPSC seeking an annual rate increase of $245 million, based on a 10.5 percent authorized return on equity and a projected twelve-month period ending September 30, 2021. In May 2020, Consumers reduced its requested annual rate increase to $229 million. In September 2020, the MPSC approved a settlement agreement authorizing an annual rate increase of $144 million, based on a 9.9 percent authorized return on equity. As part of that agreement, Consumers agreed not to file a new gas rate case prior to December 2021. The MPSC also approved the continuation of a revenue decoupling mechanism, which annually reconciles Consumers’ actual weather-normalized non-fuel revenues with the revenues approved by the MPSC.
•2020 Electric Rate Case: In February 2020, Consumers filed an application with the MPSC seeking an annual rate increase of $244 million, based on a 10.5 percent authorized return on equity and a projected twelve-month period ending December 31, 2021. In July 2020, Consumers reduced its requested annual rate increase to $230 million. In December 2020, the MPSC approved an annual rate increase of $90 million, based on a 9.9 percent authorized return on equity. This increase reflects a $36 million refund to customers of regulatory tax liabilities associated with the remeasurement of Consumers’ deferred income taxes as a result of the TCJA; excluding the impacts of this refund, the order resulted in a $126 million increase in annual rates. The order also approved the recovery of $13 million associated with Consumers’ deferral of depreciation and property tax expense and the overall rate of return on distribution-related capital investments exceeding certain threshold amounts. Additionally, the order approved the method of recovering amounts earned under the financial compensation mechanism approved by the MPSC in Consumers’ IRP. This mechanism allows Consumers to earn a return on payments made under PPAs approved by the MPSC after January 1, 2019.
Looking Forward
CMS Energy and Consumers will continue to consider the impact on the triple bottom line of people, planet, and profit in their daily operations as well as in their long-term strategic decisions. Consumers will continue to seek fair and timely regulatory treatment that will support its customer-driven investment plan, while pursuing cost-control measures that will allow it to maintain sustainable customer base rates. The Consumers Energy Way is an important means of realizing CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ purpose of achieving world class performance while delivering hometown service.
Results of Operations
CMS Energy Consolidated Results of Operations
Presented in the following table are specific after-tax changes to net income available to common stockholders for 2020 versus 2019:
1See Note 3, Regulatory Matters and Note 22, Asset Sale and Exit Activities.
2See Note 3, Regulatory Matters.
For specific after-tax changes to net income available to common stockholders for 2019 versus 2018, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-CMS Energy Consolidated Results of Operations, in the Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed February 6, 2020.
Consumers Electric Utility Results of Operations
Presented in the following table are the detailed changes to the electric utility’s net income available to common stockholders for 2020 versus 2019 (amounts are presented pre-tax, with the exception of income tax changes):
1Deliveries to end-use customers were 35.4 billion kWh in 2020 and 36.8 billion kWh in 2019.
2See Note 3, Regulatory Matters.
3See Note 3, Regulatory Matters and Note 22, Asset Sale and Exit Activities.
4See Note 22, Asset Sale and Exit Activities.
5See Note 14, Income Taxes.
For detailed changes to the electric utility’s net income available to common stockholders for 2019 versus 2018, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-Consumers Electric Utility Results of Operations, in the Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed February 6, 2020.
Consumers Gas Utility Results of Operations
Presented in the following table are the detailed changes to the gas utility’s net income available to common stockholders for 2020 versus 2019 (amounts are presented pre-tax, with the exception of income tax changes):
1Deliveries to end-use customers were 283 bcf in 2020 and 313 bcf in 2019.
2See Note 3, Regulatory Matters.
3See Note 4, Contingencies and Commitments-Consumers Gas Utility Contingencies.
4See Note 14, Income Taxes.
For detailed changes to the gas utility’s net income available to common stockholders for 2019 versus 2018, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-Consumers Gas Utility Results of Operations, in the Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed February 6, 2020.
Enterprises Results of Operations
Presented in the following table are the detailed after-tax changes to the enterprises segment’s net income available to common stockholders for 2020 versus 2019:
1See Note 14, Income Taxes.
For detailed after-tax changes to the enterprises segment’s net income available to common stockholders for 2019 versus 2018, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-Enterprises Results of Operations, in the Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed February 6, 2020.
EnerBank Results of Operations
Presented in the following table are the detailed after-tax changes to EnerBank’s net income available to common stockholders for 2020 versus 2019:
1See Note 2, New Accounting Standards.
For detailed after-tax changes to EnerBank’s net income available to common stockholders for 2019 versus 2018, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-EnerBank Results of Operations, in the Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed February 6, 2020.
Corporate Interest and Other Results of Operations
Presented in the following table are the detailed after-tax changes to corporate interest and other results for 2020 versus 2019:
1See Note 14, Income Taxes.
For detailed after-tax changes to corporate interest and other’s net income available to common stockholders for 2019 versus 2018, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-Corporate Interest and Other Results of Operations, in the Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed February 6, 2020.
Cash Position, Investing, and Financing
At December 31, 2020, CMS Energy had $185 million of consolidated cash and cash equivalents, which included $17 million of restricted cash and cash equivalents. At December 31, 2020, Consumers had $35 million of consolidated cash and cash equivalents, which included $15 million of restricted cash and cash equivalents.
Operating Activities
Presented in the following table are specific components of net cash provided by operating activities for 2020 versus 2019:
1Non-cash transactions comprise depreciation and amortization, changes in deferred income taxes and investment tax credits, bad debt expense, and other non-cash operating activities and reconciling adjustments.
2Core working capital comprises accounts receivable, notes receivable, accrued revenue, inventories, accounts payable, and accrued rate refunds.
For specific components of net cash provided by operating activities for 2019 versus 2018, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Cash Position, Investing, and Financing-Operating Activities, in the Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed February 6, 2020.
Investing Activities
Presented in the following table are specific components of net cash used in investing activities for 2020 versus 2019:
1See Note 22, Asset Sale and Exit Activities
For specific components of net cash used in investing activities for 2019 versus 2018, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Cash Position, Investing, and Financing-Investing Activities, in the Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed February 6, 2020.
Financing Activities
Presented in the following table are specific components of net cash provided by financing activities for 2020 versus 2019:
For specific components of net cash provided by financing activities for 2019 versus 2018, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Cash Position, Investing, and Financing-Financing Activities, in the Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed February 6, 2020.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
CMS Energy uses dividends and tax-sharing payments from its subsidiaries and external financing and capital transactions to invest in its utility and non-utility businesses, retire debt, pay dividends, and fund its other obligations. The ability of CMS Energy’s subsidiaries, including Consumers, to pay dividends to CMS Energy depends upon each subsidiary’s revenues, earnings, cash needs, and other factors. In addition, Consumers’ ability to pay dividends is restricted by certain terms included in its debt covenants and articles of incorporation and potentially by FERC requirements and provisions under the Federal Power Act and the Natural Gas Act. For additional details on Consumers’ dividend restrictions, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 5, Financings and Capitalization-Dividend Restrictions. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Consumers paid $637 million in dividends on its common stock to CMS Energy.
Consumers uses cash flows generated from operations and external financing transactions, as well as stockholder contributions from CMS Energy, to fund capital expenditures, retire debt, pay dividends, and fund its other obligations. Consumers also uses these sources of funding to contribute to its employee benefit plans.
CMS Energy and Consumers expect to have sufficient liquidity to fund their commitments despite potential material uncertainties that may impact their cash management and financing strategies as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. CMS Energy and Consumers rely on the capital markets to fund their robust capital plan and those markets have faced significant strain. CMS Energy and Consumers have mitigated the potential impact of the pandemic on their liquidity by completing financing transactions and reducing the need for additional external funding. For more information on CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ financing transactions, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 5, Financings and Capitalization.
Barring any sustained market dislocations or disruptions, CMS Energy and Consumers expect to continue to have ready access to the financial and capital markets and will continue to explore possibilities to take advantage of market opportunities as they arise with respect to future funding needs. If access to these markets were to diminish or otherwise become restricted, CMS Energy and Consumers would implement contingency plans to address debt maturities, which could include reduced capital spending. The COVID-19 pandemic is a continually evolving situation and CMS Energy and Consumers cannot predict the ultimate impact it will have on their debt covenants, business, results of operations, financial condition, capital investment program, liquidity, and cash flows.
CMS Energy will make a change in method of tax accounting in its 2020 tax return to take advantage of IRS tax guidance that allows certain costs to maintain, replace, or improve electric assets to be deducted as repairs for tax purposes. Under this guidance, the costs can be deducted immediately rather than capitalized and depreciated over a 20-year period. This change will allow CMS Energy to claim accelerated one-time federal tax deductions of approximately $975 million upon initial adoption, with favorable ongoing annual deductions thereafter, placing CMS Energy in a net operating loss carryforward position until 2023.
In 2020, CMS Energy entered into an equity offering program under which it may sell shares of its common stock having an aggregate sales price of up to $500 million in privately negotiated transactions, in “at the market” offerings, through forward sales transactions, or otherwise.
CMS Energy has entered into forward sales transactions under this program, which allow CMS Energy to either physically settle the contracts by issuing shares of its common stock at the then-applicable forward sale price specified by the agreement or net settle the contracts through the delivery or receipt of cash or
shares. CMS Energy may settle the contracts at any time through their maturity dates, and presently intends to physically settle the contracts by delivering shares of its common stock.
For more information on these forward sale contracts, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 5, Financings and Capitalization-Issuance of Common Stock.
At December 31, 2020, CMS Energy had $532 million of its revolving credit facility available and Consumers had $1.1 billion available under its revolving credit facilities. CMS Energy and Consumers use these credit facilities for general working capital purposes and to issue letters of credit. An additional source of liquidity is Consumers’ commercial paper program, which allows Consumers to issue, in one or more placements, up to $500 million in the aggregate in commercial paper notes with maturities of up to 365 days at market interest rates. These issuances are supported by Consumers’ revolving credit facilities. While the amount of outstanding commercial paper does not reduce the available capacity of the revolving credit facilities, Consumers does not intend to issue commercial paper in an amount exceeding the available capacity of the facilities. At December 31, 2020, there were no commercial paper notes outstanding under this program. For additional details on CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ secured revolving credit facilities and commercial paper program, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 5, Financings and Capitalization.
Certain of CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ credit agreements contain covenants that require CMS Energy and Consumers to maintain certain financial ratios, as defined therein. At December 31, 2020, no default had occurred with respect to any financial covenants contained in CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ credit agreements. CMS Energy and Consumers were each in compliance with these covenants as of December 31, 2020, as presented in the following table:
1Applies to CMS Energy’s revolving credit agreement and term loan credit agreement. In April 2020, amendments to these agreements changed the required financial covenant from a leverage ratio to a capitalization ratio.
2Applies to Consumers’ revolving credit agreements and letter of credit agreement.
Components of CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ cash management plan include controlling operating expenses and capital expenditures and evaluating market conditions for financing and refinancing opportunities. CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ present level of cash and expected cash flows from operating activities, together with access to sources of liquidity, are anticipated to be sufficient to fund the companies’ contractual obligations for 2021 and beyond.
CMS Energy is also required both by law and by contract to provide financial support, including infusing additional capital, to ensure that EnerBank satisfies mandated capital requirements and has sufficient liquidity to operate. With its self-funding plan, EnerBank has exceeded these requirements historically and exceeded them as of December 31, 2020. In addition, EnerBank has access to contingent funding sources, including the Discount Window and a $50 million uncommitted federal funds line of credit. Each month, EnerBank pledges a subset of its eligible loans to the Federal Reserve to ensure a seamless
borrowing capability should the need arise. At December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings under EnerBank’s contingent funding sources.
Contractual Obligations: Presented in the following table are CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ contractual obligations. The table excludes all amounts classified as current liabilities on CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ consolidated balance sheets, other than the current portion of long-term debt, leases, and other financing.
1Long-term contracts for the purchase of commodities and related services, and construction and service agreements. The commodities and related services include natural gas and coal and associated transportation.
2Long-term PPAs from certain affiliates of CMS Enterprises.
CMS Energy and Consumers also have recognized non-current liabilities for which the timing of payments cannot be reasonably estimated. These items, which are excluded from the table above, include regulatory liabilities, deferred income taxes, workers’ compensation liabilities, accrued liabilities under renewable energy programs, and other liabilities. Retirement benefits are also excluded from the table above. For details related to benefit payments, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 12, Retirement Benefits.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements: CMS Energy, Consumers, and certain of their subsidiaries enter into various arrangements in the normal course of business to facilitate commercial transactions with third parties. These arrangements include indemnities, surety bonds, letters of credit, and financial and performance guarantees. Additionally, CMS Energy has entered into forward sales contracts to sell its common stock in order to invest in its utility and non-utility businesses; as of December 31, 2020, these contracts have an aggregate sales price of $58 million, maturing through 2022. For additional details on the companies’ indemnity and guarantee arrangements, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 4, Contingencies and Commitments-Guarantees. For additional details on letters of credit and CMS Energy’s forward sales contracts, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 5, Financings and Capitalization.
Capital Expenditures: Over the next five years, Consumers expect to make substantial capital investments. Consumers may revise its forecasts of capital expenditures periodically due to a number of factors, including environmental regulations, business opportunities, market volatility, economic trends, and the ability to access capital. Presented in the following table are Consumers’ estimated capital expenditures, including lease commitments, for 2021 through 2025:
Outlook
Several business trends and uncertainties may affect CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ financial condition and results of operations. These trends and uncertainties could have a material impact on CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ consolidated income, cash flows, or financial position. For additional details regarding these and other uncertainties, see Forward-Looking Statements and Information; Item 1A. Risk Factors; Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 3, Regulatory Matters; and Note 4, Contingencies and Commitments.
Consumers Electric Utility Outlook and Uncertainties
Clean Energy Plan: In 2019, the MPSC approved the IRP that Consumers filed in 2018, which details its Clean Energy Plan. Through its Clean Energy Plan, Consumers expects to reduce carbon emissions of its owned generation by more than 90 percent from its 2005 levels by 2040 and eliminate the use of coal to generate electricity by 2040. The Clean Energy Plan provides the foundation for Consumers’ goal to achieve net-zero carbon emissions from its electric business by 2040. Under this net-zero goal, Consumers plans to eliminate the impact of carbon emissions created by the electricity it generates or purchases for customers. Consumers is required to file a new IRP by June 2021.
Specifically, the Clean Energy Plan provides for:
•the retirement of the D.E. Karn 1 & 2 coal-fueled generating units, totaling 460 MW, in 2023
•the potential retirement of the J.H. Campbell 1 & 2 coal-fueled generating units, totaling 540 MW, in 2031 or earlier
Under the Clean Energy Plan, Consumers will replace the capacity to be retired with:
•increased demand response programs
•increased energy efficiency
•increased renewable energy generation
•conservation voltage reduction
•increased pumped storage
Consumers will competitively bid new capacity and at least 50 percent of the new capacity will be built and owned by third parties; the remainder will be owned and operated by Consumers.
In support of its Clean Energy Plan, Consumers issued requests for proposals in September 2019 and July 2020, each to acquire up to 300 MW of new capacity from projects to be operational in Michigan’s Lower Peninsula by May 2023. Specifically, Consumers solicited offers to enter into PPAs with or purchase solar generation projects ranging in size from 20 MW to 150 MW and to enter into PPAs with PURPA qualifying facilities up to 20 MW. Any contracts entered into as a result of the request for proposals would be subject to MPSC approval.
As a result of the 2019 request for proposals, in December 2020, Consumers entered into a 25-year PPA under which it will purchase 140 MW of renewable capacity, energy, and RECs from a solar generating facility to be constructed in Calhoun County, Michigan. The facility is expected to be operational in 2022. Also, in January 2021, Consumers entered into an agreement to purchase a solar generating facility under development in Michigan, with capacity of up to 150 MW. Consumers expects to take full ownership and begin commercial operation of the project in 2022. Both of these agreements are subject to MPSC approval.
Renewable Energy Plan: The 2016 Energy Law raised the renewable energy standard to 15 percent in 2021, with an interim target of 12.5 percent in 2019. Consumers met the interim target for 2019 and demonstrated its compliance in the 2019 renewable energy cost reconciliation that the MPSC approved in February 2021. Consumers is required to submit RECs, which represent proof that the associated electricity was generated from a renewable energy resource, in an amount equal to at least the required percentage of Consumers’ electric sales volume each year. Under its renewable energy plan, Consumers expects to meet its renewable energy requirement each year with a combination of newly generated RECs and previously generated RECs carried over from prior years.
Under Consumers’ renewable energy plan, the MPSC has approved the acquisition of up to 525 MW of new wind generation projects and authorized Consumers to earn a 10.7 percent return on equity on any projects approved by the MPSC. Specifically, the MPSC has approved the following:
•purchase and construction of a 150-MW wind generation project in Gratiot County, Michigan; the project became operational in December 2020
•purchase of a wind generation project under development, with capacity of up to 166 MW, in Hillsdale, Michigan; Consumers expects to take full ownership and begin commercial operation of the project in early 2021
In December 2020, Consumers entered into an agreement to purchase a wind generation project under development, with capacity of up to 201 MW, in Gratiot County, Michigan. Consumers expects to take full ownership and begin commercial operation of the project in 2022. The agreement is subject to MPSC approval.
The MPSC also approved the execution of a 20-year PPA under which Consumers will purchase 100 MW of renewable capacity, energy, and RECs from a 149-MW solar generating facility to be constructed in Calhoun County, Michigan; the facility is expected to be operational in 2022.
Electric Customer Deliveries and Revenue: Consumers’ electric customer deliveries are seasonal and largely dependent on Michigan’s economy. The consumption of electric energy typically increases in the summer months, due primarily to the use of air conditioners and other cooling equipment. In addition, Consumers’ electric rates, which follow a seasonal rate design, are higher in the summer months than in the remaining months of the year.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, Consumers has delayed implementation of a summer peak time-of-use rate for electric residential customers, originally planned to begin in June 2020. The summer peak time-of-use rate will allow customers to take advantage of lower-cost energy during off-peak times during the summer months. Customers could reduce their electric bills by shifting their consumption from on-peak to off-peak times. The MPSC approved delaying implementation of the summer peak time-of-use rate to 2021, recognizing that more customers may be at home during the pandemic and may not have the same opportunities to manage peak power consumption.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Michigan’s Governor issued various executive orders requiring all non-essential businesses to close temporarily and Michigan residents to stay home during the period from March 23, 2020 to June 8, 2020. Subsequent executive orders gradually eased restrictions. In October 2020, the Michigan Supreme Court issued an opinion that limits the governor’s authority to issue executive orders relating to the COVID-19 pandemic. Subsequently, the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services issued emergency orders maintaining and then increasing restrictions on indoor gatherings. Most recent orders have resulted in stepped-up enforcement of remote work in lieu of in-person work when possible and restrictions on certain entertainment venues and indoor dining at restaurants. Presently, most businesses are now open at limited capacity and with safety measures in place.
During the period from April 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020, a period covering the majority of the pandemic to date, weather-normalized electric deliveries were approximately five percent lower than deliveries during the same period in 2019, due mainly to a decline in deliveries to commercial and industrial customers of approximately 13 percent. This decline, however, was offset partially by an increase of approximately seven percent in deliveries to residential customers. Consumers cannot predict the long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In response to the pandemic, Consumers initially suspended shut-offs of service for non-payment and extended payment protection plans for low-income and senior customers. Consumers slowly began resuming shut-offs of service for non-payment in late July 2020 for commercial and industrial customers and in October 2020 for residential customers. Consumers has experienced and anticipates it will continue to experience increased uncollectible accounts in the near term, but cannot predict the long-term impact of the pandemic on Michigan’s economy or its customers.
Over the next five years, Consumers expects weather-normalized electric deliveries to remain stable relative to 2020. This outlook reflects the effects of energy waste reduction programs and appliance efficiency standards offset largely by modest growth in electric demand. Actual delivery levels will depend on:
•energy conservation measures and results of energy waste reduction programs
•weather fluctuations
•Michigan’s economic conditions, including utilization, expansion, or contraction of manufacturing facilities, population trends, and housing activity
Electric ROA: Michigan law allows electric customers in Consumers’ service territory to buy electric generation service from alternative electric suppliers in an aggregate amount capped at ten percent of Consumers’ sales, with certain exceptions. At December 31, 2020, electric deliveries under the ROA program were at the ten-percent limit. Of Consumers’ 1.9 million electric customers, fewer than 300, or 0.02 percent, purchased electric generation service under the ROA program.
The 2016 Energy Law established a path to ensure that forward capacity is secured for all electric customers in Michigan, including customers served by alternative electric suppliers under ROA. The new law also authorized the MPSC to ensure that alternative electric suppliers have procured enough capacity to cover their anticipated capacity requirements for the four-year forward period. In 2017, the MPSC issued an order establishing a state reliability mechanism for Consumers. Under this mechanism, beginning June 2018, if an alternative electric supplier does not demonstrate that it has procured its capacity requirements for the four-year forward period, its customers will pay a set charge to the utility for capacity that is not provided by the alternative electric supplier. All alternative electric suppliers have demonstrated that they have procured their capacity requirements through the MISO planning year beginning June 1, 2023.
During 2017, the MPSC issued orders finding that it has statutory authority to determine and implement a local clearing requirement, which requires all electric suppliers to demonstrate that a portion of the capacity procured to serve customers during peak demand times is located in the MISO footprint in Michigan’s Lower Peninsula. In 2018, the Michigan Court of Appeals issued a decision that the MPSC does not have statutory authority to implement such a requirement for individual alternative electric suppliers. In April 2020, the Michigan Supreme Court issued a unanimous opinion reversing the Court of Appeals’ decision and determined that the 2016 Energy Law authorizes the MPSC to implement a local clearing requirement on individual alternative electric suppliers. The Michigan Supreme Court remanded the case to the Court of Appeals to consider a procedural challenge previously undecided by the Court of Appeals; this challenge concerns the process that the MPSC used in 2017 to consider a local clearing requirement and does not affect the substance of the MPSC’s authority to implement a local clearing requirement for future planning periods. In April 2020, ABATE filed a motion for rehearing of the Michigan Supreme Court’s decision; the Michigan Supreme Court denied ABATE’s motion in May 2020. In June 2020, the Michigan Court of Appeals issued a letter resubmitting the case for its consideration of the Michigan Supreme Court’s remand of the procedural issue. In December 2020, the Michigan Court of Appeals issued a decision in response to the Michigan Supreme Court’s procedural remand upholding the MPSC’s procedure for determining capacity obligations of electric providers under the 2016 Energy Law. The Michigan Court of Appeals also held that the 2016 Energy Law’s provision for the MPSC to implement a local clearing requirement does not constitute an unlawful delegation of the Michigan Legislature’s authority.
In September 2020, ABATE and another intervenor filed a complaint against the MPSC in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan challenging the constitutionality of a local clearing requirement. The complaint requests the federal court to issue a permanent injunction prohibiting the MPSC from implementing a local clearing requirement on individual electric providers. In
December 2020, Consumers filed a motion to intervene and defend the local clearing requirement in that federal litigation; this motion was granted in January 2021.
Electric Rate Matters: Rate matters are critical to Consumers’ electric utility business. For additional details on rate matters, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 3, Regulatory Matters and Note 4, Contingencies and Commitments.
Depreciation Rate Case: In July 2020, Consumers filed a depreciation case related to Ludington, requesting to increase depreciation expense, and its recovery of that expense, by $17 million annually. In February 2021, the MPSC approved a settlement agreement that decreases depreciation expense by $9 million annually based on December 31, 2019 balances. The new depreciation rates will be reflected in rates determined in Consumers’ next-filed electric rate case.
PSCR Plan: Consumers submitted its 2021 PSCR plan to the MPSC in September 2020 and, in accordance with its proposed plan, self-implemented the 2021 PSCR charge beginning in January 2021. In January 2021, Consumers filed an amendment to its plan with the MPSC and will self-implement a new 2021 PSCR charge beginning in May 2021.
Electric Environmental Outlook: Consumers’ operations are subject to various state and federal environmental laws and regulations. Consumers estimates that it will incur capital expenditures of $260 million from 2021 through 2025 to continue to comply with RCRA, the Clean Water Act, the Clean Air Act, and numerous state and federal environmental regulations. Consumers expects to recover these costs in customer rates, but cannot guarantee this result. Consumers’ primary environmental compliance focus includes, but is not limited to, the following matters.
Air Quality: Multiple air quality regulations apply, or may apply, to Consumers.
CSAPR, which became effective in 2015, requires Michigan and many other states to improve air quality by reducing power plant emissions that, according to EPA computer models, contribute to ground-level ozone and fine particle pollution in other downwind states. In 2016, the EPA finalized new ozone season standards for CSAPR, which became effective in 2017. In October 2020, in response to a court-ordered remand due to litigation, the EPA proposed a revised CSAPR rule to reflect updated emission reductions from electric generating units in 12 states, including Michigan. The EPA intends to finalize the rule by March 2021, and has made provisions for program implementation by May 2021, with continued emission reductions through 2024. Consumers is evaluating its emission compliance strategy for existing units based on the proposed number of allowances allocated to Michigan for 2021 through 2024.
In 2012, the EPA published emission standards for electric generating units, known as MATS, based on Section 112 of the Clean Air Act. Under MATS, all of Consumers’ existing coal-fueled electric generating units were required to add additional controls for hazardous air pollutants. Consumers met the deadline for five coal-fueled units and two oil/gas-fueled units it continues to operate and retired its seven remaining coal-fueled units. In addition, in May 2020, the EPA finalized changes to the supporting analysis used to enact MATS, but did not make any changes to the MATS regulations. These changes do not impact Consumers’ MATS compliance strategy because, if the MATS regulations were repealed, Consumers would then be required to comply with the Michigan Mercury Rule, which has similar requirements to MATS. In addition, Consumers must comply with emission limits in its renewable operating permits, which have similar emission requirements to MATS.
In 2015, the EPA lowered the NAAQS for ozone. The 2015 ozone NAAQS made it more difficult to construct or modify power plants and other emission sources in areas of the country that have not met the 2015 ozone standard. In 2018, the EPA designated certain areas of Michigan as not meeting the ozone standard. None of Consumers’ fossil-fuel-fired generating units are located in these areas. Additionally,
the State of Michigan has convened industry workgroups to seek implementation and control strategy ideas for statewide compliance of the 2015 ozone standard. In August 2020, the EPA proposed to retain the 2015 NAAQS for ozone without revision, and finalized this regulatory decision in December 2020. Consumers does not expect that any litigation involving NAAQS for ozone will have a material adverse impact on its generating assets.
Consumers’ strategy to comply with air quality regulations, including CSAPR, NAAQS, and MATS, as well as its legal obligations, involved the installation and operation of emission control equipment at some facilities and the suspension of operations at others; however, Consumers continues to evaluate these rules in conjunction with other EPA and EGLE rulemakings, litigation, executive orders, treaties, and congressional action. This evaluation could result in:
•a change in Consumers’ fuel mix
•changes in the types of generating units Consumers may purchase or build in the future
•changes in how certain units are used
•the retirement, mothballing, or repowering with an alternative fuel of some of Consumers’ generating units
•changes in Consumers’ environmental compliance costs
Greenhouse Gases: There have been numerous legislative and regulatory initiatives at the state, regional, national, and international levels that involve the potential regulation of greenhouse gases. Consumers continues to monitor and comment on these initiatives and to follow litigation involving greenhouse gases.
In 2015, the EPA finalized new rules pursuant to Section 111(b) of the Clean Air Act to limit carbon dioxide emissions from new electric generating units, as well as modified or reconstructed electric generating units. New coal-fueled units would not be able to meet this limit without installing carbon dioxide control equipment using such methods as carbon capture and sequestration.
In 2018, the EPA proposed a revised Section 111(b) regulation to replace the 2015 standard rule limiting carbon dioxide emissions from new electric generating units, citing limited availability and high costs of carbon capture and sequestration equipment as reasons to change the 2015 rule. The revised Section 111(b) regulation would require new coal-fueled generating units to meet a highly efficient steam cycle performance standard. If finalized, Consumers does not expect this proposal to change its existing environmental strategy.
In 2019, the EPA finalized the Affordable Clean Energy rule. The rule requires individual states to evaluate coal-fueled power plants for heat-rate improvements that could increase overall plant efficiency. The evaluations to be performed by the State of Michigan may require Consumers to make heat-rate improvements at its J.H. Campbell plant beginning in the mid-2020s. However, the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals vacated and remanded this rule to the EPA in January 2021. Consumers cannot evaluate the potential impact of the remand until the EPA acts and any additional appeals are extinguished.
In 2015, a group of 195 countries, including the U.S., finalized the Paris Agreement, which governs carbon dioxide reduction measures beginning in 2020. While the U.S. withdrew from the Paris Agreement, it has taken the necessary steps to rejoin the Paris Agreement in 2021. At this time, Consumers does not expect any adverse changes to its environmental strategy as a result of these events.
In September 2020, Michigan’s Governor signed an executive order creating the Michigan Healthy Climate Plan, which outlines goals for Michigan to achieve economy-wide net-zero greenhouse gas emissions and to be carbon neutral by 2050. The executive order aims for a 28-percent reduction below 2005 levels of greenhouse gas emissions by 2025. Consumers has already surpassed the 28-percent reduction milestone for its owned electric generation and previously announced, in February 2020, a goal
of achieving net-zero carbon emissions from its electric business by 2040. The order directs EGLE to develop and oversee an action plan for achieving these goals. In addition, the Governor established the Council on Climate Solutions, an advisory group of key stakeholders to be appointed by the Governor that will assist EGLE in implementing the plan. These goals are aspirational in nature and any changes in law or regulation to achieve these goals would need to be approved by Michigan Legislature or the relevant regulatory agency. The MPSC has requested comments from utilities and other stakeholders on how the Governor’s goal should be incorporated into future IRP filings. Consumers does not expect any adverse changes to its environmental strategy as a result of these events.
While Consumers cannot predict the outcome of changes in U.S. policy or of other legislative or regulatory initiatives involving the potential regulation of greenhouse gases, it intends to continue to move forward with its Clean Energy Plan, its present net-zero carbon reduction goal, and its emphasis on supply diversity. Consumers will continue to monitor regulatory and legislative activity and related litigation regarding greenhouse gas emissions standards that may affect electric generating units.
Increased frequency of severe weather events, including those due to climate change, could materially impact Consumers’ facilities, energy sales, and results of operations. Consumers is unable to predict these events or their financial impact; however, Consumers evaluates the potential physical impacts of climate change on its operations, including increased storm activity, increased rainfall, and higher lake and river levels. Consumers is taking steps to mitigate these risks as appropriate.
Litigation, international treaties, executive orders, federal laws and regulations (including regulations by the EPA), and state laws and regulations, if enacted or ratified, could ultimately require Consumers to replace equipment, install additional emission control equipment, purchase emission allowances or credits, curtail operations, arrange for alternative sources of supply, mothball or retire facilities that generate certain emissions, pursue energy efficiency or demand response measures more swiftly, or take other steps to manage or lower the emission of greenhouse gases. Although associated capital or operating costs relating to greenhouse gas regulation or legislation could be material and cost recovery cannot be assured, Consumers expects to recover these costs and capital expenditures in rates consistent with the recovery of other reasonable costs of complying with environmental laws and regulations.
CCRs: In 2015, the EPA published a final rule regulating CCRs under RCRA. The final rule adopts minimum standards for beneficially reusing and disposing of non-hazardous CCRs. The rule establishes new minimum requirements for site location, groundwater monitoring, flood protection, storm water design, fugitive dust control, and public disclosure of information, including any groundwater protection standard exceedances. The rule also sets out conditions under which CCR units would be forced to cease receiving CCR and non-CCR wastewater and initiate closure based on the inability to achieve minimum safety standards, meet a location standard, or meet minimum groundwater standards. Consumers has aligned with EGLE on closure plans for each of its unlined ash ponds to ensure coordination between federal and state requirements. The unlined ash ponds have ceased operation and, where applicable, have been replaced with double-lined ash ponds or concrete tanks. Significant closure work has been completed at the remaining ash ponds.
Due to litigation, many aspects of the 2015 CCR rule have been remanded to the EPA, which has resulted in various new rulemakings. These new rulemakings are now in litigation. Continued litigation will add uncertainty around requirements for compliance and state permit programs.
Separately, Congress passed legislation in 2016 allowing participating states to develop permitting programs for CCRs under RCRA. In 2018, the Michigan Legislature adopted a permitting program, which requires the EPA’s authorization. This program should reduce costly, duplicative oversight over CCRs and provide local oversight to CCR issues unique to Michigan. In April 2020, EGLE submitted a regulatory package for Michigan’s permit program to the EPA for its review. Federal rulemaking challenges may delay EPA approval of the Michigan permitting program.
Consumers has aligned with EGLE on closure plans for all of its coal ash disposal sites, including those subject to the EPA’s 2015 CCR rule, and adjusted its recorded ARO accordingly. Consumers has historically been authorized to recover in electric rates costs related to coal ash disposal sites.
Water: Multiple water-related regulations apply, or may apply, to Consumers.
The EPA regulates cooling water intake systems of existing electric generating plants under Section 316(b) of the Clean Water Act and the corresponding rules that were revised in 2014. The rules seek to reduce alleged harmful impacts on aquatic organisms, such as fish. In 2018, Consumers submitted to EGLE for approval all required studies and recommended plans to comply with Section 316(b), but has not yet received final approval.
In 2015, the EPA released its final effluent limitation guidelines for steam electric generating plants. These guidelines, which are presently being litigated, set stringent new requirements for the discharge from electric generating units into surface waters. The EPA published a final rule in October 2020, with an effective date of December 2020, revising the 2015 guidelines related to the discharge of certain wastewater streams from electric generating units. The rule also allows for extension of the compliance deadline from the end of 2023 to the end of 2025, upon approval by EGLE through the NPDES permitting process. Consumers does not expect any adverse changes to its environmental strategy as a result of these revisions to the rule.
In recent years, the EPA and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers have proposed rules redefining “Waters of the United States,” which defines the scope of federal jurisdiction under the Clean Water Act, and other changes to the Clean Water Act regulations. For example, the EPA recently finalized a rule repealing the 2015 definition of “Waters of the United States” and, in January 2020, released a rule with its new definition. The new definition narrows the scope of federal jurisdiction and reduces the frequency of dual jurisdiction in states with authority to regulate the same waters; Michigan is one such state. Consumers does not expect adverse changes to its environmental strategy as a result of the new definition, which is presently being litigated in multiple jurisdictions.
Many of Consumers’ facilities maintain NPDES permits, which are renewed every five years and are vital to the facilities’ operations. Failure of EGLE to renew any NPDES permit, a successful appeal against a permit, a change in the interpretation or scope of NPDES permitting, or onerous terms contained in a permit could have a significant detrimental effect on the operations of a facility.
Other Matters: Other electric environmental matters could have a material impact on Consumers’ outlook. For additional details on other electric environmental matters, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 4, Contingencies and Commitments-Consumers Electric Utility Contingencies-Electric Environmental Matters.
Retention Incentive Program: In October 2019, Consumers announced a retention incentive program to ensure necessary staffing at the D.E. Karn generating complex through the anticipated retirement of the coal-fueled generating units. Based on the number of employees that have chosen to participate, the aggregate cost of the program through 2023 is estimated to be $35 million. Consumers expects to recognize $8 million of retention benefit costs in 2021; this expense will be deferred as a regulatory asset. In its order in Consumers’ 2020 electric rate case, the MPSC approved deferred accounting treatment for these costs. For additional details on this program, see Note 22, Asset Sale and Exit Activities.
Consumers Gas Utility Outlook and Uncertainties
Gas Deliveries: Consumers’ gas customer deliveries are seasonal. The peak demand for natural gas typically occurs in the winter due to colder temperatures and the resulting use of natural gas as heating fuel.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on weather-normalized gas deliveries during 2020 was not material. Consumers has experienced and anticipates it will continue to experience increased uncollectible accounts in the near term, but cannot predict the long-term impact of the pandemic on Michigan’s economy or its customers.
Over the next five years, Consumers expects weather-normalized gas deliveries to remain stable relative to 2020. This outlook reflects modest growth in gas demand offset by the predicted effects of energy efficiency and conservation. Actual delivery levels from year to year may vary from this expectation as a result of:
•weather fluctuations
•use by power producers
•availability and development of renewable energy sources
•gas price changes
•Michigan economic conditions, including population trends and housing activity
•the price of competing energy sources or fuels
•energy efficiency and conservation impacts
Gas Rate Matters: Rate matters are critical to Consumers’ gas utility business. For additional details on rate matters, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 3, Regulatory Matters and Note 4, Contingencies and Commitments.
GCR Plan: Consumers submitted its 2021-2022 GCR plan to the MPSC in December 2020 and, in accordance with its proposed plan, expects to self-implement the 2021-2022 GCR charge beginning in April 2021.
Gas Pipeline and Storage Integrity and Safety: In October 2019, PHMSA published a final rule that expands federal safety standards for gas transmission pipelines. To comply with the rule, Consumers will incur increased capital costs to install and remediate pipelines as well as increased operating and maintenance costs to expand inspections, maintenance, and monitoring of its existing pipelines. The requirements in the regulation took effect July 1, 2020, with various implementation phases over numerous years.
In February 2020, PHMSA finalized an interim rule it had published in 2016; this rule established minimum federal safety standards for underground natural gas storage facilities. To comply with the rule, Consumers incurred increased capital and operating and maintenance costs to expand inspections, maintenance, and monitoring of its underground gas storage facilities.
Although associated capital or operating and maintenance costs relating to these regulations could be material and cost recovery cannot be assured, Consumers expects to recover such costs and capital expenditures in rates consistent with the recovery of other reasonable costs of complying with laws and regulations. Consumers will continue to monitor gas safety regulations and continue implementation of the American Petroleum Institute’s Recommended Practice 1173, Pipeline Safety Management Systems. This program minimizes gas system asset- and performance-related risks by ensuring that there are policies, procedures, work instructions, forms, and records in place to streamline adoption and deployment of any existing or future regulations.
Gas Environmental Outlook: Consumers expects to incur response activity costs at a number of sites, including 23 former MGP sites. For additional details, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 4, Contingencies and Commitments-Consumers Gas Utility Contingencies-Gas Environmental Matters.
Greenhouse Gases: Consumers is making voluntary efforts to reduce its gas utility’s methane emissions. In 2019, Consumers released its Methane Reduction Plan, which set a goal of net-zero methane emissions from its natural gas delivery system by 2030. Under its Methane Reduction Plan, Consumers plans to reduce methane emissions from its system by about 80 percent by accelerating the replacement of aging pipe, rehabilitating or retiring outdated infrastructure, and adopting new technologies and practices. The remaining emissions will be offset by purchasing and/or producing renewable natural gas.
In September 2020, Michigan’s Governor signed an executive order creating the Michigan Healthy Climate Plan, which outlines goals for Michigan to achieve economy-wide net-zero greenhouse gas emissions and to be carbon neutral by 2050. The executive order aims for a 28-percent reduction below 2005 levels of greenhouse gas emissions by 2025. These new goals could have an impact on Consumers’ gas business over the long term. For additional details on the executive order, see Consumers Electric Utility Outlook and Uncertainties-Electric Environmental Outlook.
There is increasing interest at the federal, state, and local levels involving potential regulation of greenhouse gases or its sources. Such regulation, if adopted, may involve requirements to reduce methane emissions from Consumers’ gas utility operations and carbon dioxide emissions from natural gas customer use. No such measures apply to Consumers at this time. Consumers continues to monitor these initiatives and comment as appropriate. Consumers cannot predict the impact of any potential future legislation or regulation on its gas utility.
Consumers Electric Utility and Gas Utility Outlook and Uncertainties
Energy Waste Reduction Plan: The 2016 Energy Law authorized incentives for demand response programs and expanded existing incentives for energy efficiency programs, referring to the combined initiatives as energy waste reduction programs. The 2016 Energy Law:
•extended the requirement to achieve annual reductions of 1.0 percent in customers’ electricity use through 2021 and 0.75 percent in customers’ natural gas use indefinitely
•removed limits on investments under the program and provided for a higher return on those investments; together, these provisions effectively doubled the financial incentives Consumers may earn for exceeding the statutory targets
•established a goal of 35 percent combined renewable energy and energy waste reduction by 2025; Consumers has achieved 25 percent combined renewable energy and energy waste reduction through 2020
Additionally, the MPSC has approved the recovery of demand response costs and an associated financial incentive based on demand response target performance.
Under its energy waste reduction plan, Consumers provides its customers with incentives to reduce usage by offering energy audits, rebates and discounts on purchases of highly efficient appliances, and other incentives and programs. The COVID-19 pandemic may impact Consumers’ ability to execute energy efficiency programs effectively and, accordingly, could affect Consumers’ ability to exceed its statutory savings targets and earn the maximum energy waste reduction incentive for 2021. Consumers cannot predict the ultimate financial impact of the pandemic on its 2021 energy waste reduction incentive.
Enterprises Outlook and Uncertainties
CMS Energy’s primary focus with respect to its enterprises businesses is to maximize the value of generating assets, its share of which represents 1,480 MW of capacity, and to pursue opportunities for the development of renewable generation projects.
In July 2020, CMS Enterprises purchased an ownership interest in Aviator Wind, a 525-MW wind generation project in Coke County, Texas. The project was completed and became operational in September 2020. Of the project’s 525-MW nameplate capacity, 420 MW has been committed under long-term PPAs. For additional details, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 21, Variable Interest Entities.
The enterprises segment’s assets may be affected by environmental laws and regulations. The 2015 ozone NAAQS made it more difficult to construct or modify power plants and other emission sources in areas of the country that have not met the 2015 ozone standard. In 2018, the EPA designated certain areas of Michigan as not meeting the ozone standard. The enterprises segment’s DIG plant located in Dearborn, Michigan is in one such area and, as a result, would be subject to additional permitting restrictions in the event of any future modifications. For additional details regarding the new ozone NAAQS, see Consumers Electric Utility Outlook and Uncertainties-Electric Environmental Outlook.
Trends, uncertainties, and other matters related to the enterprises segment that could have a material impact on CMS Energy’s consolidated income, cash flows, or financial position include:
•investment in and financial benefits received from renewable energy and energy storage projects
•changes in energy and capacity prices
•severe weather events and climate change associated with increasing levels of greenhouse gases
•changes in commodity prices and interest rates on certain derivative contracts that do not qualify for hedge accounting and must be marked to market through earnings
•changes in various environmental laws, regulations, principles, or practices, or in their interpretation
•indemnity and environmental remediation obligations at Bay Harbor, including an inability to renew an NPDES permit
•obligations related to a tax claim from the government of Equatorial Guinea
•representations, warranties, and indemnities provided by CMS Energy in connection with previous sales of assets
For additional details regarding the enterprises segment’s uncertainties, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 4, Contingencies and Commitments.
EnerBank Outlook and Uncertainties
EnerBank is a Utah state-chartered, FDIC-insured industrial bank providing primarily unsecured, fixed-rate installment loans throughout the U.S. to finance home improvements. The carrying value of EnerBank’s loan portfolio was $2.9 billion at December 31, 2020. The 12-month rolling average net default rate on loans held by EnerBank was 1.1 percent at December 31, 2020. For additional details regarding EnerBank’s loan portfolio, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 8, Notes Receivable.
EnerBank’s loan portfolio was funded primarily by certificates of deposit of $2.8 billion at December 31, 2020. With its loan portfolio funded by certificates of deposit, EnerBank has not had to rely
on access to the financial and capital markets in order to fund loan growth during the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, EnerBank has experienced market share gains as new customers have transitioned from less financially stable competitors. Accordingly, EnerBank has experienced increased lending growth in recent months and expects this trend to continue during 2021. Over the next five years, EnerBank expects lending growth of approximately seven percent annually. For additional details regarding EnerBank’s capital and liquidity, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Capital Resources and Liquidity
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and consistent with FDIC guidance, EnerBank offered new payment accommodations for current qualifying customers. EnerBank cannot predict the longer-term impacts of the pandemic, but could experience slower lending growth, higher loan write-offs, and increased loan modifications.
Other Outlook and Uncertainties
Employee Separation Program: In December 2019, CMS Energy and Consumers announced a voluntary separation program for non-union employees. For the year ended December 31, 2020, CMS Energy and Consumers recorded an after-tax charge of $9 million related to the program, under which 140 employees accepted and were approved for early separation. As a result of the program, CMS Energy and Consumers expect to benefit from future cost savings, as employee staffing levels will be better matched to workload demand, which reflects the companies’ ongoing workforce productivity improvements.
Union Contracts: The UWUA represents Consumers’ operating, maintenance, construction, and customer contact center employees. The USW represents Zeeland plant employees. The UWUA and USW agreements expired and new agreements were ratified in 2020. The new agreements ratified in 2020 provide the following:
•three-percent pay increases to operating, maintenance, and construction employees and the same annual increase through 2024
•three-and-a-half-percent pay increases to customer contact center employees
•three-percent pay increases to Zeeland Plant employees and the same annual increase through 2024
Litigation: CMS Energy, Consumers, and certain of their subsidiaries are named as parties in various litigation matters, as well as in administrative proceedings before various courts and governmental agencies, arising in the ordinary course of business. For additional details regarding these and other legal matters, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 3, Regulatory Matters and Note 4, Contingencies and Commitments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following information is important to understand CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ results of operations and financial condition. For additional accounting policies, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 1, Significant Accounting Policies.
In the preparation of CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ consolidated financial statements, estimates and assumptions are used that may affect reported amounts and disclosures. CMS Energy and Consumers use accounting estimates for asset valuations, unbilled revenue, depreciation, amortization, financial and derivative instruments, employee benefits, stock-based compensation, the effects of regulation, indemnities, contingencies, and AROs. Actual results may differ from estimated results due to changes in the regulatory environment, regulatory decisions, lawsuits, competition, and other factors. CMS Energy and Consumers consider all relevant factors in making these assessments.
Accounting for the Effects of Industry Regulation: Because Consumers has regulated operations, it uses regulatory accounting to recognize the effects of the regulators’ decisions on its financial statements. Consumers continually assesses whether future recovery of its regulatory assets is probable by considering communications and experience with its regulators and changes in the regulatory environment. If Consumers determined that recovery of a regulatory asset were not probable, Consumers would be required to write off the asset and immediately recognize the expense in earnings.
Contingencies: CMS Energy and Consumers make judgments regarding the future outcome of various matters that give rise to contingent liabilities. For such matters, they record liabilities when they are considered probable and reasonably estimable, based on all available information. In particular, CMS Energy and Consumers are participating in various environmental remediation projects for which they have recorded liabilities. The recorded amounts represent estimates that may take into account such considerations as the number of sites, the anticipated scope, cost, and timing of remediation work, the available technology, applicable regulations, and the requirements of governmental authorities. For remediation projects in which the timing of estimated expenditures is considered reliably determinable, CMS Energy and Consumers record the liability at its net present value, using a discount rate equal to the interest rate on monetary assets that are essentially risk-free and have maturities comparable to that of the environmental liability. The amount recorded for any contingency may differ from actual costs incurred when the contingency is resolved. For additional details, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 4, Contingencies and Commitments.
Derivative Instruments: CMS Energy and Consumers account for certain contracts as derivative instruments. If a contract is a derivative and does not qualify for the normal purchases and sales exception, it is recorded on the consolidated balance sheets at its fair value. At CMS Energy, if the derivative is accounted for as a cash flow hedge, unrealized gains and losses from changes in the fair value of the derivative are recognized in AOCI and subsequently recognized in earnings when the hedged transactions impact earnings. If the derivative is accounted for as a fair value hedge, changes in the fair value of the derivative and changes in the fair value of the hedged item due to the hedged risk are recognized in earnings. For the FTRs at Consumers, changes in fair value are deferred as regulatory assets or liabilities.
The criteria used to determine if an instrument qualifies for derivative accounting or for an exception from derivative accounting are complex and often require judgment in application. Changes in business strategies or market conditions, as well as a requirement to apply different interpretations of the derivative accounting literature, could result in changes in accounting for a single contract or groups of contracts,
which could have a material impact on CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ financial statements. For additional details on CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ derivatives and how the fair values of derivatives are determined, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 6, Fair Value Measurements.
Income Taxes: The amount of income taxes paid by CMS Energy is subject to ongoing audits by federal, state, and foreign tax authorities, which can result in proposed assessments. An estimate of the potential outcome of any uncertain tax issue is highly judgmental. CMS Energy believes adequate reserves have been provided for these exposures; however, future results may include favorable or unfavorable adjustments to the estimated tax liabilities in the period the assessments are made or resolved or when statutes of limitation on potential assessments expire. Additionally, CMS Energy’s judgment as to the ability to recover its deferred tax assets may change. CMS Energy believes the valuation allowances related to its deferred tax assets are adequate, but future results may include favorable or unfavorable adjustments. As a result, CMS Energy’s effective tax rate may fluctuate significantly over time. For additional details, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 14, Income Taxes.
Pension and OPEB: CMS Energy and Consumers provide retirement pension benefits to certain employees under non-contributory DB Pension Plans, and they provide postretirement health and life benefits to qualifying retired employees under an OPEB Plan.
CMS Energy and Consumers record liabilities for pension and OPEB on their consolidated balance sheets at the present value of the future obligations, net of any plan assets. The calculation of the liabilities and associated expenses requires the expertise of actuaries, and requires many assumptions, including:
•life expectancies
•discount rates
•expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
•rate of compensation increases
•expected health care costs
A change in these assumptions could change significantly CMS Energy’s and Consumers’ recorded liabilities and associated expenses.
Presented in the following table are estimates of costs (credits) and cash contributions through 2023 for the DB Pension Plans and OPEB Plan. Actual future costs and contributions will depend on future investment performance, discount rates, and various factors related to the participants of the DB Pension
Plans and OPEB Plan. CMS Energy and Consumers will, at a minimum, contribute to the plans as needed to comply with federal funding requirements.
1Consumers’ pension and OPEB costs are recoverable through its general ratemaking process.
Lowering the expected long-term rate of return on the assets of the DB Pension Plans by 25 basis points would increase estimated pension cost for 2021 by $7 million for both CMS Energy and Consumers. Lowering the PBO discount rates by 25 basis points would increase estimated pension cost for 2021 by $5 million for both CMS Energy and Consumers.
Pension and OPEB plan assets are accounted for and disclosed at fair value. Fair value measurements incorporate assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability, including assumptions about risk. Development of these assumptions may require judgment.
For additional details on postretirement benefits, including the fair value measurements for the assets of the DB Pension Plans and OPEB Plan, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 12, Retirement Benefits.
Unbilled Revenues: Consumers’ customers are billed monthly in cycles having billing dates that do not generally coincide with the end of a calendar month. This results in customers having received electricity or natural gas that they have not been billed for as of the month-end. Consumers estimates its unbilled revenues by applying an average billed rate to total unbilled deliveries for each customer class. For additional information on unbilled revenues, see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 16, Revenue.
New Accounting Standards
There are no new accounting standards issued but not yet effective that are expected to have a material impact on CMS Energy’s or Consumers’ consolidated financial statements.