ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Forward Looking Statements
This section and other parts of this Form 10-K annual report includes "forward-looking statements", that involves risks and uncertainties. All statements other than statements of historical facts, included in this Form 10-K that address activities, events, or developments that we expect or anticipate will or may occur in the future, including such things as future capital expenditures (including the amount and nature thereof), business strategy and measures to implement strategy, competitive strength, goals, expansion and growth of our business and operations, plans, references to future success, reference to intentions as to future matters, and other such matters are forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as "may," "will," "should," "expects," "plans," "anticipates," "believes," "estimates," "predicts," "potential," or "continue," or the negative of such terms or other comparable terminology. These statements are only predictions. Actual events or results may differ materially. These statements are based upon certain assumptions and analyses made by us in light of our experience and our perception of historical trends, current conditions and expected future developments as well as other factors that we believe are appropriate in the circumstances. However, whether actual results and developments will conform to our expectations and predictions is subject to a number of risks, uncertainties, and other factors, many of which are beyond our control.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements. Moreover, we do not assume responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of such forward-looking statements. We are under no duty to update any of the forward-looking statements after the date of this report to conform such statements to actual results.
Overview
Chun Can Capital Group. (the "Company", "we", or "us") was incorporated under the laws of the State of Nevada on August 16, 1996. The purpose of the Company is to serve as a vehicle to effect a merger, exchange of capital stock, asset acquisition, or other business combination with a domestic or foreign private business. The company has no principal operations. The Company has a December 31 year end. As of December 31, 2020, the issued and outstanding shares of common stock totaled 33,011,
Certain statements contained below are forward-looking statements (rather than historical facts) that are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those described in the forward-looking statements.
We are considered a start-up corporation. Our auditors have issued a going concern opinion in the financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Working Capital
Cash Flows
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
REVENUES
We have generated no revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
OPERATION AND ADMINISTATIVE EXPENSES
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $68,234 compared with $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Operating expenses for 2020 consisted of an increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $68,234 from $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a net loss of $68,234, compared with net loss of $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2020, the Company's cash balance was $0 compared to cash balance of $0 as at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the Company's total assets were $0 compared to total assets of $0 as at December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had total liabilities of $58,234 compared with total liabilities of $0 as at December 31, 2019. The increase in total liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of an increase in accounts payable for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $26,361 from $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019; and an increase in due to related party for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $31,873 from $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has a working capital of ($58,234) compared with working capital of $0 at December 31, 2019.
Cashflow from Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company used $0 of cash for operating activities compared to $0 of cash used by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cashflow from Financing Activities
During the years ended December 31, 2020 the Company's net cash provided by financing activity was $0 compared to $0 cash provided by financing for year ended December31, 2019.
Subsequent Developments
None
Going Concern
We have not attained profitable operations and are dependent upon the continued financial support from our shareholders, the ability to raise equity or debt financing, and the attainment of profitable operations from our future business. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern.
OFF BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
As a "smaller reporting company" as defined by Item 10 of Regulation S-K, we are not required to provide this information.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
We have one main products, namely the concealed weapons detection system. In all cases revenue is considered earned when the product is shipped to the customer, installed (if necessary) and accepted by the customer as a completed sale. Each product has an unconditional 30-day warranty, during which time the product can be returned for a complete refund. Customers can purchase extended warranties, which provide for replacement or repair of the unit beyond the period provided by the unconditional warranty. Warranties can be purchased for various periods but generally they are for one-year period that begins after any other warranties expire. The revenue from warranties is recognized on a straight-line bases over the period covered by the warranty. Prior to the issuance of financial statements management reviews any returns subsequent to the end of the accounting period which are from sales recognized during the accounting period and makes appropriate adjustments as necessary. Product prices are fixed or determinable and products are only shipped when collectability is reasonably assured.
Stock Based Compensation
We account for share-based compensation at fair value. Stock based compensation cost for stock options granted to employees, board members and service providers is determined at the grant date using an option pricing model. The value of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expensed on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.