Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following information should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We owned and operated CAKE and getcake.com, a marketing technology company that provided a proprietary solution for advanced analytics, attribution and campaign optimization for digital marketers, and we sold this business on June 18, 2019. We contemporaneously acquired assets from Emerging Growth LLC related to its cannabis industry focused sponsored content and marketing business, or the CFN Business. Our initial ongoing operations will consist primarily of the CFN Business and we will continue to pursue strategic transactions and opportunities.
The CFN Business generates revenue through sponsored content, including articles, press releases, videos, podcasts, advertisements and other media, email advertisements and other marketing campaigns run on behalf of public and private companies in the cannabis industry, helping them reach accredited, retail and institutional investors. Most revenue is generated through contracts involving a monthly cash payment.
The CFN Business’ primary expenses come from advertising on platforms like Twitter and Facebook and from employee salaries and contractor fees. The CFN Business’ content is primarily produced by a team of freelance writers and video content is produced through various vendors. The CFN Business also incurs hosting and development costs associated with maintaining and improving its website, web applications, and mobile applications. The CFN Business operates several media platforms, including CannabisFN.com, the CannabisFN iOS app, the CFN Media YouTube channel, the CFN Media podcast, and other venues. These properties are designed to educate and inform investors interested in the cannabis industry, as well as provide a platform for the clients of the CFN Business to reach investors. The CFN Business distributes content across numerous online platforms, including the CannabisFN.com website, press releases, financial news syndicates, search engines, YouTube, iTunes, Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, LinkedIn, and others.
The CFN Business targets the legal cannabis industry. According to Grand View Research, the global cannabis industry is expected to reach $146.4 billion by 2025, driven by the legalization of medical and adult-use cannabis across a growing number of jurisdictions. According to the Marijuana Index, there are approximately 400 public companies involved in the cannabis industry, which represents the primary target market of the CFN Business. The CFN Business’ services are designed to help private companies prepare to go public and public companies grow their shareholder base through sponsored content and marketing outreach. The success of the CFN Business depends on the legal status of cannabis, investor demand for cannabis investments, investor demand for Psychedelics, investor and consumer demand for CBD and numerous other external factors.
The CFN Business competes with other public relations firms for clients, as well as online publishers for investors. Public relations competition includes investor awareness firms like Stockhouse Publishing, Catalyst Xchange, Stonebridge Partners and Midan Ventures. Online publisher competition includes firms like New Cannabis Ventures, Leafly and High Times. The CFN Business is regulated by rules established by the SEC, FINRA, and certain federal and state cannabis regulations.
Late in 2020, we launched an e-commerce network focused on the sale of general wellness CBD products. Revenue generated from this new line of business has been minimal as of December 31, 2020. However, we expect to grow and continue marketing this line of business in future periods.
Results of Operations
The following are the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019:
Net Revenues
Our revenues are generated from the sale of promotional service packages to customers ranging from 3 to 6 months. We offer different packages tailored to the type and stage of the potential customer, such as public companies looking to increase their shareholder base, as well as private companies potentially looking to go public and attract capital and publicity. Our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 represents revenue recognized for the period from June 21, 2019 through December 31, 2019 subsequent to the purchase of the CFN Business. We expect this be our primary source of revenue going forward.
Our revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 was lower than the same period in 2019, as the volume of new contracts entered into with customers has decreased in 2020 due in-part to COVID-19 and the impacts on our customers and the industry in which we operate. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had 26 contracts in progress, whereas we had 31 contracts in 2019. We expect these trends to continue for the foreseeable future.
Our revenue for 2020 also included $8,948 relating to sales of product from our e-commerce network focused on the sale of general wellness CBD products. This network was launched during the fourth quarter of 2020. We expect our revenue related to this e-commerce business to increase in future periods as we continue to grow and market this business line.
Costs of Revenue
Our cost of revenue primarily represents costs incurred associated with performing services under our customer contracts acquired under the CFN Business. We expect for our cost of revenue to increase proportionately with increases in revenues recognized in future periods. During 2020, the cost of revenue did not increase proportionately with revenue as our main customer market suffered a decline while certain online fixed costs remained the same.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $4,812,435 as compared to the prior year period. This decrease is primarily due to impairment charges of $3,767,541 for 2019, including $541,724 related to the impairment of marketing-related intangibles and $3,225,817 related to the impairment of goodwill generated from the acquisition of the CFN Business in connection with the Emerging Growth Agreement. We had no impairment charges in 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased in 2020 by $1,044,894 as compared to 2019 primarily due to additional legal and professional fees associated with the closing of the asset purchase agreement, or the Asset Purchase Agreement, with CAKE Software Inc. for the sale of the CAKE Business and the asset purchase agreement, or the Emerging Growth Agreement, with Emerging Growth, LLC for the purchase of the CFN Business and the reporting regulatory requirements associated with these transactions in 2019. We had no such transactions in 2020.
Discontinued Operations
Effective June 18, 2019, we sold substantially all of our assets associated with the CAKE Business for total proceeds of $20,892,667. Accordingly, we had a gain from discontinued operations during the year ended December 31, 2019 of $14,391,173, which includes the gain on sale of the CAKE Business of $19,473,080 offset by losses from the CAKE business through June 18, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a loss on discontinued operations resulting primarily from the loss on foreign currency translation associated with dissolving our subsidiary in the UK.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On May 15, 2019, we entered into the Asset Purchase Agreement to sell substantially all of our assets related to the CAKE Business. Concurrent with this agreement, we also entered into the Emerging Growth Agreement where we acquired certain assets from Emerging Growth, LLC related to its sponsored content and marketing business for purchase price consideration consisting in part of $420,000 in cash. In September 2019, we received proceeds of $500,000 from a note payable. On May 6, 2020, we received $263,000 in the form of a loan from the Paycheck Protection Program, or the PPP, which is a program of the U.S. Small Business Administration, or the SBA, established under the Coronavirus Aid Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act,, as well $150,000 in proceeds from a loan with the SBA on June 24, 2020. Our plan to continue as a going concern includes raising additional capital in the form of debt or equity, growing the business acquired under the Emerging Growth Agreement and managing and reducing operating and overhead costs. We cannot provide any assurance that unforeseen circumstances that could occur at any time within the next twelve months or thereafter will not increase the need for us to raise additional capital on an immediate basis.
These matters, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. These financial statements do not include any adjustments to the amounts and classification of assets and liabilities that may be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
The following is a summary of our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, we had unrestricted cash of $160,115.
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $500,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with approximately $7.0 million during the same period in 2019. The decrease in cash used in operating activities during 2020 was primarily due to a higher net loss from continuing operations in 2019 of approximately $6.0 million as compared to approximately $1.3 million in 2020. In addition, we used a higher amount of cash in 2019 for the payment of a large number of accounts payable and accrued expenses at the time of closing of the Asset Purchase Agreement on June 18, 2019.
Net cash used in investing activities amounted to approximately $206,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with cash provided by investing activities of approximately $20.5 million during the same period in 2019. Cash provided by investing activities in 2019 consisted primarily of proceeds from the sale of the CAKE Business of approximately $20.9 million, offset by cash used of $420,000 for the acquisition of assets pursuant to the Emerging Growth Agreement. During 2020, our cash
used in investing activities consisted primarily of $200,000 for a 9.8% investment made in an outside company in the cannabis-related business.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $763,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in financing activities of approximately $13.5 million for the same period in 2019. Cash provided by financing activities in 2020 resulted from proceeds from notes payable of $413,000 and proceeds from the sale of common stock of $410,000, which stock was issued in January, 2021, offset by payments of preferred stock dividend of $60,000. Cash used in financing activities in 2019 consisted of payments of approximately $11.8 million to repay the principal amounts outstanding under our credit facilities, repayment of promissory notes of $2.7 million and repayment of related party notes of $300,000. These repayments occurred at the time of closing of the Asset Purchase Agreement on June 18, 2019 for the sale of the CAKE Business. The cash used in financing activities in 2019 was offset by proceeds from credit facility borrowings of $900,000, as well as proceeds of $500,000 from a note payable in September 2019.
Description of Indebtedness
As of June 18, 2019, upon the closing of the Asset Purchase Agreement for the sale of the CAKE Business, all existing debt at the time was either paid off or settled through the exchange of outstanding principal into Series A Preferred Stock.
On September 10, 2019, we entered into a promissory note payable whereby we borrowed $500,000 bearing interest at 8% per annum. Interest on the note is payable quarterly on the first business day of December, March, June and September commencing December 1, 2019. Outstanding principal on the note is due in full on September 30, 2022.
In connection with the promissory note payable on September 10, 2019, we issued warrants to purchase 500,000 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $0.10 per share. The warrants expire on September 10, 2024 and are fully vested upon issuance. The note was discounted by $17,624 allocated from the valuation of the warrants issued. The discount recorded on the note is being amortized as interest expense through the maturity date, which amounted to $5,884 and $1,801 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the net book value of the promissory note amounted to $490,061 including the principal amount outstanding of $500,000 net of the remaining discount of $9,939.
On May 6, 2020, the Company entered into a promissory note, or the Note, with Pacific Western Bank, evidencing an unsecured loan, or the Loan, in the amount of $263,000 made to the Company under the PPP. The PPP is a program of the SBA established under the CARES Act. Under the PPP, the proceeds of the Loan may be used to pay payroll and make certain covered interest payments, lease payments and utility payments, or the Qualifying Expenses. The Company intends to use the entire Loan amount for Qualifying Expenses under the PPP. Under the terms of the CARES Act, PPP loan recipients can be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of the loan granted under the PPP, with such forgiveness to be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of the loan proceeds for payment of Qualifying Expenses and the Company maintaining its payroll levels over certain required thresholds under the PPP. The terms of any forgiveness also may be subject to further requirements in any regulations and guidelines the SBA may adopt. No assurance can be provided that the Company will obtain forgiveness of the Note in whole or in part.
The interest rate on the Loan is 1.0% per annum. The Note matures on May 6, 2022. On December 1, 2020 and on the first day of each month thereafter until May 1, 2022, the Company must make monthly payments of $14,727 under the Loan that is not forgiven in accordance with the terms of the PPP and related accrued interest thereon. The Note contains events of default and other conditions customary for a Note of this type. As of December 31, 2020, the current portion of the Loan due within the next 12 months amounted to $188,249. The Company has applied for full forgiveness of the amounts due under this Note.
On June 24, 2020, the Company entered into a Loan Authorization and Agreement with the SBA under which the Company borrowed $150,000, and issued to the SBA a note and security agreement for the amount borrowed. Outstanding borrowings accrue interest at a rate of 3.75% per annum, and installment payments, including principal and interest, of $731 are due monthly and begin 12 months from the date of the loan agreement. The balance of any remaining principal and interest is due 30 years from the date of the loan agreement. As collateral for the borrowing, the Company granted the SBA a security interest in substantially all assets of the Company.
Future scheduled maturities of long-term debt are as follows.
Obligations Under Preferred Stock
On June 20, 2019, existing debtholders were issued an aggregate of 500 shares of Series A Preferred Stock, each with a stated value per share of $1,000, as conversion of $500,000 worth of outstanding promissory notes. The Series A Preferred Stock bears interest at 12% per annum, and is convertible into our common stock at the election of the holder at a conversion price per share to be mutually agreed between us and the holder in the future, and be redeemable at our option following the third year after issuance, without voting rights or a liquidation preference.
On June 20, 2019, we issued 3,000 shares of Series B Preferred Stock, each with a stated value of $1,000 per share, to Emerging Growth, LLC as part of the Emerging Growth Agreement. The aggregate fair value of $687,000 was recorded as part of the acquisition price of the net assets acquired from Emerging Growth, LLC. The Series B Preferred Stock bears interest at 6% per annum and is convertible into our common stock at the election of Emerging Growth, LLC at a conversion price per share to be mutually agreed between us and Emerging Growth, LLC in the future, without voting rights or a liquidation preference, except with respect to accrued penalty interest.
Other outstanding obligations at December 31, 2020
Warrants
As of December 31, 2020, 5,256,944 shares of our common stock are issuable pursuant to the exercise of warrants.
Options
As of December 31, 2020, 3,160,000 shares of our common stock are issuable pursuant to the exercise of options.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 caused by a novel strain of the coronavirus was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization, and the outbreak has become increasingly widespread in the United States, including each of the areas in which we operate. While to date we have not been required to stop operating, COVID-19 has had and is expected to continue to have an adverse effect on the financial condition of us and our customers. The outbreak of COVID-19 in the U.S. has had an unfavorable impact on our business operations. Our main customer market suffered its worst decline, decreasing our revenue. Mandatory closures of businesses imposed by the federal, state and local governments to control the spread of the virus is disrupting the operations of our management, business and finance teams. In addition, the COVID-19 outbreak has adversely affected the U.S. economy and financial markets, which may result in a long-term economic downturn that could negatively affect future performance. We took steps to diversify our revenue model by creating our CBD ecommerce business which has higher margins during the second half of 2020 and reduce our costs. The extent to which COVID-19 will impact our business and our consolidated financial results further will depend on future developments which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time, but may result in a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Climate Change
Our opinion is that neither climate change, nor governmental regulations related to climate change, have had, or are expected to have, any material effect on our operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
Accounts Receivable
The Company’s account receivables are due from customers relating to contracts to provide investor relation services. Collateral is currently not required. The Company also maintains allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of the Company’s customers to make payments. The Company periodically reviews these estimated allowances, including an analysis of the customers’ payment history and creditworthiness, the age of the trade receivable balances and current economic conditions that may affect a customer’s ability to make payments as well as historical collection trends for its customers as a whole. Based on this review, the Company specifically reserves for those accounts deemed uncollectible or likely to become uncollectible. When receivables are determined to be uncollectible, principal amounts of such receivables outstanding are deducted from the allowance. The allowance for doubtful accounts as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 amounted to $183,750 and $163,750, respectively.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 606, the core principle of which is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, five basic criteria must be met before revenue can be recognized: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when or as the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
Subsequent to the closing of the Emerging Growth Agreement on June 20, 2019, the Company’s revenue is generated from the sale of promotional service packages to its customers ranging from 3 to 6 months. The Company offers different packages tailored to the type and stage of the potential customer, such as public companies looking to increase their shareholder base, as well as private companies potentially looking to go public and attract capital and publicity. The services provided by the Company include advertising, publishing of interviews and articles across its network and featuring of client content on its newsletters and social media. The packages all have fixed prices that are billed monthly over the terms of the agreement in even amounts. The Company recognizes revenue for its performance obligation associated with its contracts with customers over time as work is performed, which is deemed to occur evenly throughout the duration of the contract. This also reflects the pattern in which costs are incurred on performing the contracts. To the extent revenue recognized on contracts at each period end exceeds collections, the amounts are reflected as accounts receivable. To the extent collections on contracts at each period end exceeds revenue recognized, the amounts are reflected as deferred revenue.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for in accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 740, Accounting for Income Taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized, but no less than quarterly.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are recorded at cost and are depreciated on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives of five years. Maintenance and repairs are charged to expense as incurred. Significant renewals and betterments are capitalized.
Goodwill
The Company’s goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over tangible and intangible assets acquired, less liabilities assumed arising from business acquisitions. Goodwill is not amortized, but is reviewed for potential impairment on an annual basis at the reporting unit level. There was an impairment charge of $3,225,817 during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to the impairment of goodwill acquired from the Emerging Growth Agreement.
Investment
On December 24, 2020, the Company acquired a 9.8% interest in the outstanding stock of a privately held company. As the stock has no readily determinable fair value, the Company accounts for this stock received using the cost method, less adjustments for impairment. At each reporting period, management reviews the status of the investment to determine if any indicators of impairment have occurred. There were no impairment charges recorded related to investments during the year ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with ASC 360-10, the Company evaluates long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their net book value may not be recoverable. When such factors and circumstances exist, the Company compares the projected undiscounted future cash flows associated with the related asset or group of assets over their estimated useful lives against their respective carrying amount. Impairment, if any, is based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value, based on market value when available, or discounted expected cash flows, of those assets and is recorded in the period in which the determination is made. There was an impairment charge of $541,724 during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to the impairment of marketing-related intangible assets acquired from the Emerging Growth Agreement.
Basic and Diluted Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share are calculated by dividing income available to stockholders by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during each period. Diluted earnings per share are computed using the weighted average number of common and dilutive common share equivalents outstanding during the period. Dilutive common share equivalents consist of shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options, warrants and preferred stock (calculated using the modified-treasury stock method). As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 3,160,000 outstanding stock options and 5,256,944 outstanding warrants and 3,500 preferred stock which were excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share because their effects were anti-dilutive. As of December 31, 2019, the Company had 6,320,000 outstanding stock options, 7,543,944 outstanding warrants and 3,500 preferred stock which were excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share because their effects were anti-dilutive. As a result, the basic and diluted earnings per share are the same for each of the periods presented.
Share-Based Payment
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, or ASC 718. Under the fair value recognition provisions of this topic, stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is the vesting period.
The Company has elected to use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of its options, which incorporates various subjective assumptions including volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected life, and dividend yield to calculate the fair value of stock option awards. Compensation expense recognized in the statements of operations is based on awards ultimately expected to vest and reflects estimated forfeitures. ASC 718 requires forfeitures to be estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
Common stock awards
The Company has granted common stock awards to non-employees in exchange for services provided. The Company measures the fair value of these awards using the fair value of the services provided or the fair value of the awards granted. The fair value of the awards is recognized on a straight-line basis as services are rendered. The share-based payments related to common stock awards for the settlement of services provided by non-employees is recorded on the consolidated statement of comprehensive loss in the same manner and charged to the same account as if such settlements had been made in cash.
Warrants
In connection with certain financing, consulting and collaboration arrangements, the Company has issued warrants to purchase shares of its common stock. The outstanding warrants are standalone instruments that are not puttable or mandatorily redeemable by the holder and are classified as equity awards. The Company measures the fair value of the awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model as of the measurement date. Warrants are recorded at fair value as expense over the requisite service period or at the date of issuance, if there is not a service period.