Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and accompanying notes included in this report. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of the uncertainties and risk associated with these statements. Discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018 is included in Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed February 21, 2020.
Overview
We are a leader in the motion picture exhibition industry, with theatres in the U.S., Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama, Guatemala, Bolivia, Curacao and Paraguay. As of December 31, 2020, we managed our business under two reportable operating segments - U.S. markets and international markets. See Note 21 to our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Developments
The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has had an unprecedented impact on the world and our industry. As a movie exhibitor that operates spaces where patrons gather in close proximity, we have been, and continue to be, significantly impacted by COVID-19. At the initial outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, to comply with government mandates, we temporarily closed all of our theatres in the U.S. and Latin America effective March 17, 2020 and March 18, 2020, respectively. In conjunction with the temporary closure of our theatres in March 2020, we implemented temporary personnel and salary reductions, limited non-essential operating and capital expenditures, and negotiated modified timing and/or abatement of contractual payments with landlords and other major suppliers until our theatres reopened. In addition, we suspended our quarterly dividend.
As of December 31, 2020, we had reopened 217 of our domestic theatres and 129 of our international theatres showing a limited volume of new releases along with library content during reduced operating hours with limited capacities. While some staffing has been brought back to support theatre reopenings, we continue operating with reduced staffing and limiting capital expenditures to essential activities and projects. Government restrictions also continue to fluctuate with the status of the virus, impacting our reopening plans. We continue to work with landlords and other vendors on modified contractual payment terms while we continue to navigate through the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and seek to recover a routine level of operations.
Our focus on maintaining a strong balance sheet and low leverage allowed us to enter the global COVID-19 pandemic in a solid financial position. Based on our current estimates of recovery, we believe we have and will generate sufficient cash to sustain operations. Nonetheless, the COVID-19 pandemic has had, and continues to have, adverse effects on our business, results of operations, cash flows, financial condition, access to credit markets and ability to service existing and future indebtedness, some of which are significant.
We have elected to take advantage of certain tax-related benefits available under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act of 2020, or the CARES Act signed into U.S. federal law on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer social security payments, net operating loss, or NOL, utilization and carryback periods, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and a technical correction to the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which makes certain qualified improvement property eligible for bonus depreciation. In accordance with the provisions of the CARES Act, we have deferred payment of certain employer payroll taxes for 2020 and have recorded payroll tax credits for expenses related to paying wages and health benefits to employees who were not working as a result of closures and reduced receipts associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. See additional discussion at Note 3 and Note 19 to our consolidated financial statements.
If we receive certain government disaster relief assistance, it may be subject to certain requirements imposed by the government on the recipients of the aid including restrictions on executive officer compensation, share buybacks, dividends, prepayment of debt, incurrence of additional indebtedness and other similar restrictions until the aid is repaid or redeemed in full. However, we cannot predict the manner in which such benefits will be allocated or administered and cannot predict whether we will be able to access such benefits in a timely manner or at all.
Revenues and Expenses
We generate revenues primarily from filmed entertainment box office receipts and concession sales with additional revenues from screen advertising and screen rental revenue and other revenue streams, such as transactional fees, vendor marketing promotions, studio trailer placements, meeting rentals and electronic video games located in some of our theatres. We also offer alternative entertainment, such as the Metropolitan Opera, concert events, in-theatre gaming, live and pre-recorded sports programs and other special events in our theatres through Fathom Entertainment (operated by AC JV, LLC). NCM provides our domestic theatres with various forms of in-theatre advertising. Our Flix Media subsidiaries provide screen advertising and alternative content for our international circuit and to other international exhibitors.
Films released during the year ended December 31, 2020 included Bad Boys for Life, Sonic the Hedgehog, Birds of Prey, Dolittle, The Invisible Man and The Call of the Wild. The carryover of late 2019 releases such as 1917, Jumanji: The Next Level and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker also contributed to industry box office during early 2020. Due to the temporary closure of many theatres since March, movie studios delayed the release of many films originally planned for 2020 or released them directly on streaming platforms or, in some instances, simultaneously with theatrical release. Upon reopening its domestic theatres, the Company offered patrons primarily library content, bringing back many classics to the big screen. As more theatres reopened and safety protocols were implemented, studios began releasing new content, which included Wonder Woman 1984, Tenet, The Croods: A New Age, The New Mutants, Unhinged, The War with Grandpa and Honest Thief.
Currently, films scheduled for release in 2021 include the sequel to Marvel’s Spider-man Far From Home, Top Gun Maverick, Black Widow,, Luca, Eternals, Mission: Impossible 7, No Time to Die, Cruella, and Minions: The Rise of Gru, among others. As the industry navigates the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting various regulations and restrictions, film release schedules may continue to change.
Film rental costs are variable in nature and fluctuate with our admissions revenues. Film rental costs as a percentage of revenues are generally higher for periods in which more blockbuster films are released. The Company also receives virtual print fees from studios for certain of its international locations, which are included as a contra-expense in film rentals and advertising costs; however, these costs are expected to be fully recovered during 2021. Advertising costs, which are expensed as incurred, are primarily related to campaigns for new and remodeled theatres, loyalty and membership programs and brand advertising that vary depending on the timing of such campaigns.
Concession supplies expense is variable in nature and fluctuates with our concession revenues and product mix. We negotiate prices for concession supplies directly with concession vendors and manufacturers to obtain volume rates.
Although salaries and wages include a fixed cost component (i.e. the minimum staffing costs to operate a theatre facility during non-peak periods), salaries and wages tend to move in relation to revenues as theatre staffing is adjusted to respond to changes in attendance. Staffing levels may vary based on the amenities offered at a location, such as full service restaurants, bars or expanded food and beverage options. In certain locations, staffing levels are also subject to local regulations.
Facility lease expense is primarily a fixed cost at the theatre level as most of our facility leases require a fixed monthly minimum rent payment. Certain leases are subject to percentage rent only, while others are subject to percentage rent in addition to their fixed monthly rent if a target annual performance level is achieved. Facility lease expense as a percentage of revenues is also affected by the number of theatres under operating leases, the number of theatres under finance leases and the number of owned theatres.
Utilities and other costs include both fixed and variable costs and primarily consist of utilities, property taxes, janitorial costs, credit card fees, third party ticket sales commissions, repairs and maintenance expenses, security services and expenses for the maintenance and monitoring of projection and sound equipment.
General and administrative expenses are primarily fixed in nature and consist of the costs to support the overall management of the Company. Fixed expenses include salaries and wages and benefit costs for our corporate
office personnel, facility expenses for our corporate and other offices, software maintenance costs and audit fees. Some variable expenses may include incentive compensation, consulting and legal fees, supplies and other costs that are not specifically associated with the operations of our theatres.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S., or U.S. GAAP. As such, we are required to make certain estimates and assumptions that we believe are reasonable based upon the information available. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. The significant accounting policies, which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported consolidated financial results, include the following:
Revenue and Expense Recognition
Our patrons have the option to purchase movie tickets well in advance of a movie showtime or right before the movie showtime, or at any point in between those two timeframes depending on when tickets are put on sale and seat availability. We recognize such admissions revenues when the showtime for a purchased movie ticket has passed. Concession revenues are recognized when products are sold to the consumer, or if pre-ordered, after the associated pick-up date has passed. Other revenues primarily consist of screen advertising and screen rental revenues, promotional income, studio trailer placements and transactional fees. We sell gift cards and discount ticket vouchers, the proceeds from which are recorded as deferred revenues. Deferred revenues for gift cards and discount ticket vouchers are recognized when they are redeemed for movie tickets or concession items. We offer a subscription program in the U.S. whereby patrons can pay a monthly fee to receive a monthly credit for use towards a future movie ticket purchase. We record the monthly subscription program fees as deferred revenues and record admissions revenues when the showtime for a movie ticket purchased with a credit has passed. We have loyalty programs in the U.S. and many of our international locations that either have a prepaid annual membership fee or award points to customers as purchases are made. For those loyalty programs that have an annual membership fee, we recognize the fee collected as other revenues on a straight-line basis over the term of the membership. For those loyalty programs that award points to customers based on their purchases, we record a portion of the original transaction proceeds as deferred revenues based on the number of reward points issued to customers and we recognize the deferred revenues when the customer redeems such points. The value of loyalty points issued is based on the estimated fair value of the rewards offered. We record breakage revenue on gift cards and discount ticket vouchers based on redemption activity and historical experience with unused balances. We generally record breakage revenue upon the expiration of loyalty points and subscription credits. Advances collected on concession and other contracts are deferred and recognized during the period in which we satisfy the related performance obligations, which may differ from the period in which the advances are collected. These advances are recognized on either a straight-line basis over the term of the contracts or as we meet our performance obligations in accordance with the terms of the contracts.
Film rental costs are subject to the film licensing arrangement and accrued based on the applicable box office receipts and either; 1) a sliding scale formula, which is generally established prior to the opening of the film, 2) firm terms or 3) estimates of the final settlement rate, which occurs at the conclusion of the film run. Under a sliding scale formula, we pay a percentage of box office revenues using a pre-determined matrix that is based upon box office performance of the film for its full run. Under a firm terms formula, we pay the distributor a percentage of box office receipts, which reflects either an aggregate rate for the life of the film or rates that decline over the term of the run. The settlement process allows for negotiation of film rental fees upon the conclusion of the film run based upon how the film performs. Estimates are based on the expected success of a film. The success of a film can generally be determined a few weeks after a film is released when the initial box office performance of the film is known. If actual settlements are different than those estimates, film rental costs are adjusted at that time.
Facility lease expense is primarily a fixed cost at the theatre level as most of our facility leases require a fixed monthly minimum rent payment. Certain of our leases are subject to monthly percentage rent only, which is accrued each month based on actual revenues. Certain of our other theatres require payment of percentage rent in addition to fixed monthly rent if an annual target revenue level is achieved. Percentage rent expense is estimated and recorded for these theatres on a monthly basis if the theatre’s historical performance or forecasted performance indicates that
the annual target revenue level will be reached. Once annual revenues are known, the timing of which is based on the lease agreement, percentage rent expense is adjusted at that time.
Theatre properties and equipment are depreciated using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives. In estimating the useful lives of our theatre properties and equipment, we have relied upon our experience with such assets and our historical replacement period. We periodically evaluate these estimates and assumptions and adjust them as necessary. Leasehold improvements for which we pay, and to which we have title, are amortized over the lesser of their useful life or the remaining lease term.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review long-lived assets for impairment indicators on a quarterly basis or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. We also perform a full quantitative impairment evaluation on an annual basis. We assess many factors including the following to determine whether to impair individual theatre assets:
•
actual theatre level cash flows;
•
budgeted or forecast theatre level cash flows;
•
theatre property and equipment carrying values;
•
operating lease right-of-use asset carrying values;
•
amortizing intangible asset carrying values;
•
the age of a recently built theatre;
•
competitive theatres in the marketplace;
•
the impact of recent ticket price changes;
•
the impact of recent theatre remodels or other substantial improvements;
•
available lease renewal options; and
•
other factors considered relevant in our assessment of impairment of individual theatre assets.
Long-lived assets are evaluated for impairment on a theatre basis, which we believe is the lowest applicable level for which there are identifiable cash flows. The impairment evaluation is based on the estimated undiscounted cash flows from continuing use through the remainder of the theatre’s useful life. The remainder of the theatre’s useful life correlates with the remaining lease period, which includes the probability of the exercise of available renewal periods for leased properties, and the lesser of twenty years or the building’s remaining useful life for owned properties. If the estimated undiscounted cash flows are not sufficient to recover a long-lived asset’s carrying value, we then compare the carrying value of the asset group (theatre) with its estimated fair value. When estimated fair value is determined to be lower than the carrying value of the asset group (theatre), the asset group (theatre) is written down to its estimated fair value. Significant judgment is involved in estimating cash flows and fair value. Fair value is determined based on a multiple of cash flows. Management’s estimates, which fall under Level 3 of the U.S. GAAP fair value hierarchy as defined by FASB ASC Topic 820-10-35, are based on historical and projected operating performance, recent market transactions and current industry trading multiples.
See further discussion of our impairment evaluation policy at Note 1 of our consolidated financial statements. See a summary of the impairment evaluations performed during the year ended December 31, 2020 and impairments recorded during the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020 at Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually during the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of the goodwill may not be fully recoverable. We evaluate goodwill for
impairment at the reporting unit level and we have allocated goodwill to the reporting unit based on an estimate of its relative fair value. Management considers the reporting unit to be each of its twenty regions in the U.S. and seven of its international countries with Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama and Guatemala considered one reporting unit (the Company does not have goodwill recorded for all of its international locations). Under ASC Topic 350, Goodwill, Intangibles and Other, or ASC Topic 350, we may perform a qualitative impairment assessment or a quantitative impairment assessment of our goodwill.
Tradename intangible assets are tested for impairment at least annually during the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be fully recoverable. Under ASC Topic 350, we can elect to perform a qualitative or quantitative impairment assessment for our tradename intangible assets. A quantitative tradename impairment assessment includes comparing the carrying values of tradename assets to an estimated fair value. Fair values are estimated by applying an estimated market royalty rate that could be charged for the use of our tradename to forecasted future revenues, with an adjustment for the present value of such royalties. If the estimated fair value is less than the carrying value, the tradename intangible asset is written down to its estimated fair value. Significant judgment is involved in estimating market royalty rates and long-term revenue forecasts. Management’s estimates, which fall under Level 3 of the U.S. GAAP fair value hierarchy as defined by FASB ASC Topic 820-10-35, are based on historical and projected revenue performance and industry trends. A qualitative assessment considers our historical and forecasted revenues and changes in estimated royalty rates, and a comparison of current carrying values to estimated fair values from our most recent quantitative assessment.
See further discussion of our impairment evaluation policy at Note 1 of our consolidated financial statements. See a summary of the impairment evaluations performed during the year ended December 31, 2020 and impairments recorded during the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020 at Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
We use an asset and liability approach to financial accounting and reporting for income taxes. Deferred income taxes are provided when tax laws and financial accounting standards differ with respect to the amount of income for a year and the basis of assets and liabilities. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce the carrying amount of deferred tax assets unless it is more likely than not that such assets will be realized. Income taxes are provided on unremitted earnings from foreign subsidiaries unless such earnings are expected to be indefinitely reinvested. Income taxes have also been provided for potential tax assessments. The evaluation of an uncertain tax position is a two-step process. The first step is recognition: We determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. In evaluating whether a tax position has met the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we presume that the position would be examined by the appropriate taxing authority that would have full knowledge of all relevant information. The second step is measurement: A tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is measured to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The tax position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Differences between tax positions taken in a tax return and amounts recognized in the financial statements result in (1) a change in a liability for income taxes payable or (2) a change in an income tax refund receivable, a deferred tax asset or a deferred tax liability or both (1) and (2). We accrue interest and penalties on uncertain tax positions. See Note 19 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of income taxes.
Accounting for Investment in National CineMedia, LLC and Related Agreements
We have an investment in NCM. NCM operates a digital in-theatre network in the U.S. for providing cinema advertising and non-film events. Upon joining NCM, we entered into an Exhibitor Services Agreement, or ESA, with NCM pursuant to which NCM provides advertising, promotion and event services to our theatres. On February 13, 2007, National CineMedia, Inc., or NCM Inc., a newly formed entity that serves as a member and the sole manager of NCM, completed an initial public offering of its common stock. In connection with the NCM Inc. initial public offering, we amended our operating agreement and the Exhibitor Services Agreement, or ESA, with NCM and received proceeds related to the modification of the ESA and our sale of certain of shares in NCM. The ESA modification reflected a shift from circuit share expense under the prior Exhibitor Services Agreement, which obligated NCM to pay us a percentage of revenue, to a monthly theatre access fee, which significantly reduced the
contractual amounts paid to the Company by NCM. The Company recorded the proceeds related to the ESA modification as deferred revenue. As a result of the proceeds received as part of the NCM, Inc. initial public offering, the Company had a negative basis in its original membership units in NCM (referred to herein as its Tranche 1 Investment). The Company does not recognize undistributed equity in the earnings on its Tranche 1 Investment until NCM's future net earnings, less distributions received, surpass the amount of the excess distribution. The Company recognizes equity in earnings on its Tranche 1 Investment only to the extent it receives cash distributions from NCM. The Company believes that the accounting model provided by ASC 323-10-35-22 for recognition of equity investee losses in excess of an investor's basis is analogous to the accounting for equity income subsequent to recognizing an excess distribution.
Pursuant to a Common Unit Adjustment Agreement dated as of February 13, 2007 between NCM, Inc. and Cinemark, AMC and Regal, collectively referred to as its Founding Members, annual adjustments to the common membership units are made primarily based on increases or decreases in the number of theatre screens operated and theatre attendance generated by each Founding Member. To account for the receipt of additional common units under the Common Unit Adjustment Agreement, the Company follows the guidance in ASC 323-10-35-29 (formerly EITF 02-18, Accounting for Subsequent Investments in an Investee after Suspension of Equity Loss Recognition) by analogy, which also refers to AICPA Technical Practice Aid 2220.14, which indicates that if a subsequent investment is made in an equity method investee that has experienced significant losses, the investor must determine if the subsequent investment constitutes funding of prior losses. The Company concluded that the construction or acquisition of new theatres that has led to the common unit adjustments equates to making additional investments in NCM. The Company evaluated the receipt of the additional common units in NCM and the assets exchanged for these additional units and has determined that the right to use its incremental new screens would not be considered funding of prior losses. The Company accounts for these additional common units (referred to herein as its Tranche 2 Investment) as a separate investment than its Tranche 1 Investment. The common units received are recorded at fair value as an increase in the Company’s investment in NCM with an offset to deferred revenue. The deferred revenue is amortized over the remaining term of the ESA. The Tranche 2 Investment is accounted for following the equity method, with undistributed equity earnings related to its Tranche 2 Investment included as a component of equity in income of affiliates and distributions received related to its Tranche 2 Investment are recorded as a reduction of its investment basis.
See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our investment in NCM.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the amounts for certain items reflected in our consolidated statements of income along with each of those items as a percentage of revenues.
(1)
All costs are expressed as a percentage of total revenues, except film rentals and advertising, which are expressed as a percentage of admissions revenues and concession supplies, which are expressed as a percentage of concession revenues. Certain values are considered not meaningful (“NM”) as they are not comparable due to the temporary theatre closures effective March 18, 2020.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
All of our domestic and international theatres were temporarily closed effective March 17, 2020 and March 18, 2020, respectively, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We began reopening our domestic theatres in June 2020 and operated under a test-and-learn strategy to define training, communication, implementation and execution of enhanced health and safety protocols. These theatres opened to reduced operating hours with library content and “Welcome Back” pricing for tickets and concession products to encourage patrons to return to the movies. We began opening our international theatres in August 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had 217 domestic theatres and 129 international theatres reopened. We continue to monitor the status of the COVID-19 pandemic and local government regulations to plan the reopening of our remaining theatres.
Revenues. Total revenues were $686.3 million for 2020 compared to $3,283.1 million for 2019. The table below, presented by reportable operating segment, summarizes our year-over-year revenue performance and certain key performance indicators that impact our revenues.
(1)
Revenue and attendance amounts in millions. Average ticket price is calculated as admissions revenues divided by attendance. Concession revenues per patron is calculated as concession revenues divided by attendance.
(2)
U.S. operating segment revenues include eliminations of intercompany transactions with the international operating segment. See Note 21 to our consolidated financial statements.
(3)
Constant currency revenue amounts, which are non-GAAP measurements, were calculated using the average exchange rates for the corresponding months for 2019. We translate the results of our international operating segment from local currencies into U.S. dollars using currency rates in effect at different points in time. Significant changes in foreign exchange rates from one period to the next can result in meaningful variations in reported results. We are providing constant currency amounts for our international operating segment to present a period-to-period comparison of business performance without the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
•
U.S. Admissions, concession and other revenues decreased as a result of the 80.2% decrease in attendance due to our theatres being temporarily closed for an extended period of time beginning March 2020. We began reopening theatres in the U.S. in late June 2020, showing library content and limited new releases with limited capacities and reduced operating hours. We offered library content at promotional prices, and also offered Private Watch Parties to our patrons at many of our theatres. We continue to offer a limited menu of concession items in essentially all locations, and at promotional prices for much of the reopening phase. Average ticket price increased due to price increases and the impact of the deferral of admissions revenues for loyalty points issued, partially offset by the impact of promotional pricing during our reopening period. Concession revenues per patron grew primarily due to incremental sales of traditional concession products, the impact of the deferral of concessions revenues for loyalty points issued and price increases prior to the temporary closure of our theatres, partially offset by the impact of promotional pricing during our reopening period. Other revenues in 2020 primarily included the amortization of NCM screen advertising advances and promotional revenues.
•
International. Admissions, concession and other revenues decreased as a result of the 81.2% decrease in attendance due to our theatres being temporarily closed for an extended period of time beginning March 2020. We began reopening international theatres in late August 2020, showing library content and limited new releases
with limited capacities and reduced operating hours. We offered core concession items at our theatres and also offered take out concession items in certain locations. Average ticket price and concession revenues per patron decreased, as reported, primarily due to the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates in certain countries in which we operate, partially offset by price increases. Other revenues in 2020 included primarily screen advertising, media and loyalty program revenues.
Cost of Operations. The table below summarizes certain of our theatre operating costs by reportable operating segment (in millions) for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020.
(1)
Constant currency expense amounts, which are non-GAAP measurements, were calculated using the average exchange rates for the corresponding months for 2019. We translate the results of our international operating segment from local currencies into U.S. dollars using currency rates in effect at different points in time. Significant changes in foreign exchange rates from one period to the next can result in meaningful variations in reported results. We are providing constant currency amounts for our international operating segment to present a period-to-period comparison of business performance without the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
•
U.S. Film rentals and advertising costs were 53.3% of admissions revenues for 2020, reflecting both new releases and library content as well as advertising and promotional expenses related to the reopening of our theatres. Film rentals and advertising costs were 57.2% of admissions revenues for 2019, which reflected a higher concentration of blockbuster films. Concession supplies expense was 19.5% of concession revenues for 2020 compared to 16.8% of concession revenues for 2019. The increase in the concession supplies rate was primarily due to the impact of the disposal of perishable food and expired product as a result of the temporary closure of our theatres, as well as promotional pricing implemented during our reopening period
Salaries and wages decreased to $113.8 million for 2020 from $331.2 million for 2019 primarily due to the temporary closure of all of our U.S. theatres for a portion of the 2020 period, limited operating hours for the reopened theatres and our efforts to streamline our operational processes upon reopening. Facility lease expense decreased to $247.0 million for 2020 from $259.8 million for 2019 primarily due to a decline in percentage rent expense and the impact of theatres that were permanently closed. Utilities and other costs decreased to $180.3 million for 2020 from $348.2 million for 2019 as many of these costs, such as credit card fees, security, janitorial costs and repairs and maintenance, are variable in nature and were impacted by the temporary closures of our theatres and reduced operating hours of the theatres that were reopened.
•
International. Film rentals and advertising costs were 48.5% of admissions revenues for 2020 compared to 49.3% of admissions revenues, for 2019. The decrease is due to limited new releases and library content shown in 2020 compared to 2019. Concession supplies expense was 28.4% of concession revenues for 2020 compared to 22.1% of concession revenues for 2019. The increase in the concession supplies rate was primarily due to the impact of the disposal of perishable food and expired product as a result of the temporary closure of our theatres.
Salaries and wages decreased to $31.2 million ($38.0 million in constant currency) for 2020 from $78.9 million for 2019. The decrease was due the temporary closure of all of our international theatres on March 18, 2020, some of which began reopening in August, and our efforts to streamline our operational processes upon reopening. Facility lease expense decreased to $32.8 million (decreased to $38.9 million in constant currency) for 2020 from $86.3 million for 2019. The decrease was due to lower percentage rent and rent-free periods allowed in certain international locations due to temporary mall closures. Utilities and other costs decreased to $49.2 million ($59.4 million in constant currency) for 2020 from $126.5 million for 2019 as many of these costs, such as credit card fees, security, janitorial costs and repairs and maintenance, are variable in nature and
were impacted by the temporary closure of our theatres and reduced operating hours of the theatres that were reopened.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased to $127.6 million for 2020 from $173.4 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily due to temporary salary reductions and the furlough of a portion of our corporate office personnel for part of 2020, the impact of the 2020 Restructuring Plan (as defined in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements), which permanently reduced headcount, reduced incentive compensation expense and the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates in certain countries in which we operate.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased to $259.8 million for 2020 from $261.2 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the impact of theatre assets impaired during late 2019 and 2020. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements for discussion of impairment.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. We recorded asset impairment charges on assets held and used of $152.7 million for 2020 compared to $57.0 million for 2019. Approximately $60.0 million of the impairment charges recorded in 2020 were primarily a result of the prolonged impact of the COVID pandemic on our operations, as some theatres remained closed and film content shifted into future periods, both of which impact estimated future cash flows for theatres. In addition, we recorded an impairment of $92.6 million for our investment in NCM due to the NCM, Inc.’s stock price being below our book value per common unit for a prolonged period of time. Impairment charges for 2019 were specific to theatres that were directly and individually impacted by industry conditions, temporary closures, recovery expectations, increased competition, adverse changes in market demographics or adverse changes in the development or the conditions of the areas surrounding the theatres. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements for a summary of impairment recorded.
Restructuring costs. We recorded restructuring costs of $20.4 million during 2020 related to the 2020 Restructuring Plan implemented during 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
(Gain) Loss on Disposal of Assets and Other. We recorded a gain on disposal of assets and other of $(8.9) million during 2020 compared to a loss of $12.0 million during 2019. Activity for 2020 was primarily related to a favorable litigation outcome for a case that was previously accrued and the write-off of previously recorded lease assets and liabilities for terminated and amended lease contracts, partially offset by the retirement of assets related to asset replacements. Activity for 2019 was primarily due to the retirement of assets related to theatre remodels.
Interest Expense. Interest expense, which includes amortization of debt issue costs, amortization of accumulated losses in swap amendments and accretion of interest on the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes, was $129.9 million for 2020 compared to $100.0 million for 2019. The increase was primarily due to the issuance of 8.750% Secured Notes on April 20, 2020 and the issuance of 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes on August 21, 2020. See also Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements for discussion of our long-term debt and our interest rate swap agreements.
Foreign Currency Exchange Loss. We recorded a foreign currency exchange loss of $4.9 million during 2020 and $3.4 million during 2019 primarily related to intercompany transactions and changes in exchange rates from original transaction dates until cash settlement. See Notes 1 and 15 to our consolidated financial statements for discussion of foreign currency translation.
Distributions from NCM. We recorded distributions received from NCM of $7.0 million during 2020 and $12.9 million during 2019, which were in excess of the carrying value of our Tranche 1 Investment. The decrease in distributions from NCM is primarily due to the impact of theatres being temporarily closed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic as discussed at Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for discussion of our investment in NCM.
Non-cash Distribution from Other Equity Investee. We recorded a non-cash distribution of $12.9 million related to digital projectors distributed to us from DCIP during 2020. See further discussion at Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements.
Interest expense - NCM. We recorded non-cash interest expense of $23.6 million during 2020 compared to $28.6 million during 2019 related to the significant financing component associated with revenues collected in advance under certain of our agreements with NCM. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for a summary of all activity with NCM.
Equity in Income (Loss) of Affiliates. We recorded equity in loss of affiliates of $(38.7) million during 2020 and equity in income of affiliates of $41.9 million during 2019. The decrease in equity income (loss) of affiliates is primarily due to the impact of theatres being temporarily closed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic as discussed at Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. See Notes 8 and 9 to our consolidated financial statements for information about our equity investments.
Income Taxes. An income tax benefit of $(309.4) million was recorded for 2020 compared to income tax expense of $79.9 million recorded for 2019. The effective tax rate for 2020 was 33.4% compared to 29.2% for 2019. On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act contains several business tax provisions aimed at stimulating a failing economy. One of these provisions allows corporate taxpayers to take net operating losses earned in 2018, 2019 and 2020 and carry back those losses five years. We generated significant net operating losses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We carried back these losses under the five-year NOL carryback provision which enabled us to benefit from the losses and re-measure certain deferred tax assets and liabilities at the former federal tax rate of 35%. In 2020, we recorded tax benefits of $187.5 million related to the NOL carryback provision. We have recorded an income tax receivable of $155.7 million at December 31, 2020 and have received cash tax refunds of $124.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Activities
We primarily collect our revenues in cash, mainly through box office receipts and the sale of concessions. Our revenues are generally received in cash prior to the payment of related expenses; therefore, we have an operating “float” and historically have not required traditional working capital financing. However, we temporarily closed all of our theatres during March 2020. As we continue to reopen our theatres to reduced operating hours and limited capacities, we will fund operating expenses with cash on hand and recent additional financing discussed below under Financing Activities. As discussed in Recent Developments above, based on our current estimates for recovery, we believe that we have and will generate sufficient cash to sustain operations.
Cash provided by (used for) operating activities amounted to $562.0 million and $(330.1) million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily a result of the temporary closure of all of our theatres during March 2020.
As discussed in Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements, we negotiated the deferral of rent and other lease-related payments for the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 with many of our landlords, resulting in approximately $66.2 million in deferred lease payments as of December 31, 2020. We began to repay previously deferred amounts during 2020, while a majority of the repayments will be made throughout 2021 and 2022.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities have been principally related to the development, remodel and acquisition of theatres. New theatre openings, remodels and acquisitions historically have been financed with internally generated cash and by debt financing, including borrowings under our senior secured credit facility. Cash used for investing activities amounted to $310.6 million and $83.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in cash used for investing activities was primarily due to the suspension of non-essential capital expenditures in response to the temporary closure of our theatres.
Capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 were as follows (in millions):
We operated 531 theatres with 5,958 screens worldwide as of December 31, 2020. Theatres and screens acquired, built and closed during the year ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
As of December 31, 2020, we had the following signed commitments (costs in millions):
Actual expenditures for continued theatre development, remodels and acquisitions are subject to change based upon the availability of attractive opportunities. We plan to fund capital expenditures for our continued development with cash flow from operations, borrowings under our senior secured credit facility, proceeds from debt issuances, sale leaseback transactions and/or sales of excess real estate.
Financing Activities
Cash (used for) provided by financing activities was $(186.5) million and $584.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to the issuance of $250.0 million 8.750% Secured Notes on April 20, 2020, the issuance of $460.0 million 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes on August 21, 2020 and borrowings by certain of our international subsidiaries. In addition, we suspended our dividend in March 2020 due to the temporary closure of our theatres.
We, at the discretion of the board of directors and subject to applicable law, may pay dividends on our common stock. The amount, if any, of the dividends to be paid in the future will depend upon our then available cash, anticipated cash needs, overall financial condition, loan agreement restrictions as discussed below, future prospects for earnings and cash flows, as well as other relevant factors. We suspended our quarterly dividend due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We may from time to time, subject to compliance with our debt instruments, purchase our debt securities on the open market depending upon the availability and prices of such securities.
Long-term debt consisted of the following as of December 31, 2019 and 2020 (in millions):
As of December 31, 2020, we had $100 million in available borrowing capacity on our revolving credit line.
As of December 31, 2020, our long-term debt obligations, scheduled interest payments on long-term debt, future minimum lease obligations under non-cancelable operating and finance leases, deferred rent payments due as a result of amended lease terms, scheduled interest payments under finance leases and other obligations for each period indicated are summarized as follows:
(1)
Amounts are presented before adjusting for debt issuance costs.
(2)
Amounts include scheduled interest payments on fixed rate and variable rate debt agreements. Estimates for the variable rate interest payments were based on interest rates in effect on December 31, 2020. The average interest rates on our fixed rate and variable rate debt were 4.9% and 2.2%, respectively, as of December 31, 2020.
(3)
Amounts include both scheduled principal and interest payments on leases commenced prior to December 31, 2020. See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements for discussion of lease obligations.
(4)
Amounts due under amended lease terms with landlords where payments due during the year ended December 31, 2020 will be paid in future periods. See further discussion at Lease Deferrals and Abatements at Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements.
(5)
Includes estimated capital expenditures associated with the construction of new theatres to which we were committed as of December 31, 2020, obligations under employment agreements and contractual purchase commitments.
(6)
The contractual obligations table excludes the long-term portion of our liability for uncertain tax positions of $19.2 million because we cannot make a reliable estimate of the timing of the related cash payments. As of December 31, 2020, there was no amount recorded for short-term uncertain tax provisions on the consolidated balance sheet.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Senior Secured Credit Facility
Cinemark USA, Inc. has a senior secured credit facility that includes a $700.0 million term loan and a $100.0 million revolving credit line, or the Credit Agreement. Under the amended Credit Agreement, quarterly principal payments of $1.6 million are due on the term loan through December 31, 2024, with a final principal payment of $613.4 million due on March 29, 2025. Cinemark USA, Inc. had $100.0 million available borrowing capacity on the revolving credit line as of December 31, 2020.
Interest on the term loan accrues at Cinemark USA, Inc.’s option at: (A) the base rate equal to the greater of (1) the US “Prime Rate” as quoted in The Wall Street Journal or if no such rate is quoted therein, in a Federal Reserve Board statistical release, (2) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50%, and (3) a one-month Eurodollar-based rate plus 1.0%, plus, in each case, a margin of 0.75% per annum, or (B) a Eurodollar-based rate for a period of 1, 2, 3, 6, 9 or 12 months plus a margin of 1.75% per annum. Interest on the revolving credit line accrues, at our option, at: (A) a base rate equal to the greater of (1) the US “Prime Rate” as quoted in The Wall Street Journal or if no such rate is quoted therein, in a Federal Reserve Board statistical release, (2) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50%, and (3) a one-month Eurodollar-based rate plus 1.0%, plus, in each case, a margin that ranges from 0.50% to 1.25% per annum, or (B) a Eurodollar-based rate for a period of 1, 2, 3, 6, 9 or 12 months plus a margin that ranges from 1.50% to 2.25% per annum. The margin of the revolving credit line is determined by the consolidated net senior secured leverage ratio as defined in the Credit Agreement.
Cinemark USA, Inc.’s obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by Cinemark Holdings, Inc. and certain of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s domestic subsidiaries and are secured by mortgages on certain fee and leasehold properties and security interests in substantially all of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s and the guarantors’ personal property, including, without limitation, pledges of all of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s capital stock, all of the capital stock of certain of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s domestic subsidiaries and 65% of the voting stock of certain of its foreign subsidiaries.
The Credit Agreement contains usual and customary negative covenants for agreements of this type, including, but not limited to, restrictions on Cinemark USA, Inc.’s ability, and in certain instances, its subsidiaries’ and our ability, to consolidate or merge or liquidate, wind up or dissolve; substantially change the nature of its business; sell, transfer or dispose of assets; create or incur indebtedness; create liens; pay dividends or repurchase stock; and make capital expenditures and investments. If Cinemark USA, Inc. has borrowings outstanding on the revolving credit line, it is required to satisfy a consolidated net senior secured leverage ratio covenant as defined in the Credit Agreement, not to exceed 4.25 to 1. See below for discussion of recent covenant waivers.
The dividend restriction contained in the Credit Agreement prevents the Company and any of its subsidiaries from paying a dividend or otherwise distributing cash to its stockholders unless (1) the Company is not in default, and the distribution would not cause Cinemark USA, Inc. to be in default, under the Credit Agreement; and (2) the aggregate amount of certain dividends, distributions, investments, redemptions and capital expenditures made since December 18, 2012, including dividends declared by the board of directors, is less than the sum of (a) the aggregate amount of cash and cash equivalents received by Cinemark Holdings, Inc. or Cinemark USA, Inc. as common equity since December 18, 2012, (b) Cinemark USA, Inc.’s consolidated EBITDA minus 1.75 times its consolidated interest expense, each as defined in the Credit Agreement, and (c) certain other defined amounts, or collectively, the Applicable Amount. As of December 31, 2020, Cinemark USA, Inc. could have distributed up to approximately $2.7 billion to its parent company and sole stockholder, Cinemark Holdings, Inc.
On April 17, 2020, in conjunction with the issuance of the 8.750% Secured Notes discussed below, we obtained a waiver of the leverage covenant from the majority of revolving lenders under the Credit Agreement for the fiscal quarters ending September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020. The waiver is subject to certain liquidity thresholds, restrictions on investments and the use of the Applicable Amount.
On August 21, 2020, in conjunction with the issuance of the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes discussed below, we further amended the waiver of the leverage covenant through the fiscal quarter ending September 30, 2021. The amendment also i) modifies the leverage covenant calculation beginning with the calculation for the trailing twelve-month period ended December 31, 2021, ii) for purposes of testing the consolidated net senior secured leverage ratio for the fiscal quarters ending on December 31, 2021, March 31, 2022 and June 30, 2022, permits us to substitute Consolidated EBITDA for the first three fiscal quarters of 2019 in lieu of Consolidated EBITDA for the corresponding fiscal quarters of 2021, (iii) modifies the restrictions imposed by the covenant waiver and (iv) makes such other changes to permit the issuance of the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes discussed below.
We have four interest rate swap agreements that are used to hedge a portion of the interest rate risk associated with the variable interest rates on the term loan outstanding under the Credit Agreement. See Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements for discussion of the interest rate swaps.
At December 31, 2020, there was $639.7 million outstanding under the term loan and no borrowings were outstanding under the $100.0 million revolving line of credit. The average interest rate on outstanding term loan borrowings under the Credit Agreement at December 31, 2020 was approximately 3.4% per annum, after giving effect to the interest rate swap agreements.
4.875% Senior Notes
On May 24, 2013, Cinemark USA, Inc. issued $530.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.875% senior notes due 2023, at par value, or the 4.875% Senior Notes. Interest on the 4.875% Senior Notes is payable on June 1 and December 1 of each year. The 4.875% Senior Notes mature on June 1, 2023.
On March 21, 2016, Cinemark USA, Inc. issued an additional $225.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 4.875% Senior Notes, at 99.0% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest from December 1, 2015. These additional notes have identical terms, other than the issue date, the issue price and the first interest payment date, and constitute part of the same series as Cinemark USA, Inc.’s existing 4.875% Senior Notes. The aggregate principal amount of $755.0 million of 4.875% Senior Notes mature on June 1, 2023.
The 4.875% Senior Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a joint and several senior unsecured basis by certain of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s subsidiaries that guarantee, assume or become liable with respect to any of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s or a guarantor’s debt. The 4.875% Senior Notes and the guarantees are senior unsecured obligations and rank equally in right of payment with all of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s and its guarantor’s existing and
future senior unsecured debt and senior in right of payment to all of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s and its guarantor’s existing and future senior subordinated debt. The 4.875% Senior Notes and the guarantees are effectively subordinated to all of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s and its guarantor’s existing and future secured debt to the extent of the value of the assets securing such debt, including all borrowings under Cinemark USA, Inc.’s Credit Agreement. The 4.875% Senior Notes and the guarantees are structurally subordinated to all existing and future debt and other liabilities of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s subsidiaries that do not guarantee the 4.875% Senior Notes.
The indenture governing the 4.875% Senior Notes contains covenants that limit, among other things, the ability of Cinemark USA, Inc. and certain of its subsidiaries to (1) make investments or other restricted payments, including paying dividends, making other distributions or repurchasing subordinated debt or equity, (2) incur additional indebtedness and issue preferred stock, (3) enter into transactions with affiliates, (4) enter new lines of business, (5) merge or consolidate with, or sell all or substantially all of its assets to, another person and (6) create liens. As of December 31, 2020, Cinemark USA, Inc. could have distributed up to approximately $2.8 billion to its parent company and sole stockholder, Cinemark Holdings, Inc., under the terms of the indenture governing the 4.875% Senior Notes, subject to its available cash and other borrowing restrictions outlined in the indenture. Upon a change of control, as defined in the indenture governing the 4.875% Senior Notes, Cinemark USA, Inc. would be required to make an offer to repurchase the 4.875% Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount outstanding plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, through the date of repurchase. The indenture governing the 4.875% Senior Notes allows Cinemark USA, Inc. to incur additional indebtedness if it satisfies the coverage ratio specified in the indenture, after giving effect to the incurrence of the additional indebtedness, and in certain other circumstances. The required minimum coverage ratio is 2 to 1 and the actual ratio as of December 31, 2020 was below zero.
Cinemark USA, Inc. may redeem the 4.875% Senior Notes in whole or in part at redemption prices specified in the indenture.
5.125% Senior Notes
On December 18, 2012, Cinemark USA, Inc. issued $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.125% senior notes due 2022, at par value, or the 5.125% Senior Notes. Interest on the 5.125% Senior Notes is payable on June 15 and December 15 of each year. The 5.125% Senior Notes mature on December 15, 2022.
The 5.125% Senior Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a joint and several senior unsecured basis by certain of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s subsidiaries that guarantee, assume or become liable with respect to any of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s or a guarantor’s debt. The 5.125% Senior Notes and the guarantees are senior unsecured obligations and rank equally in right of payment with all of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s and its guarantor’s existing and future senior unsecured debt and senior in right of payment to all of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s and its guarantor’s existing and future subordinated debt. The 5.125% Senior Notes and the guarantees are effectively subordinated to all of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s and its guarantor’s existing and future secured debt to the extent of the value of the assets securing such debt, including all borrowings under Cinemark USA, Inc.’s Credit Agreement. The 5.125% Senior Notes and the guarantees are structurally subordinated to all existing and future debt and other liabilities of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s subsidiaries that do not guarantee the 5.125% Senior Notes.
The indenture governing the 5.125% Senior Notes contains covenants that limit, among other things, the ability of Cinemark USA, Inc. and certain of its subsidiaries to (1) make investments or other restricted payments, including paying dividends, making other distributions or repurchasing subordinated debt or equity, (2) incur additional indebtedness and issue preferred stock, (3) enter into transactions with affiliates, (4) enter new lines of business, (5) merge or consolidate with, or sell all or substantially all of its assets to, another person and (6) create liens. As of December 31, 2020, Cinemark USA, Inc. could have distributed up to approximately $2.8 billion to its parent company and sole stockholder, Cinemark Holdings, Inc., under the terms of the indenture governing the 5.125% Senior Notes, subject to its available cash and other borrowing restrictions outlined in the indenture. Upon a change of control, as defined in the indenture governing the 5.125% Senior Notes, Cinemark USA, Inc. would be required to make an offer to repurchase the 5.125% Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount outstanding plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, through the date of repurchase. The indenture governing the 5.125% Senior Notes allows Cinemark USA, Inc. to incur additional indebtedness if it satisfies the coverage ratio specified in the indenture, after giving effect to the incurrence of the additional indebtedness, and in certain other circumstances. The required minimum coverage ratio is 2 to 1 and the actual ratio as of December 31, 2020 was below zero.
Cinemark USA, Inc. may redeem the 5.125% Senior Notes in whole or in part at redemption prices specified in the indenture.
8.750% Secured Notes
On April 20, 2020, Cinemark USA, Inc. issued $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of 8.750% senior secured notes due 2025, or the 8.750% Secured Notes. The 8.750% Secured Notes will mature on May 1, 2025; provided, however, that if (i) on September 13, 2022, the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the 5.125% Senior Notes that shall not have been purchased, repurchased, redeemed, defeased or otherwise acquired, retired, cancelled or discharged exceeds $50.0 million, the 8.750% Secured Notes will mature on September 14, 2022 and (ii) on February 27, 2023, the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the 4.875% Senior Notes that shall not have been purchased, repurchased, redeemed, defeased or otherwise acquired, retired, cancelled or discharged exceeds $50.0 million, the 8.750% Secured Notes will mature on February 28, 2023. Interest on the 8.750% Secured Notes is payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year, beginning on November 1, 2020.
The 8.750% Secured Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a joint and several senior basis by certain of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s subsidiaries that guarantee, assume or in any other manner become liable with respect to any of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s or its guarantors’ other debt. If Cinemark USA, Inc. cannot make payments on the 8.750% Secured Notes when they are due, Cinemark USA, Inc.’s guarantors must make them instead. Under certain circumstances, the guarantees may be released without action by, or the consent of, the holders of the 8.750% Secured Notes.
The 8.750% Secured Notes and the guarantees are Cinemark USA, Inc.’s and its guarantors’ senior obligations and are:
•
rank effectively senior in right of payment to Cinemark USA, Inc.’s and its guarantors’ existing and future debt that is not secured by the collateral as described within the indenture governing the 8.750% Secured Notes, or the Collateral, including all obligations under the Credit Agreement, and unsecured obligations, including the existing senior notes, in each case to the extent of the value of the Collateral;
•
rank effectively junior to Cinemark USA, Inc.’s and its guarantors’ existing and future debt secured by assets that are not part of the Collateral to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such debt, including all obligations under the Credit Agreement;
•
otherwise rank equally in right of payment to Cinemark USA, Inc.’s and its guarantors’ existing and future senior debt, including debt under the Credit Agreement and the existing senior notes;
•
rank senior in right of payment to Cinemark USA, Inc.’s and its guarantors’ future subordinated debt; and
•
be structurally subordinated to all existing and future debt and other liabilities of Cinemark USA, Inc.’s non-guarantor subsidiaries.
The indenture governing the 8.750% Secured Notes contains covenants that limit, among other things, the ability of Cinemark USA, Inc. and certain of its subsidiaries to (1) make investments or other restricted payments, including paying dividends, making other distributions or repurchasing subordinated debt or equity, (2) incur additional indebtedness and issue preferred stock, (3) enter into transactions with affiliates, (4) enter new lines of business, (5) merge or consolidate with, or sell all or substantially all of its assets to, another person and (6) create liens. As of December 31, 2020, Cinemark USA, Inc. could have distributed up to approximately $3.1 billion to its parent company and sole stockholder, Cinemark Holdings, Inc., under the terms of the indenture governing the 8.750% Secured Notes, subject to its available cash and other borrowing restrictions outlined in the indenture. Upon a change of control, as defined in the indenture governing the 8.750% Secured Notes, Cinemark USA, Inc. would be required to make an offer to repurchase the 8.750% Secured Notes at a price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount outstanding plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, through the date of repurchase. The indenture governing the 8.750% Secured Notes allows Cinemark USA, Inc. to incur additional indebtedness if it satisfies a coverage ratio specified in the indenture, after giving effect to the incurrence of the additional indebtedness, and in certain other circumstances. The required minimum coverage ratio is 2 to 1 and the actual ratio as of December 31, 2020 was below zero.
4.500% Convertible Senior Notes
On August 21, 2020, Cinemark Holdings, Inc. issued $460.0 million 4.500% convertible senior notes, or the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes. The 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes will mature on August 15, 2025, unless
earlier repurchased or converted. Interest on the notes is payable on February 15 and August 15 of each year, beginning on February 15, 2021.
Holders of the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes may convert their 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes at their option at any time prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding May 15, 2025 only under the following circumstances: (1) during the five business day period after any five consecutive trading day period, or the measurement period, in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of our common stock and the conversion rate on each such trading day; (2) if we distribute to all or substantially all stockholders (i) rights options or warrants entitling them to purchase shares at a discount to the recent average trading price of our common stock (including due to a stockholder rights plan) or (ii) our assets or securities or rights, options or warrants to purchase the same with a per share value exceeding 10% of the trading price of our common stock, (3) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events as described further in the indenture. Beginning May 15, 2025, holders may convert their 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes at any time prior to the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date, or (4) during any calendar quarter commencing after the calendar quarter ending on September 30, 2020 (and only during such calendar quarter), if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days during the period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price (initially $14.35 per share), on each applicable trading day. Upon conversion of the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes, we will pay or deliver cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election.
The initial conversion rate is 69.6767 shares of our common stock per one thousand dollars principal amount of the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes. The conversion rate will be subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of certain events. If a make-whole fundamental change as defined in the indenture occurs prior to the maturity date, we will, in certain circumstances, increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes in connection with such make-whole fundamental change.
The 4.500% Convertible Notes are effectively subordinated to any of our, or our subsidiaries’, existing and future secured debt to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness, including obligations under the Credit Agreement. The 4.500% Convertible Notes are structurally subordinated to all existing and future debt and other liabilities of our subsidiaries, including trade payables and including Cinemark USA’s 5.125% Senior Notes, 4.875% Senior Notes and the 8.750% Secured Notes, or, collectively, Cinemark USA’s senior notes (but excluding all obligations under the Credit Agreement which are guaranteed by Cinemark Holdings, Inc.). The 4.500% Convertible Notes rank equally in right of payment with all of our existing and future unsubordinated debt, including all obligations under the Credit Agreement, which such Credit Agreement is guaranteed by Cinemark Holdings, Inc., and senior in right of payment to any future debt that is expressly subordinated in right of payment to the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes. The 4.500% Convertible Notes are not guaranteed by any of Cinemark Holdings, Inc.’s subsidiaries.
In accordance with accounting guidance on debt and equity financing, we bifurcated the gross proceeds from the issuance of 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes and recorded a portion as long-term debt and a portion in equity. The long-term debt value was based on the fair value of the debt, determined as the present value of principal and interest payments assuming a market interest rate for similar debt that excluded a conversion feature. The difference between the face value of the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes and the fair value is referred to as the debt discount, and represents the amount allocated to equity. The debt discount is being amortized to interest expense at an effective interest rate of 10.0% over the contractual terms of the notes.
Concurrently with the issuance of the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes, we entered into privately negotiated convertible note hedge transactions, or the Hedge Transactions, with one or more of the initial purchasers of the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes or their respective affiliates, or the Option Counterparties. The Hedge Transactions cover the number of shares of our common stock that will initially underlie the aggregate amount of the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes, subject to anti-dilution adjustments substantially similar to those applicable to the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes. The Hedge Transactions are generally expected to reduce potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes and/or offset any cash payments we may be required to make in excess of the principal amount of converted 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes, as the case may be. Concurrently with entering into the Hedge Transactions, we also entered into separate privately negotiated warrant transactions with Option Counterparties, or the Warrant Transactions, whereby we sold to Option
Counterparties warrants to purchase (subject to the net share settlement provisions set forth therein) up to the same number of shares of our common stock, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments, or the Warrants. The Warrants could separately have a dilutive effect to the extent that the market value per share of our common stock exceeds the strike price of the warrants on the applicable expiration dates unless, subject to the terms of the Warrants, we elect to cash settle the Warrants. The exercise price of the Warrants is initially $22.08 and is subject to certain adjustments under the terms of the warrants. The Company received $89.4 million in cash proceeds from the sale of Warrants, which were used along with proceeds from the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes, to pay approximately $142.1 million to enter into the Hedge Transactions. The tax impact of the conversion option and Warrants amounted to $11.0 million and was recorded in additional paid-in-capital.
Together, the Hedge Transactions and the Warrants are intended to reduce the potential dilution from the conversion of the 4.500% Convertible Senior Notes. The Hedge Transactions and Warrants are recorded in equity and are not accounted for as derivatives, in accordance with applicable accounting guidance.
Additional Borrowings of International Subsidiaries
During the year ended December 31, 2020, certain of our international subsidiaries borrowed an aggregate of $22.3 million under various local bank loans. Below is a summary of these loans:
Additionally, we deposited cash into a collateral account to support the issuance of letters of credit to the lenders for certain of the international loans noted above. The total amount deposited was $13.8 million and is considered restricted cash as of December 31, 2020.
Covenant Compliance
As of December 31, 2020, we believe we were in full compliance with all agreements, including all related covenants, governing our outstanding debt.
Ratings
We are rated by nationally recognized rating agencies. The rating scales and methodologies used to derive individual ratings may vary from agency to agency. Credit ratings are issued by credit rating agencies based on evaluations of our ability to pay back our outstanding debt and the likelihood that we would default on that debt prior to its maturity. The credit ratings issued by the credit rating agencies represent the credit rating agency's evaluation of both qualitative and quantitative information for our company. The credit ratings that are issued are based on the credit rating agency’s judgment and experience in determining what information should be considered in giving a rating to a particular company. Ratings are always subject to change and there can be no assurance that our current ratings will continue for any given period of time. A downgrade of our debt ratings, depending on the extent, could increase the cost to borrow funds.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements and their impact on our financial statements.
Seasonality
Our revenues have historically been seasonal, coinciding with the timing of releases of motion pictures by the major distributors. The most successful motion pictures have historically been released during summer months in the U.S., extending from May to July, and during the holiday season, extending from November through year-end. The timing of releases, however, has become less pronounced as distributors have begun releasing content more evenly throughout the year. In our Latin American markets, while Hollywood content has similar release dates as in the U.S., the local holidays and seasons can vary. The unexpected emergence of a hit film during other periods can alter this seasonality trend. The timing, quantity and quality of such film releases can have a significant effect on our results of operations, and the results of one quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for the next quarter or for the same period in the following year.