Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Selected Financial Data (Item 6), and our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes contained elsewhere in this report.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview of CONMED Corporation
CONMED Corporation (“CONMED”, the “Company”, “we” or “us”) is a medical technology company that provides surgical devices and equipment for minimally invasive procedures. The Company’s products are used by surgeons and other healthcare professionals in a variety of specialties including orthopedics, general surgery, gynecology, thoracic surgery and gastroenterology.
Our product lines consist of orthopedic surgery and general surgery. Orthopedic surgery consists of sports medicine instrumentation and small bone, large bone and specialty powered surgical instruments as well as, imaging systems for use in minimally invasive surgery procedures including 2DHD and 3DHD vision technologies and service fees related to the promotion and marketing of sports medicine allograft tissue. General surgery consists of a complete line of endo-mechanical instrumentation for minimally invasive laparoscopic and gastrointestinal procedures, a line of cardiac monitoring products as well as electrosurgical generators and related instruments. These product lines as a percentage of consolidated net sales are as follows:
A significant amount of our products are used in surgical procedures with approximately 82% of our revenues derived from the sale of single-use products. Our capital equipment offerings also facilitate the ongoing sale of related single-use products and accessories, thus providing us with a recurring revenue stream. We manufacture substantially all of our products in facilities located in the United States and Mexico. We market our products both domestically and internationally directly to customers and through distributors. International sales approximated 44% in 2020, 46% in 2019 and 48% in 2018.
COVID-19
Our business has been significantly impacted by the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic, with the Company experiencing lower sales in 2020 compared to 2019, first in the Asia/Pacific Rim and later in the United States, Europe and elsewhere as temporary closures occurred and hospitals and surgery centers postponed many non-urgent surgical procedures to minimize the risk of infection. In compliance with various governmental orders, beginning in March we restricted access to our main facilities to only essential personnel required to be on-site while maintaining production and distribution. We expect revenues to increase in 2021 as compared to 2020. We expect the United States to rebound faster than our international markets based on the expected timing of increases in procedural volumes and general surgery rebounding faster than orthopedic surgery due to the nature of the products. However, the extent and duration of the adverse impact of COVID-19 on our business are still uncertain, rapidly changing and are subject to factors outside of our control, see "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for more information. For additional discussion regarding COVID 19, see Liquidity and Capital Resources below.
Buffalo Filter Acquisition
On February 11, 2019, we acquired Buffalo Filter and all of the issued and outstanding common stock of Palmerton Holdings, Inc. from Filtration Group FGC LLC (the “Buffalo Filter Acquisition”) for approximately $365 million, in cash. Buffalo Filter develops, manufactures and markets smoke evacuation technologies that are complementary to our general surgery offering. See Note 2 for further information on this business acquisition.
We financed the purchase price for the Buffalo Filter Acquisition using a combination of the issuance of $345.0 million of 2.625% convertible notes due 2024 issued on January 29, 2019 (the Convertible Notes”) and the incurrence of
indebtedness under our sixth amended and restated senior secured credit agreement, which closed on February 7, 2019. Refer to Financing Cash Flows and Note 7 for further details.
Critical Accounting Policies
Preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions which affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Note 1 describes the significant accounting policies used in preparation of the consolidated financial statements. The most significant areas involving management judgments and estimates are described below and are considered by management to be critical to understanding the financial condition and results of operations of CONMED Corporation. Actual results may or may not differ from these estimates.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We have a history of growth through acquisitions. Assets and liabilities of acquired businesses are recorded at their estimated fair values as of the date of acquisition. Goodwill represents costs in excess of fair values assigned to the underlying net assets of acquired businesses. Factors that contribute to the recognition of goodwill include synergies that are expected to increase net sales and profits; acquisition of a talented workforce; cost savings opportunities; the strategic benefit of expanding our presence in core and adjacent markets; and diversifying our product portfolio. Customer and distributor relationships, trademarks, tradenames, developed technology, patents and other intangible assets primarily represent allocations of purchase price to identifiable intangible assets of acquired businesses. Sales representation, marketing and promotional rights represent intangible assets created under our agreement with Musculoskeletal Transplant Foundation (“MTF”). Determining the fair value of intangible assets acquired as part of a business combination requires us to make significant estimates. These estimates include the amount and timing of projected future cash flows of each project or technology, revenue growth rates, projected cost of sales, customer attrition rates, the discount rate used to discount those cash flows to present value, the assessment of the asset’s useful life, and the consideration of legal, technical, regulatory, economic, and competitive risks. As these are significant estimates, we would obtain the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist in estimating fair values of intangible assets for significant acquisitions.
Goodwill and intangible assets deemed to have indefinite lives are not amortized, but are subject to at least annual impairment testing. It is our policy to perform our annual impairment testing in the fourth quarter. The identification and measurement of goodwill impairment involves the estimation of the fair value of our business. Estimates of fair value are based on the best information available as of the date of the assessment. We completed our goodwill impairment testing of our single reporting unit during the fourth quarter of 2020. We performed our impairment test utilizing the market capitalization approach to determine whether the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Based upon our assessment, the fair value of our reporting unit continues to exceed carrying value.
For our indefinite-lived intangible assets, trademarks and tradenames, we performed our impairment testing as of the fourth quarter of 2020 utilizing the relief from royalty income based approach to determine whether the fair value is less than its carrying amount. A considerable amount of management judgment and assumptions are required in performing the impairment testing. The key assumptions used in the impairment testing were long-term revenue growth projections, royalty rates, discount rates and general industry, market and macro-economic conditions. Based upon our assessment, the fair value continues to exceed carrying value.
Intangible assets with a finite life are amortized over the estimated useful life of the asset and are evaluated each reporting period to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining period of amortization. Intangible assets subject to amortization are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying amount may not be recoverable. The carrying amount of an intangible asset subject to amortization is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset. An impairment loss is recognized by reducing the carrying amount of the intangible asset to its current fair value.
See Note 6 for further discussion of goodwill and other intangible assets.
Pension Plan
We sponsor a defined benefit pension plan (the “pension plan”) that was frozen in 2009. It covered substantially all our United States based employees at the time it was frozen. In conjunction with the pension plan, we recorded a pension benefit obligation totaling $101.2 million as of December 31, 2020. In accounting for this pension plan, we are required to make a number of assumptions, including the expected rate of return on plan assets and discount rate. In determining the expected rate of return on plan assets, we consider the relative weighting of plan assets, the historical performance of total plan
assets and individual asset classes and economic and other indicators of future performance. The discount rate represents the interest rate used in estimating the present value of projected cash flows to settle the Company’s pension obligations. The discount rate assumption is determined by using a full yield curve approach, which involves applying the specific spot rates along the yield curve used in the determination of the benefit obligation that correlates to the relevant projected cash flows. See Note 12 for further discussion of the pension plan.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table presents, as a percentage of net sales, certain categories included in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income for the periods indicated:
Net Sales
The following table presents net sales by product line for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(a) Refer to Non-GAAP Financial Measures below for further details.
Net sales decreased 9.7% to $862.5 million in 2020 from $955.1 million in 2019. Net sales decreased across all product lines in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Orthopedic surgery sales decreased 19.1% in 2020 to $374.7 million from $463.3 million in 2019 primarily driven by deferral of non-urgent surgeries in hospitals and surgery centers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. A significant portion of this decline was driven by a reduction in capital equipment purchases as hospitals and surgery centers conserved cash and deferred capital outlays.
•General surgery sales decreased 0.8% in 2020 to $487.8 million from $491.8 million in 2019. The decrease was a result of the deferral of non-urgent surgeries in hospitals and surgery centers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe the deferral of non-urgent procedures has had a lesser impact on our general surgery lines as a result of the nature of the products and procedures in which they are used and this belief was borne out in the second half of the year as we experienced sequential growth from the third to the fourth quarter, including continued growth in our Buffalo Filter® and AirSeal® products throughout 2020.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales was $402.2 million in 2020 compared to $430.4 million in 2019. Gross profit margins were 53.4% in 2020 and 54.9% in 2019. The decrease in gross profit margin of 1.5 percentage points in 2020 was driven by the following:
•$6.6 million in costs related to plant underutilization due to abnormally low production as a result of decreased sales caused by the COVID-19 pandemic;
•an increase of $1.1 million in costs related to the consolidation of certain manufacturing operations related to winding down operations at certain locations and moving production lines to other facilities ($4.0 million in 2020 compared to $2.9 million in 2019);
•an increase of $1.5 million in business acquisition costs ($2.8 million in 2020 compared to $1.3 million in 2019);
•$2.2 million in costs related to product rationalization; and
•$1.1 million in restructuring costs related to a voluntary separation arrangement as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Refer to Note 14 for further details.
Selling and Administrative Expense
Selling and administrative expense was $373.8 million in 2020 compared to $400.1 million in 2019. Selling and administrative expense as a percentage of net sales was 43.3% in 2020 and 41.9% in 2019.
The decrease in selling and administrative expense in 2020 was driven mainly by actions taken to reduce expenses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We experienced reduced travel due to safety measures put in place and reduced trade show costs as shows were cancelled during the year. We also had lower commission costs during 2020 as sales declined compared to the prior year. In addition, during 2020, we incurred $4.8 million in severance costs related to a voluntary termination program and costs associated with the restructuring of our sales force, a $2.1 million write-off of field inventory used for customer demonstration and evaluation of products resulting from the product rationalization initiative and $1.2 million in acquisition and integration costs relating to the Buffalo Filter acquisition compared to $13.1 million in acquisition and integration costs in 2019. Refer to Note 14 for further details.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense was $40.5 million in 2020 and $45.5 million in 2019. As a percentage of net sales, research and development expense was 4.7% in 2020 and 4.8% in 2019. The lower spend in 2020 was driven by cost cutting measures in light of the COVID-19 pandemic while still investing in key projects.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased to $44.1 million in 2020 compared to $42.7 million in 2019. The weighted average interest rates on our borrowings were 3.65% in 2020 decreasing from 3.71% in 2019. The increase in interest expense during 2020 was primarily due to an increase in non-cash interest expense offset by a decrease in outstanding debt balances and slightly lower interest rates.
Other Expense
Other expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to non-service pension costs. Other expense during the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly related to costs associated with our sixth amended and restated senior credit agreement entered into on February 7, 2019 as further described in Note 7. These costs included a $3.6 million charge related to commitment fees paid to certain of our lenders, which provided a financing commitment for the Buffalo Filter acquisition, and a loss on the early extinguishment of debt of $0.3 million. Also included in 2019 were non-service pension costs.
Provision for Income Taxes
A provision (benefit) for income taxes was recorded at an effective rate of (493.9)% and 8.3% in 2020 and 2019, respectively, as compared to the federal statutory rate of 21.0%. The lower effective tax rate in 2020 was primarily the result of federal tax items having a greater benefit due to lower book income in 2020 as compared to 2019 as well as the benefit relating to the final issuance of tax regulations regarding United States tax on foreign earnings at different rates. A reconciliation of the United States statutory income tax rate to our effective tax rate is included in Note 8.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Net sales on a "constant currency" basis is a non-GAAP measure. The Company analyzes net sales on a constant currency basis to better measure the comparability of results between periods. To measure percentage sales growth in constant currency, the Company removes the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates that affect the comparability and trend of net sales.
Because non-GAAP financial measures are not standardized, it may not be possible to compare this financial measure with other companies' non-GAAP financial measures having the same or similar names. This adjusted financial measure should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for reported net sales growth, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure. This non-GAAP financial measure is an additional way of viewing net sales that, when viewed with our GAAP results, provides a more complete understanding of our business. The Company strongly encourages investors and shareholders to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs arise primarily from capital investments, working capital requirements and payments on indebtedness under the amended and restated senior credit agreement, described below. We have historically met these liquidity requirements with funds generated from operations and borrowings under our revolving credit facility. In addition, we have historically used term borrowings, including borrowings under the sixth amended and restated senior credit agreement and borrowings under separate loan facilities, in the case of real property purchases, to finance our acquisitions. We also have the
ability to raise funds through the sale of stock or we may issue debt through a private placement or public offering.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced lower sales in 2020, however as noted above we expect revenues to increase in 2021. On April 17, 2020 we amended our senior credit agreement to suspend our required leverage ratios for up to four quarters. On November 20, 2020, we entered into a third amendment under our senior credit agreement to lower the applicable margin on loans and lower the interest floor on Eurocurrency loans agreed upon in April as actual and forecasted results are expected to be better than anticipated. We have certain minimum liquidity and fixed charge coverage ratio requirements with which we were in compliance with as of December 31, 2020. Management believes that cash flow from operations, including cash and cash equivalents on hand and available borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility, will be adequate to meet our liquidity needs for the foreseeable future. We have undertaken steps to reduce our spending and expenses in light of our expectation that our revenues will be depressed over the next several months. While we expect that we will be well positioned when surgeries begin to return to their pre-pandemic levels, we are unable to predict with certainty how long the COVID-19 pandemic will last, or how severe its economic impact will be. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic and government responses thereto have subsided, residual economic and other effects may have an impact on the demand for post-pandemic surgery levels that are difficult to predict. If the downturn is more severe and prolonged than we currently expect, we may need to take further steps to reduce our costs, or to refinance our debt.
We had total cash on hand at December 31, 2020 of $27.4 million, of which approximately $26.3 million was held by our foreign subsidiaries outside the United States with unremitted earnings. During 2020, we redeployed $15.8 million of cash from certain non-U.S. subsidiaries primarily for U.S. debt reduction which consisted primarily of earnings that were taxed in 2017 as part of the deemed repatriation toll charge implemented by Tax Reform. We may repatriate funds from certain foreign subsidiaries in the future. Refer to Note 8 for further details.
Operating Cash Flows
Our net working capital position was $226.5 million at December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by operating activities was $64.5 million in 2020 and $95.1 million in 2019 generated on net income of $9.5 million in 2020 and $28.6 million in 2019. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities in 2020 as compared to 2019 was mainly driven by lower sales and net income in 2020 resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Significant impacts to operating cash flows in 2020 include increases from accounts receivable as fourth quarter sales in 2020 were lower than the same period in 2019 offset by decreases in operating cash flow caused by higher inventories on lower sales compared to the same period a year ago. Use of cash in other assets declined in 2020 compared to 2019 as lower sales force activity caused by the pandemic resulted in lower field inventory requirements.
Investing Cash Flows
Net cash used in investing activities decreased to $13.6 million in 2020 compared to $387.7 million in 2019 primarily due to the $365 million payment for the Buffalo Filter acquisition in 2019 and $3.2 million in cash received from the sale of a facility during 2020. Capital expenditures were $13.0 million and $20.1 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Financing Cash Flows
Financing activities in 2020 used cash of $52.1 million compared to providing cash of $300.9 million in 2019. Below is a summary of the significant financing activities:
•During 2019, we received proceeds of $345.0 million related to the issuance of 2.625% convertible notes as further described below.
•During 2019, we entered into a $265.0 million term loan in conjunction with the refinancing of our senior credit agreement. This new term loan replaced the previous term loan and resulted in payments of $13.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $110.7 million in net proceeds in the prior year.
•We had net repayments on our revolving line of credit of $13.0 million and $92.0 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
•In 2019, we paid $51.2 million to purchase hedges related to our convertible notes. Partially offsetting this, were proceeds of $30.6 million from the issuance of warrants as further described below.
•We paid $2.7 million and $6.5 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, in contingent consideration related to prior acquisitions.
•In 2020, we paid debt issuance costs of $3.2 million in connection with the April 17, 2020 and November 20, 2020 amendments of our sixth amended and restated senior credit agreement as further described below compared to $16.2 million in 2019 related to the sixth amended and restated senior credit agreement and 2.625% convertible notes.
On February 7, 2019, we entered into a sixth amended and restated senior credit agreement consisting of: (a) a $265.0 million term loan facility and (b) a $585.0 million revolving credit facility. The revolving credit facility will terminate and the loans outstanding under the term loan facility will mature on the earlier of (i) February 7, 2024 or (ii) 91 days prior to the earliest scheduled maturity date of the 2.625% convertible notes due in 2024 described below, (if, as of such date, more than $150.0 million in aggregate principal amount of such convertible notes (or any refinancing thereof) remains outstanding). The term loan facility is payable in quarterly installments increasing over the term of the facility. Proceeds from the term loan facility and borrowings under the revolving credit facility were used to repay the then existing senior credit agreement and in part to finance the acquisition of Buffalo Filter. As noted above, on April 17, 2020, we amended our sixth amended and restated senior credit agreement to suspend our required leverage ratios for up to four quarters. On November 20, 2020, we entered into a third amendment under our senior credit agreement to lower the applicable margin on the loans and lower the interest floor on Eurocurrency loans agreed upon in April as forecasted results are expected to be better than anticipated. We have certain minimum liquidity and fixed charge coverage ratio requirements. Interest rates are adjusted so that the applicable margin for base rate loans is 2.00% per annum and for Eurocurrency rate loans is 3.00% per annum, and the applicable commitment fee rate for the revolving credit facility is 0.50%. Following the suspension period, the applicable margin will depend upon CONMED’s consolidated senior secured leverage ratio, using the pricing grid set forth in the November 2020 amendment. Interest rates were at LIBOR (subject to 0.50% floor) plus an interest rate margin of 3.00% (3.50% at December 31, 2020).
There were $241.8 million in borrowings outstanding on the term loan facility as of December 31, 2020. There were $207.0 million in borrowings outstanding under the revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2020. Our available borrowings on the revolving credit facility at December 31, 2020 were $375.5 million with approximately $2.5 million of the facility set aside for outstanding letters of credit.
The sixth amended and restated senior credit agreement is collateralized by substantially all of our personal property and assets. The sixth amended and restated senior credit agreement contains covenants and restrictions which, among other things, require the maintenance of certain financial ratios and restrict dividend payments and the incurrence of certain indebtedness and other activities, including acquisitions and dispositions. We were in full compliance with these covenants and restrictions as of December 31, 2020. We are also required, under certain circumstances, to make mandatory prepayments from net cash proceeds from any issuance of equity and asset sales.
On January 29, 2019, we issued $345.0 million in 2.625% convertible notes due in 2024 (the "Notes"). Interest is payable semi-annually in arrears on February 1 and August 1 of each year, commencing August 1, 2019. The Notes will mature on February 1, 2024, unless earlier repurchased or converted. The Notes represent subordinated unsecured obligations and are convertible under certain circumstances, as defined in the indenture, into a combination of cash and CONMED common stock. The Notes may be converted at an initial conversion rate of 11.2608 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $88.80 per share of common stock). Holders of the Notes may convert the Notes at their option at any time on or after November 1, 2023 through the second scheduled trading day preceding the maturity date. Holders of the Notes will also have the right to convert the Notes prior to November 1, 2023, but only upon the occurrence of specified events. The conversion rate is subject to anti-dilution adjustments if certain events occur. A portion of the net proceeds from the offering of the Notes were used as part of the financing for the Buffalo Filter acquisition and $21.0 million were used to pay the cost of certain convertible notes hedge transactions as further described below.
In connection with the offering of the Notes, we entered into convertible notes hedge transactions with a number of financial institutions (each, an “option counterparty”). The convertible notes hedge transactions cover, subject to anti-dilution adjustments substantially similar to those applicable to the Notes, the number of shares of our common stock underlying the Notes. Concurrently with entering into the convertible notes hedge transactions, we also entered into separate warrant transactions with each option counterparty whereby we sold to such option counterparty warrants to purchase, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments, the same number of shares of our common stock.
The convertible notes hedge transactions are expected generally to reduce the potential dilution upon conversion of the Notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of converted Notes, as the case may be, in the event that the market price per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the convertible notes hedge transactions, is greater than the strike price ($114.92) of the convertible notes hedge transactions, which initially corresponds to the conversion price of the Notes and is subject to anti-dilution adjustments substantially similar to those applicable to the conversion rate of the Notes. If, however, the market price per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the warrant transactions, exceeds the strike price of the warrants, there would nevertheless be dilution to the extent that such market price exceeds the strike price of the warrants, unless we elect to settle the warrants in cash.
Our Board of Directors has authorized a $200.0 million share repurchase program. Through December 31, 2020, we have repurchased a total of 6.1 million shares of common stock aggregating $162.6 million under this authorization and have $37.4 million remaining available for share repurchases. The repurchase program calls for shares to be purchased in the open market or in private transactions from time to time. We may suspend or discontinue the share repurchase program at any time. We have not purchased any shares of common stock under the share repurchase program during 2020. We have financed the repurchases and may finance additional repurchases through operating cash flow and from available borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
Management believes that cash flow from operations, including cash and cash equivalents on hand and available borrowing capacity under our sixth amended and restated senior credit agreement, will be adequate to meet our anticipated operating working capital requirements, debt service, funding of capital expenditures, dividend payments and common stock repurchases in the foreseeable future. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Indebtedness."
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations for the next five years and thereafter (amounts in thousands) as of December 31, 2020. Purchase obligations represent purchase orders for goods and services placed in the ordinary course of business.
In addition to the above contractual obligations, we are required to make periodic interest payments on our long-term debt obligations (see additional discussion under