ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
This section is intended to help potential investors understand our financial performance through a discussion of the factors affecting our financial condition at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 and our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. This section should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Cincinnati Federal provides financial services to individuals and businesses from our main office in Cincinnati, Ohio and our full service branch offices in Miami Heights, Anderson and Price Hill and in Covington and Florence in Northern Kentucky. Our primary market area includes Hamilton County, Ohio, and, to a lesser extent, Warren, Butler and Clermont Counties, Ohio. We also conduct business in the northern Kentucky region and make loans secured by properties in Campbell, Kenton and Boone Counties, Kentucky, as well as in Dearborn County, in southeastern Indiana.
Our business consists primarily of taking deposits from the general public and investing those deposits, together with borrowings and funds generated from operations, in one- to four-family residential real estate loans, and, to a lesser extent, nonresidential real estate and multi-family loans, home equity loans and lines of credit and construction and land loans. At December 31, 2020, $84.8 million, or 49.0% of our total loan portfolio, was comprised of one- to four-family residential real estate loans; $29.5 million, or 17.1%, consisted of nonresidential real estate loans; $41.7 million, or 24.1%, consisted of multi-family loans; $9.9 million, or 5.8%, consisted of home equity lines of credit; $1.1 million or 0.6% consisted of commercial business loans and consumer loans; and $5.8 million, or 3.4%, consisted of construction and land loans. We also invest in securities, which currently consist primarily of mortgage-backed securities issued by U.S. government sponsored entities and Federal Home Loan Bank stock.
Cincinnati Federal also operates an active mortgage banking unit with thirteen mortgage loan officers. This unit originates loans both for sale in the secondary market and for retention in our portfolio. The revenue from gain on sales of loans was $9.5 million for year ended December 31, 2020 and $2.1 million for year ended December 31, 2019.
We offer a variety of deposit accounts, including checking accounts, savings accounts and certificate of deposit accounts. We utilize advances from the FHLB-Cincinnati for liquidity and for asset/liability management purposes. At December 31, 2020, we had $38.4 million in advances outstanding with the FHLB-Cincinnati.
Our results of operations depend primarily on our net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between the interest income we earn on our interest-earning assets and the interest we pay on our interest-bearing liabilities. Our results of operations also are affected by our provisions for loan losses, non-interest income and non-interest expense. Non-interest income currently consists primarily of gain (loss) on sale of mortgage loans, checking account service fee income, interchange fees from debit card transactions and income from bank owned life insurance. Non-interest expense currently consists primarily of expenses related to compensation and employee benefits, occupancy and equipment, data processing, franchise taxes, federal deposit insurance premiums, impairment losses on foreclosed real estate and other operating expenses.
We invest in bank owned life insurance to provide us with a funding source to offset some costs of our benefit plan obligations. Bank owned life insurance provides us with non-interest income that is nontaxable. Federal regulations generally limit our investment in bank owned life insurance to 25% of our Tier 1 capital plus our allowance for loan losses. At December 31, 2020, this limit was $9.1 million, and we had invested $4.2 million in bank owned life insurance.
Cincinnati Federal Investment Services, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Cincinnati Federal under Ohio law, was formed in 2015 to offer nondeposit investment and insurance products in partnership with Infinex Investments, Inc. Cincinnati Federal Investment Services, LLC is currently inactive.
Our results of operations also may be affected significantly by general and local economic and competitive conditions, changes in market interest rates, governmental policies and actions of regulatory authorities.
Business Strategy
Our current business strategy is to operate as a well-capitalized and profitable community bank dedicated to serving the needs of our consumer and business customers, and offering personalized and efficient customer service. Our goals are to increase interest income through loan portfolio growth, expand fee income with the mortgage banking unit, lower our cost of deposits by increasing non-maturity based accounts, achieve economies of scale through balance sheet growth and diversify sources of income. Highlights of our current business strategy include:
· Increasing our origination of nonresidential real estate and multi-family loans. We began originating a significant amount of nonresidential real estate and multi-family loans in the early 2000s. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, such loans, together with construction and land loans, totaled $77.1 million and $65.3 million, or 211.4% and 258.8% of capital plus ALLL, respectively. Under our current board approved loan concentration policy, such loans (including construction and land loans) shall not exceed 300% of our capital plus ALLL. We intend to continue to increase our origination of nonresidential real estate and multi-family real estate loans, with a focus on multi-family loans. Most nonresidential real estate and multi-family loans are originated with adjustable rates. Nonresidential real estate and multi-family lending is expected to increase loan yields with shorter repricing terms than fixed-rate loans. Nonresidential real estate and multi-family originations in 2020 increased $7.0 million or 30.6% over 2019 origination levels. See “Business of Cincinnati Federal-Lending Activities-Commercial Real Estate and Multi-Family Lending.”
· Continuing to focus on our residential mortgage banking operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we originated $323.0 million of one-to four-family residential loans, and we sold $291.4 million of one-to four-family residential loans. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we originated $113.7 million of one-to four family residential loans, and we sold $93.8 million of one- to four-family residential loans. These loans are all sold on a non-recourse basis primarily to the FHLB-Cincinnati, Freddie Mac, and other private sector third-party buyers. Loans are sold on both a servicing-retained and servicing-released basis. Subject to mortgage market conditions, we intend to continue to increase the number of mortgage loan originators in order to increase our volume of sold loans with the potential for increased servicing income.
· Continuing to emphasize one- to four-family residential adjustable rate mortgage lending. We will continue to focus on originating one- to four-family adjustable rate mortgages for retention in our portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, $54.4 million, or 64.3%, of our one- to four-family residential mortgage loans, with contractual maturities after December 31, 2020, were adjustable rate loans. As of December 31, 2019, $83.0 million, or 46.1%, of our one- to four-family residential mortgage loans had adjustable rates. Adjustable rate loans have shorter repricing terms to mitigate interest rate risk.
· Increasing our “core” deposit base. We seek to increase our core deposit base, particularly checking accounts. Core deposits include all deposit account types except certificates of deposit. Core deposits are our least costly source of funds, which improves our interest rate spread, and represent our best opportunity to develop customer relationships that enable us to cross-sell our full complement of products and services. Core deposits also contribute non-interest income from account-related fees and services and are generally less sensitive to withdrawal when interest rates fluctuate. We have continued our marketing efforts for checking accounts through digital, print and outdoor advertising channels. Core deposits as of December 31, 2020 grew $23.8 million or 36.0% over December 31, 2019 balances. The increase is partially attributable to the increase in cash of $6.0 million at Cincinnati Bancorp, Inc. which is held in a deposit account at the Bank. We continue to significantly expand and improve the products and services we offer our retail and business deposit customers who maintain core deposit accounts and have improved our infrastructure for electronic banking services, including business online banking, mobile banking, bill pay, remote deposit capture, wire transfers and e-statements. The deposit infrastructure we have established can accommodate significant increases in retail and business deposit accounts without additional capital expenditure. We will also continue to use non-core deposits, including certificates of deposit from the National CD Rateline Program, as a source of funds, in accordance with our asset/liability policies and funding strategies.
· Implementing a managed growth strategy. We intend to pursue a growth strategy for the foreseeable future, with the goal of improving the profitability of our business through increased net interest income and new sources of non-interest income. Subject to market conditions, we intend to grow our one- to four-family residential adjustable rate, nonresidential real estate and multi-family loan portfolios. To a lesser extent we intend to grow our construction and commercial business loan portfolio.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions affecting the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, and the reported amounts of income and expenses. We consider the accounting policies discussed below to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions that we use are based on historical experience and various other factors and are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, resulting in a change that could have a material impact on the carrying value of our assets and liabilities and our results of operations.
The following represent our critical accounting policies:
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is established as losses are estimated to have occurred through a provision for loan losses charged to income. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when management believes the uncollectability of a loan balance is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. The allowance for loan losses is evaluated on a regular basis by management and is based upon management’s periodic review of the collectability of the loans in light of historical experience, the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, estimated value of any underlying collateral and prevailing economic conditions. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available.
The allowance consists of allocated and general components. The allocated component relates to loans that are classified as impaired. For those loans that are classified as impaired, an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or collateral value or observable market price) of the impaired loan is lower than the carrying value of that loan. The general component covers nonclassified loans and is based on historical charge-off experience and expected loss given default derived from our internal risk rating process. Other adjustments may be made to the allowance for pools of loans after an assessment of internal or external influences on credit quality that are not fully reflected in the historical loss or risk rating data.
A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we may not be able to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Factors considered by management in determining impairment include payment status, collateral value and the probability of collecting scheduled principal and interest payments when due. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration all of the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed. Impairment is measured on a loan-by-loan basis by either the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, the loan’s obtainable market price or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent.
Groups of loans with similar risk characteristics are collectively evaluated for impairment based on the group’s historical loss experience adjusted for changes in trends, conditions and other relevant factors that affect repayment of the loans.
In the course of working with borrowers, we may choose to restructure the contractual terms of certain loans. In this scenario, we attempt to work-out an alternative payment schedule with the borrower in order to optimize collectability of the loan. Any loans that are modified are reviewed by us to identify if a troubled debt restructuring has occurred, which is when, for economic or legal reasons related to a borrower’s financial difficulties, we grant a concession to the borrower that we would not otherwise consider. Terms may be modified to fit the ability of the borrower to repay in line with the borrower’s current financial status, and the restructuring of the loan may include the transfer of assets from the borrower to satisfy the debt, a modification of loan terms or a combination of the two. If such efforts by us do not result in a satisfactory arrangement, the loan is referred to legal counsel, at which time we commence foreclosure. We may terminate foreclosure proceedings if the borrower is able to work-out a satisfactory payment plan. It is our policy that any restructured loans on nonaccrual, prior to being restructured, remain on nonaccrual status until six months of satisfactory borrower performance, at which time management would consider its return to accrual status. If a loan was accruing at the time of restructuring, we review the loan to determine if it is appropriate to continue the accrual of interest on the restructured loan.
With regards to determination of the amount of the allowance for credit losses, troubled debt restructured loans are considered to be impaired. As a result, the determination of the amount of impaired loans for each portfolio segment within troubled debt restructurings is the same as detailed previously.
Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati Lender Risk Account Receivable. Certain loan sale transactions with the Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati provide for establishment of a lender risk account receivable, which consists of amounts withheld from loan sale proceeds by the Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati for absorbing inherent losses that are probable on those sold loans. These withheld funds are an asset as they are scheduled to be paid to us in future years, net of any credit losses on those loans sold. The receivables are initially measured at fair value. The fair value is estimated by discounting the cash flows over the life of each master commitment contract. The accretable yield is amortized over the life of the master commitment contract. Expected cash flows are re-evaluated at each measurement date. If there is an adverse change in expected cash flows, the accretable yield would be adjusted on a prospective basis and the asset would be evaluated for impairment.
Mortgage Servicing Rights. Mortgage servicing assets are recognized separately when rights are acquired through sale of financial assets. Under the servicing assets and liabilities accounting guidance (ASC 860-50), servicing rights resulting from the sale of loans originated by us are initially measured at fair value at the date of transfer. Cincinnati Federal subsequently measures each class of servicing asset using the fair value method. Under the fair value method, the servicing rights are carried in the balance sheet at fair value and the changes in fair value are reported in earnings in the period in which the changes occur.
Fair value is based on a valuation model that calculates the present value of estimated future net servicing income. The valuation model incorporates assumptions that market participants would use in estimating future net servicing income, such as the cost to service, the discount rate, the custodial earnings rate, an inflation rate, ancillary income, prepayment speeds and default rates and losses. These variables change from quarter to quarter as market conditions and projected interest rates change, and may have an adverse impact on the value of the mortgage servicing rights and may result in a reduction or addition to noninterest income.
Servicing fee income is recorded for fees earned for servicing loans. The fees are based on a contractual percentage of the outstanding principal or a fixed amount per loan and are recorded as income when earned.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Impact
As a result of the spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, economic uncertainties have arisen which may negatively affect the financial position, results of operations and cash flows of the Company and, in particular, the collectability of the loan portfolio. The duration of these uncertainties and the ultimate financial effects cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Loan Modifications
Beginning in March 2020, we began receiving requests from certain of our borrowers for loan payment deferrals. These modifications for our portfolio loans are for the deferral of principal and interest payments up to 90 day terms. Loan deferral terms may be extended on a case-by-case basis. Each request is evaluated individually and evidenced by a signed loan modification agreement. Interest on loan deferrals continues to accrue during the deferral period. While interest and fees will still accrue to income, through normal GAAP accounting, should eventual credit losses on these deferred payments emerge, interest income and fees accrued would need to be reversed. In such a scenario, interest income in future periods could be negatively impacted. Collectability of accrued interest will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis once the deferral period is ended. At this time, it is uncertain what the potential impact of loan deferrals will have on the financial position, results of operations and the allowance for loan losses. The following table provides further information on coronavirus payment deferral modifications for loans held in portfolio approved as of December 31, 2020:
The Company services loans for various investors, including the FHLB-Cincinnati and Freddie Mac. Under terms of our agreement with these entities we are required to remit principal and interest on a scheduled basis. We have conformed our loan deferral program to meet the guidance issued by the FHLB-Cincinnati and Freddie Mac. At this time, it is uncertain what potential impact the loan deferrals for sold loans will have on our financial position. The following table shows the coronavirus payment deferral modifications approved for loans sold as of December 31, 2020:
Paycheck Protection Program
As part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) has been authorized to guarantee loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) under the CARES Act through August 8, 2020. We began accepting applications on April 27, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had originated 23 PPP loans totaling $633,800. PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the SBA and therefore do not represent a credit risk. PPP loans are included within the commercial loans category.
Asset Impairment
Our mortgage servicing rights valuation has experienced a decrease as of December 31, 2020 as a result of increased prepayment speed assumptions due to the decrease in market interest rates in response to COVID-19. The fair value of our mortgage servicing rights, however, has increased due to the recording of mortgage servicing rights on increased levels of new loan originations. It is uncertain whether prolonged effects of the COVID-19 pandemic will result in future decreases in the fair value of our MSRs.
Financial position and results of operations
Pertaining to our December 31, 2020 financial condition and results of operations, COVID-19 had an impact on our allowance for loan losses (“ALL”). While we have not yet experienced any charge-offs related to COVID-19, our allowance for loan losses calculation and resulting provision for loan losses are impacted by changes in economic conditions. Given the increase in economic uncertainty since the pandemic was declared in early March, our need for additional allowance for loan losses has potentially increased. As of December 31, 2020, our significant credit quality indicators, such as levels of delinquent, classified, impaired and nonperforming loans, have not materially deteriorated. Should economic conditions in our market area worsen, we could experience a need for further increases in our allowance for loan losses and be required to record additional provisions for loan loss expense. It is possible that our asset quality measures could worsen at future measurement periods if the effects of COVID-19 are prolonged.
Capital and liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, all of our capital ratios were in excess of all regulatory requirements to be considered a “well capitalized” institution. While we believe that we have sufficient capital to withstand an extended economic recession brought about by COVID-19, our reported and regulatory capital ratios could be adversely impacted by further losses.
We maintain access to multiple sources of liquidity. Wholesale funding sources, particularly the FHLB and National CD Rateline, have remained open to us. If funding costs become elevated for an extended period of time, it could have an adverse effect on our net interest margin. If an extended recession caused large numbers of our deposit customers to withdraw their funds, we might become more reliant on volatile or more expensive sources of funding.
Our processes, controls and business continuity plan
Following guidance from the Governors of Ohio and Kentucky, the Company has deployed a successful remote working strategy, provided timely communication to our employees and customers, implemented protocols for employee safety, and initiated strategies for monitoring and responding to local COVID-19 impacts - including customer relief efforts. The Company’s preparedness efforts, coupled with timely plan implementation, resulted in minimal impacts to operations as a result of COVID-19. Prior technology planning resulted in the successful deployment of the majority of our operational teams to a remote environment. As the pandemic has progressed through the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, most of our employees returned to their offices. In October 2020, management made the decision to close our branch lobbies for in-person transactions unless by appointment due to the spike in COVID-19 cases in Ohio and Kentucky. As of December 31, our branch lobbies remained closed for in-person customer transactions. Our employees are working from home where practicable. We do not anticipate incurring additional material costs related to adhering to the State of Ohio or Kentucky’s mandated COVID-19 related business requirements. Our management team continues to meet as needed to respond to any future COVID-19 interruptions or developments. We do not anticipate significant challenges to our ability to maintain our systems and controls in light of the measures we have taken to prevent the spread of COVID-19. The Company does not currently face any material resource constraint through the implementation of our business continuity plans.
Lending
The Company’s loan exposure is predominately retail residential, multifamily and nonresidential in nature. See Note 3 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no direct exposure to the hospitality, restaurant, travel, energy, aviation, healthcare or senior living industries. Although the Company has no direct exposure to the aviation industry, General Electric operates a jet engine plant in the Cincinnati area which has been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Some of General Electric employees are borrowers from the Company, and their ability to service their debt may be or may become impaired. The bank has one nonresidential loan secured by property leased by a GE aviation subsidiary. The loan was current as of December 31, 2020.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2020 and 2019
Total Assets. Total assets were $237.1 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $4.7 million, or 1.9%, from the $241.8 million at December 31, 2019. Cash and cash equivalents decreased $5.4 million, or 14.3%. Total loans, net of the allowance, decreased $12.7 million, or 7.1% due to higher prepayments. Offsetting the decrease in total assets was an increase in loans held for sale of $10.2 million, or 328.6%, to $13.3 million from $3.1 million at December 31, 2019. Interest-bearing time deposits increased $3.0 million at December 31, 2020.
Cash and Cash Equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents decreased $5.4 million, or 14.3%, to $32.3 million at December 31, 2020 from $37.7 million at December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily the result of the return of $9.8 million of stock over-subscription proceeds and the increase in loans held for sale of $10.2 million, or 328.6%, partially offset by an increase of $8.8 million in deposits.
Available-for-Sale Securities. Investment securities available-for-sale decreased $1.5 million to $5.2 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $6.7 million at December 31, 2019 due to maturities. There were no purchases or sales of available-for-sale securities in 2020.
Loans Held for Sale. We currently sell certain fixed-rate, 15- and 30-year term, one-to-four family mortgage loans. We have sold loans on both a servicing-released and servicing-retained basis to: the FHLB-Cincinnati, through its mortgage purchase program; Freddie Mac; and certain private sector third-party buyers. Loans held for sale increased $10.2 million, or 328.6%, to $13.3 million at December 31, 2020 from $3.1 million at December 31, 2019. In 2020, we originated $301.6 million of loans for sale, all of which were one- to four-family residential real estate loans. Management intends to continue this sales activity in future periods to generate gain on sale revenue and servicing fee income.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold $291.4 million of one-to- four family residential loans, on both a servicing-retained and servicing-released basis. Recent economic events, including a reduction in interest rates by the Federal Reserve Board, in its efforts to address the overall economic slowdown brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic, have reduced mortgage interest rates and have had a favorable impact on our originations of fixed-rate mortgage loans, which we have classified as held for sale to the secondary market. During the year ended December 31, 2020, in recognition of the increasing demand for mortgage lending related to the lower interest rate environment, and the opportunity to pursue increased mortgage banking business, we hired an additional five mortgage loan officers and nine lending and loan servicing support personnel. Management intends to continue this sales activity in future periods to generate gains on sale and servicing fee income, particularly if the prevailing low interest rate environment persists.
Net Loans. Net loans decreased $12.7 million, or 7.1%, to $166.7 million at December 31, 2020 from $179.3 million at December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we originated $62.6 million of loans for the portfolio, $19.8 million of which were one- to four- family residential real estate loans, $10.8 million were nonresidential real estate loans, $19.1 million were multi-family loans, $7.7 million were home equity lines of credit, $4.3 million were construction and land loans, $634,000 were Paycheck Protection Plan (PPP) commercial business loans and $268,000 were consumer loans. The residential loan portfolio declined by $19.2 million, as borrowers elected to refinance their loans at lower mortgage rates, and the Bank elected to sell the preponderance of these new fixed rate residential loans in the secondary market. This decline in the residential loan portfolio was partially offset by net increases in the nonresidential loan portfolio of $6.2 million and $5.1 million in the multifamily loan portfolio. The growth in these segments reflects our strategy to grow the commercial real estate portfolio to enhance loan yields.
Mortgage Servicing Rights. Mortgage servicing rights increased to $2.0 million, or 66.9%, from $1.2 million at December 31, 2019. New mortgage servicing rights of $1.4 million were recognized while the fair value of mortgage servicing rights declined $600,000.
Other Assets. Other assets increased $366,000, or 29.6%, to $1.6 million at December 31, 2020 from $1.2 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the right of use lease of $181,000 for a loan production office, COVID payment deferrals of $321,000 and a mortgage banking derivative net asset of $499,000, partially offset by a $584,000 decrease in prepaid stock offering expenses.
Deposits. Deposits increased $8.8 million, or 6.1%, to $152.2 million at December 31, 2020 from $143.4 million at December 31, 2019. Our core deposits increased $23.8 million, or 36.0%, to $90.0 million at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. Demand deposit accounts increased $13.3 million, or 46.4% as part of our strategy to increase lower cost funding sources. The Bank implemented a “free checking” marketing program through a third-party during the year. Time deposits decreased $15.0 million, or 19.5%, to $62.2 million at December 31, 2020 from $77.2 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease in time deposits was primarily due to the decline in the Bank’s time deposit offering rates, as a result of the decrease in market interest rates. In large part, maturing time deposits were moved to checking and savings accounts offering comparable interest rates with increased liquidity. Deposits obtained through the National CD Rateline Program decreased to $5.6 million at December 31, 2020 from $6.6 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease in retail and wholesale time deposits was part of the Bank’s strategy to reduce the cost of deposits in 2020. Management intends to continue its strategy of pursuing growth in lower cost core deposits in 2021.
Federal Home Loan Bank Advances. Federal Home Loan Bank advances decreased $8.8 million, or 18.6%, to $38.4 million at December 31, 2020 from $47.2 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease in FHLB advances was part of our strategy to reduce our dependence on wholesale funding sources.
Stock Subscription Funds. Stock subscription funds were disbursed following the closing of the stock offering. The closing occurred effective January 22, 2020. The subscription offering was over-subscribed and $9.8 million was refunded to prospective investors after the closing date.
Stockholders’ Equity. Stockholders’ equity increased $17.7 million, or 74.1%, to $41.5 million at December 31, 2020 from $23.8 million at December 31, 2019. The increase resulted primarily from the $14.3 million net proceeds of the stock offering and net income of $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
General. Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.2 million, compared to a net income of $798,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $2.4 million or 295.2%. The increase was primarily due to a $7.7 million increase in noninterest income, partially offset by a $4.2 million increase in noninterest expense, a decrease in net interest income of $199,000, a $240,000 increase in the provision for loan losses and an increase of $732,000 increase in federal income tax expense. The increase in noninterest income was primarily attributable to higher residential mortgage lending activity as a result of the decrease in interest rates from the Federal Reserve’s response to the impact of COVID-19 on the economy. The decrease in long term interest rates had a positive impact on residential refinance and home purchase activity as reflected in the increase on gain on sale of loans. Mortgage banking revenue, including gain on sale of loans in 2020, is highly dependent on continued low mortgage rates.
Interest and Dividend Income. Interest and dividend income decreased $508,000, or 5.9%, to $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to a $365,000, or 4.5%, decrease in interest on loans receivable, primarily due to a 31 basis point decrease in the average yield on loans, as customers with higher yielding loans elected to refinance to lower rates. This decrease in the yield on loans was partially offset by a $4.6 million increase in the average balance outstanding year-to-year.
Interest income on securities increased $36,000, or 127.4%, as the average balance of investment securities increased $4.5 million to $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting higher levels of liquidity. The average yield on investment securities decreased 91 basis points to 1.09% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2.00% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in yield on available-for-sale securities was attributable to the purchase of lower yielding adjustable and floating rate mortgage-backed securities. Dividends on Federal Home Loan Bank stock and other investments decreased $179,000 primarily due to the decrease in the average yield on other interest-bearing deposits of 163 basis points. The average balance of other interest-bearing deposits, including certificates of deposit in other financial institutions, and federal funds sold increased $5.4 million to $19.0 million at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense. Total interest expense decreased $309,000, or 10.6%, to $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense on deposit accounts decreased $295,000, or 15.1%, to $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of 31 basis points in the average cost of deposits, which was partially offset by a $9.8 million increase in the average balance year-to-year. The average cost of interest-bearing demand accounts decreased 125 basis points to 0.22%, while average interest-bearing demand account balances increased $8.5 million at December 31, 2020. The average cost of savings accounts decreased 25 basis points to 0.28%, while average savings account balances increased $7.1 million at December 31, 2020.The average balance of certificates of deposits decreased $5.9 million while the average cost of certificates of deposits decreased 2 basis points to 2.10% at December 31, 2020.
Interest expense on FHLB advances decreased $14,000 to $941,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $955,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The average balance of advances decreased $439,000 to $42.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, while the average cost of advances decreased one basis point to 2.22%.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income decreased $199,000, or 3.5%, to $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Average net interest-earning assets increased $14.4 million compared to year end December 31, 2019. The interest rate spread decreased to 2.39% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2.69% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net interest margin decreased to 2.58% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2.87% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Provision for Loan Losses. Based on management’s analysis of the allowance for loan losses described in Note 1 of our financial statements “Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” we recorded a provision for loan losses of $265,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a provision for loan losses of $25,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The allowance for loan losses was $1.7 million, or 0.97% of total loans, at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.4 million or 0.78% of total loans, at December 31, 2019. The increase in the provision for loan losses in 2020 compared to 2019 was due primarily to the uncertainty of impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy as a whole and on our market area in particular. The resurgence of COVID cases nationally in late 2020, and the prospect of continued economic weakness and continued high unemployment, indicated a qualitative factor adjustment was warranted to increase the allowance for loan losses. Along with the possible effects of the pandemic, we included in our consideration of the ALLL the continued low balances of our nonperforming loans and delinquent loans during 2020 and the decrease in historical charge-offs for the six year look back period. Total nonperforming loans were $174,000 and $111,000 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Classified loans declined to $883,000 at December 31, 2020, from $1.4 million at December 31, 2019, and loans past due greater than 30 days totaled $398,000 and $209,000 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Bank had no loan charge-offs during the year ended December 31, 2020 and loan charge-offs totaled $23,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of nonperforming loans, the allowance for loan losses was 962% and 1,268% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The allowance for loan losses reflects the estimate we believe to be adequate to cover incurred probable losses which were inherent in the loan portfolio, and adjusted for uncertainty due to COVID-19, at December 31, 2020. While we believe the estimates and assumptions used in our determination of the adequacy of the allowance are reasonable, such estimates and assumptions could be proven incorrect in the future, and the actual amount of future provisions may exceed the amount of past provisions, and the increase in future provisions that may be required may adversely impact our financial condition and results of operations. In addition, bank regulatory agencies periodically review our allowance for loan losses and may require an increase in the provision for possible loan losses or the recognition of further loan charge-offs, based on judgments different than those of management.
Non-Interest Income. Non-interest income increased $7.7 million, or 261.4%, to $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $7.4 million in gain on sales of loans. We sold $291.4 million in residential loans for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $92.0 million in residential loans for the year ended December 31, 2019. Other fee income increased $578,000, or 67.2%, due to an increase in the fair value of loan commitments. Fee income recognized from the Paycheck Protection Program was $9,000 for the year ended 2020.
Non-Interest Expense. Non-interest expense increased $4.2 million, or 54.5%, to $11.8 million for 2020 from $7.7 million for 2019. Salaries and employee benefits increased $3.5 million, or 79.9%. The increase in salaries and employee benefit expense was due to additional loan officers and loan origination and loan servicing support staff hired to accommodate the increased mortgage loan origination volume. During the year ended 2020 we hired five mortgage loan officers, one commercial real estate loan officer and eleven loan origination and loan servicing support staff. Loan costs increased $309,000, or 91.9% from the higher mortgage loan origination volume. Advertising expense increased $179,000, primarily from the implementation of a “free checking” marketing program through a third-party vendor. Occupancy costs increased $103,000, or 17.2% due in large part to leasing a loan production office to accommodate additional loan officers and lending support staff.
Federal Income Taxes. The provision for income taxes increased $732,000 to $820,000 in 2020. The increase was due primarily to increased income before income taxes of $3.1 million. The effective rates were 20.6% and 9.9% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate in 2020 was due to a tax credit adjustment for merger expenses related to the Kentucky Federal acquisition taken in 2019.
Average Balances and Yields. The following tables set forth average balance sheets, average yields and costs, and certain other information at the dates and for the periods indicated. No tax-equivalent yield adjustments have been made. Any adjustments necessary to present yields on a tax-equivalent basis are insignificant. All average balances are monthly average balances. Management does not believe that the use of month-end balances instead of daily average balances has caused any material differences in the information presented. Non-accrual loans were included in the computation of average balances only. The yields set forth below include the effect of deferred fees, discounts, and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income or interest expense.
(1) Consists of FHLB-Cincinnati stock, FHLB DDA, Fed Funds sold, certificates of deposit and cash reserves.
(2) Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the weighted average yield on interest-earning assets and the weighted average rate of interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Net interest-earning assets represent total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
(4) Net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table presents the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income for the periods indicated. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The total column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume.
Management of Market Risk
General. Our most significant form of market risk is interest rate risk because, as a financial institution, the majority of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature and sensitive to changes in interest rates. Therefore, a principal part of our operations is to manage interest rate risk and limit the exposure of our financial condition and results of operations to changes in market interest rates. Our Asset/Liability Committee is responsible for evaluating the interest rate risk inherent in our assets and liabilities, for determining the level of risk that is appropriate, given our business strategy, operating environment, capital, liquidity and performance objectives, and for managing this risk consistent with the policy and guidelines approved by our board of directors.
Our asset/liability management strategy attempts to manage the impact of changes in interest rates on net interest income, our primary source of earnings. Among the techniques we use to manage interest rate risk are:
· originating nonresidential real estate and multi-family loans, and, to a lesser extent, construction, consumer and commercial business loans, all of which tend to have shorter terms and higher interest rates than one- to four-family residential real estate loans, and which generate customer relationships that can result in larger non-interest bearing checking accounts;
· selling substantially all of our newly-originated longer-term fixed-rate one- to four-family residential real estate loans and retaining the shorter-term fixed-rate and adjustable-rate one- to four-family residential real estate loans that we originate, subject to market conditions and periodic review of our asset/liability management needs;
· reducing our dependence on certificates of deposit to support lending and investment activities and increasing our reliance on core deposits, including checking accounts and savings accounts, which are less interest rate sensitive than certificates of deposit; and
· purchasing adjustable and floating rate mortgage-back securities for the investment portfolio.
Our Board of Directors is responsible for the review and oversight of our Asset/Liability Committee, which is comprised of our executive management team and other essential operational staff. This committee is charged with developing and implementing an asset/liability management plan, and meets at least quarterly to review pricing and liquidity needs and assess our interest rate risk. We currently utilize a third-party modeling program, prepared on a quarterly basis, to evaluate our sensitivity to changing interest rates, given our business strategy, operating environment, capital, liquidity and performance objectives, and for managing this risk consistent with the guidelines approved by the Board of Directors.
Net Portfolio Value. We compute amounts by which the net present value of our cash flow from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet items (net portfolio value or “NPV”) would change in the event of a range of assumed changes in market interest rates. We measure our interest rate risk and potential change in our NPV through the use of a financial model. This model uses a discounted cash flow analysis and an option-based pricing approach to measure the interest rate sensitivity of net portfolio value. Historically, the model estimated the economic value of each type of asset, liability and off-balance sheet contract under the assumption that the United States Treasury yield curve increases or decreases instantaneously by 100 to 300 basis points in 100 basis point increments. However, given the current level of market interest rates, an NPV calculation for an interest rate decrease of greater than 100 basis points has not been prepared. A basis point equals one-hundredth of one percent, and 100 basis points equals one percent. An increase in interest rates from 3% to 4% would mean, for example, a 100 basis point increase in the “Change in Interest Rates” column below.
The table below sets forth, as of December 31, 2020, the calculation of the estimated changes in our net portfolio value that would result from the designated immediate changes in the United States Treasury yield curve.
(1) Assumes an immediate uniform change in interest rates at all maturities.
(2) NPV is the discounted present value of expected cash flows from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet contracts.
(3) Present value of assets represents the discounted present value of incoming cash flows on interest-earning assets.
(4) NPV Ratio represents NPV divided by the present value of assets.
The table above indicates that at December 31, 2020, in the event of an instantaneous parallel 100 basis point increase in interest rates, we would experience a 4.99% decrease in net portfolio value. In the event of an instantaneous 100 basis point decrease in interest rates, we would experience an 9.40% decrease in net portfolio value.
(1) The calculated changes assume an immediate shock of the static yield curve.
Depending on the relationship between long-term and short-term interest rates, market conditions and consumer preference, we may place greater emphasis on maximizing our net interest margin than on strictly matching the interest rate sensitivity of our assets and liabilities. We believe that the increased net income which may result from an acceptable mismatch in the actual maturity or re-pricing of our assets and liabilities can, during periods of declining or stable interest rates, provide sufficient returns to justify an increased exposure to sudden and unexpected increases in interest rates.
We do not engage in hedging activities, such as engaging in futures, options or swap transactions, or investing in high-risk mortgage derivatives, such as collateralized mortgage obligation residual interests, real estate mortgage investment conduit residual interests or stripped mortgage backed securities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity describes our ability to meet the financial obligations that arise in the ordinary course of business. Liquidity is primarily needed to meet the borrowing and deposit withdrawal requirements of our customers and to fund current and planned expenditures. Our primary sources of funds are deposits, principal and interest payments on loans and securities, proceeds from the sale of loans, and proceeds from maturities of securities. We also have the ability to borrow from the FHLB-Cincinnati. At December 31, 2020, we had $38.4 million outstanding in advances from the FHLB-Cincinnati, and had the capacity to borrow approximately an additional $34.1 million from the FHLB-Cincinnati based on our collateral capacity. At December 31, 2020, we had an additional $11.5 million on lines of credit available with three commercial banks.
While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions, and competition. Our most liquid assets are cash and short-term investments including interest-bearing demand deposits. The levels of these assets are dependent on our operating, financing, lending, and investing activities during any given period.
Our cash flows are comprised of three primary classifications: cash flows from operating activities, investing activities, and financing activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and net cash used in operating activities was $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by investing activities, which consists primarily of disbursements for loan originations and purchase of investment securities, partially offset by proceeds from maturing securities, pay downs on mortgage-backed securities and proceeds from sale of foreclosed assets was $10.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used by investing activities was $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in financing activities, consisting primarily of the repayment of Federal Home Loan Bank borrowings, was $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities, consisting mainly of the proceeds from the stock subscriptions and proceeds from Federal Home Loan Bank borrowings, was $43.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We are committed to maintaining a strong liquidity position. We monitor our liquidity position on a daily basis. We anticipate that we will have sufficient funds to meet our current funding commitments. Based on our deposit retention experience and current pricing strategy, we anticipate that a significant portion of maturing time deposits will be retained. We also anticipate continued participation in the National CD Rateline Program as a wholesale source of certificates of deposit, and continued use of FHLB-Cincinnati advances.
Cincinnati Bancorp, Inc. is a separate corporate entity from Cincinnati Federal and it must provide for its own liquidity to pay any dividends to its stockholders, to repurchase any shares of its common stock, and for other corporate purposes. Cincinnati Bancorp Inc.’s primary source of liquidity is any dividend payments it may receive from Cincinnati Federal. Cincinnati Bancorp, Inc. (on an unconsolidated basis) had $6.4 million in liquid assets at December 31, 2020. The increase in liquid assets was a primarily from stock offering proceeds. See “Regulation and Supervision - Federal Banking Regulation - Capital Distributions” for a discussion of the regulations applicable to the ability of Cincinnati Federal to pay dividends.
At December 31, 2020, Cincinnati Federal exceeded all of its regulatory capital requirements with a Tier 1 leverage capital level of $34.8 million, or 14.8% of adjusted total assets, which is above the well-capitalized required level of $11.8 million, or 5.0%; total risk-based capital of $36.5 million, or 22.0% of risk-weighted assets, which is above the well-capitalized required level of $16.6 million, or 10.0%; and common equity tier 1 risk based capital of $34.8 million, or 21.0%, of risk weighted assets, which is above the well-capitalized required level of $10.8 million, or 6.5%. At December 31, 2019, Cincinnati Federal exceeded all of its regulatory capital requirements with a Tier 1 leverage capital level of $23.5 million, or 10.2% of adjusted total assets, which is above the well-capitalized required level of $11.5 million, or 5.0%; and total risk-based capital of $24.9 million, or 16.3% of risk-weighted assets, which is above the well-capitalized required level of $15.3 million, or 10.0%. Accordingly, Cincinnati Federal was categorized as well capitalized at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Management is not aware of any conditions or events since the most recent notification that would change our category.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations
Commitments. As a financial services provider, we routinely are a party to various financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risks, such as commitments to extend credit and unused lines of credit. While these contractual obligations represent our future cash requirements, a significant portion of commitments to extend credit may expire without being drawn upon. Such commitments are subject to the same credit policies and approval process accorded to loans we make. At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding commitments to originate loans of $28.5 million, unfunded lines of credit of $19.8 million and forward sale commitments of $41.8 million. We anticipate that we will have sufficient funds available to meet our current lending commitments. Time deposits that are scheduled to mature in one year or less from December 31, 2020 totaled $35.1 million. Management expects that a substantial portion of the maturing time deposits will be renewed. However, if a substantial portion of these deposits is not retained, we may utilize Federal Home Loan Bank advances or raise interest rates on deposits to attract new accounts, which may result in higher levels of interest expense.
Contractual Obligations. In the ordinary course of our operations, we enter into certain contractual obligations. Such obligations include data processing services, operating leases for premises and equipment, agreements with respect to borrowed funds and deposit liabilities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 for a description of recent accounting pronouncements that may affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Price
The consolidated financial statements and related data presented herein have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The primary impact of inflation on our operations is reflected in increased operating costs. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all of the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates, generally, have a more significant impact on a financial institution’s performance than does inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or to the same extent as the prices of goods and services.