ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
In this section, we review the consolidated financial condition of CNO and its consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 and, where appropriate, factors that may affect future financial performance. Please read this discussion in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included in this Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
We are a holding company for a group of insurance companies operating throughout the United States that develop, market and administer health insurance, annuity, individual life insurance and other insurance products. We focus on serving the senior and middle-income markets, which we believe are attractive, underserved, high growth markets. We sell our products through exclusive agents, independent producers (some of whom sell one or more of our product lines exclusively) and direct marketing.
Prior to 2020, the Company managed its business through the following operating segments: Bankers Life, Washington National and Colonial Penn, which were defined on the basis of product distribution; long-term care in run-off; and corporate operations, comprised of holding company activities and certain noninsurance company businesses.
In January 2020, we announced a new operating model that changes how we view our operating segments. Instead of the operating business segments described above, we view our operations as three insurance product lines (annuity, health and life) and the investment and fee revenue segments. The new structure creates a leaner, more integrated, customer-centric organization that better positions us for long-term success and shareholder value creation. Our new segments are aligned based on their common characteristics, comparability of profit margins and the way management makes operating decisions and assesses the performance of the business. We began reporting under the new segment structure in the first quarter of 2020. Prior period results have been reclassified to conform to the new reporting structure.
Our insurance product line segments (including annuity, health and life) include marketing, underwriting and administration of the policies our insurance subsidiaries sell. Under our new operating model, the business written in each of the three product categories through all of our insurance subsidiaries is aggregated allowing management and investors to assess the performance of each product category. When analyzing profitability of these segments, we use insurance product margin as the measure of profitability, which is: (i) insurance policy income; and (ii) net investment income allocated to the insurance product lines; less (i) insurance policy benefits and interest credited to policyholders; and (ii) amortization, non-deferred commissions and advertising expense. Net investment income is allocated to the product lines using the book yield of investments backing the block of business, which is applied to the average insurance liabilities, net of insurance intangibles, for the block in each period.
Income from insurance products is the sum of the insurance margins of the annuity, health and life product lines, less expenses allocated to the insurance lines. It excludes the income from our fee income business, investment income not allocated to product lines, net expenses not allocated to product lines (primarily holding company expenses) and income taxes. Management believes insurance product margin and income from insurance products help provide a better understanding of the business and a more meaningful analysis of the results of our insurance product lines.
Under our new structure, we market our insurance products through the Consumer and Worksite Divisions that reflect the customers served by the Company.
The Consumer Division serves individual consumers, engaging with them on the phone, online, face-to-face with agents, or through a combination of sales channels. This structure unifies consumer capabilities into a single division and integrates the strength of our agent sales forces and industry-leading direct-to-consumer business with proven experience in advertising, web/digital and call center support.
The Worksite Division focuses on worksite and group sales for businesses, associations, and other membership groups, interacting with customers at their place of employment. By creating a dedicated Worksite Division, we are bringing a sharper focus to this high-growth business while further capitalizing on the strength of our recent acquisitions of WBD and DirectPath. Sales in the Worksite Division have been particularly adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic given the challenges of interacting with customers at their place of employment.
The Consumer and Worksite Divisions are primarily focused on marketing insurance products, several types of which are sold in both divisions and underwritten in the same manner. Sales of group underwritten policies are currently not significant, but are expected to increase within the Worksite Division.
We have also centralized certain functional areas previously housed in the three business segments, including marketing, business unit finance, sales training and support, and agent recruiting, among others. All policy, contract, and certificate terms, conditions, and benefits remain unchanged.
The investment segment involves the management of our capital resources, including investments and the management of corporate debt and liquidity. Our measure of profitability of this segment is the total net investment income not allocated to the insurance products. Investment income not allocated to product lines represents net investment income less: (i) equity returns credited to policyholder account balances; (ii) the investment income allocated to our product lines; (iii) interest expense on notes payable and investment borrowings; and (iv) certain expenses related to benefit plans that are offset by special-purpose investment income. Investment income not allocated to product lines includes investment income on investments in excess of average insurance liabilities, investments held by our holding companies, the spread we earn from the FHLB investment borrowing program and variable components of investment income (including call and prepayment income, adjustments to returns on structured securities due to cash flow changes, income (loss) from Company-owned life insurance ("COLI") and alternative investment income not allocated to product lines), net of interest expense on corporate debt.
Our fee and other revenue segment includes the earnings generated from sales of third-party insurance products, services provided by WBD (our wholly owned on-line benefit administration firm) and the operations of our broker-dealer and registered investment advisor.
Expenses not allocated to product lines include the expenses of our corporate operations, excluding interest expense on debt.
The following summarizes our earnings for the three years ending December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions, except per share data):
____________
(a)Management believes that an analysis of net operating income provides a clearer comparison of the operating results of the Company from period to period because it excludes: (i) loss related to reinsurance transaction, including impact of taxes; (ii) net realized investment gains or losses from sales, impairments and change in allowance for credit losses, net of related amortization and taxes; (iii) net change in market value of investments recognized in earnings, net of taxes; (iv) fair value changes due to fluctuations in the interest rates used to discount embedded derivative liabilities related to our fixed index annuities, net of related amortization and taxes; (v) fair value changes related to the agent deferred compensation plan, net of taxes; (vi) loss on extinguishment of debt; (vii) changes in the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets and other tax items; and (viii) other non-operating items consisting primarily of earnings attributable to VIEs ("net operating income"). The table above reconciles the non-GAAP measure to the corresponding GAAP measure.
In addition, management uses these non-GAAP financial measures in its budgeting process, financial analysis of segment performance and in assessing the allocation of resources. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures enhance an investor’s understanding of our financial performance and allows them to make more informed judgments about the Company as a whole. These measures also highlight operating trends that might not otherwise be apparent. However, net operating income is not a measurement of financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to cash flow from operating activities, as measures of liquidity, or as an alternative to net income as measures of our operating performance or any other measures of performance derived in accordance with GAAP. In addition, net operating income should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. Net operating income has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider such measure either in isolation or as a substitute for analyzing our results as reported under GAAP. Our definition and calculation of net operating income are not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled measures used by other companies due to different methods of calculation.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of various assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Management has made estimates in the past that we believed to be appropriate but were subsequently revised to reflect actual experience. If our future experience differs materially from these estimates and assumptions, our results of operations and financial condition could be materially affected.
We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We continually evaluate the information used to make these estimates as our business and the economic environment change. The use of estimates is pervasive throughout our financial statements. The accounting policies and estimates we consider most critical are summarized below. Additional information on our accounting policies is included in the note to our consolidated financial statements entitled "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies".
Investment Valuation
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date and, therefore, represents an exit price, not an entry price. We carry certain assets and liabilities at fair value on a recurring basis, including fixed maturities, equity securities, trading securities, investments held by VIEs, derivatives, separate account assets and embedded derivatives related to fixed index annuity products. We carry our COLI, which is invested in a series of mutual funds, at its cash surrender value which approximates fair value. In addition, we disclose fair value for certain financial instruments, including mortgage loans, policy loans, cash and cash equivalents, insurance liabilities for interest-sensitive products, investment borrowings, notes payable and borrowings related to VIEs.
The degree of judgment utilized in measuring the fair value of financial instruments is largely dependent on the level to which pricing is based on observable inputs. Observable inputs reflect market data obtained from independent sources, while unobservable inputs reflect our view of market assumptions in the absence of observable market information. Financial instruments with readily available active quoted prices would be considered to have fair values based on the highest level of observable inputs, and little judgment would be utilized in measuring fair value. Financial instruments that rarely trade would often have fair value based on a lower level of observable inputs, and more judgment would be utilized in measuring fair value. We categorize our financial instruments carried at fair value into a three-level hierarchy based on the observability of inputs.
The three-level hierarchy for fair value measurements is described in the note to the consolidated financial statements entitled "Fair Value Measurements."
The following summarizes our investments on our consolidated balance sheet carried at fair value by pricing source and fair value hierarchy level as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
_______________
(a) Represents primarily securities benchmarked to comparable securities to compute fair value.
Effective January 1, 2020, when an available for sale fixed maturity security's fair value is below the amortized cost, the security is considered impaired. If a portion of the decline is due to credit-related factors, we separate the credit loss component of the impairment from the amount related to all other factors. The credit loss component is recorded as an allowance and reported in net realized investment gains (losses) (limited to the difference between estimated fair value and amortized cost). The impairment related to all other factors (non-credit factors) is reported in accumulated other comprehensive income along with unrealized gains related to fixed maturity investments, available for sale, net of tax and related adjustments. The allowance is adjusted for any additional credit losses and subsequent recoveries. When recognizing an allowance associated with a credit loss, the cost basis is not adjusted. When we determine a security is uncollectable, the remaining amortized cost will be written off.
In determining the credit loss component, we discount the estimated cash flows on a security by security basis. We consider the impact of macroeconomic conditions on inputs used to measure the amount of credit loss. For most structured securities, cash flow estimates are based on bond-specific facts and circumstances that may include collateral characteristics, expectations of delinquency and default rates, loss severity, prepayment speeds and structural support, including overcollateralization, excess spread, subordination and guarantees. For corporate bonds, cash flow estimates are derived by considering asset type, rating, time to maturity, and applying an expected loss rate.
If we intend to sell an impaired fixed maturity security, available for sale, or identify an impaired fixed maturity security, available for sale, for which is it more likely than not we will be required to sell before anticipated recovery, the difference between the fair value and the amortized cost is included in net realized investment gains (losses) and the fair value becomes the new amortized cost. The new cost basis is not adjusted for any subsequent recoveries in fair value.
Prior to January 1, 2020, we regularly evaluated all of our investments with unrealized losses for possible impairment. Our assessment of whether unrealized losses were "other than temporary" required significant judgment. Factors considered included: (i) the extent to which fair value was less than the cost basis; (ii) the length of time that the fair value had been less than cost; (iii) whether the unrealized loss was event driven, credit-driven or a result of changes in market interest rates or risk premium; (iv) the near-term prospects for specific events, developments or circumstances likely to affect the value of the investment; (v) the investment's rating and whether the investment was investment-grade and/or had been downgraded since its purchase; (vi) whether the issuer was current on all payments in accordance with the contractual terms of the investment and was expected to meet all of its obligations under the terms of the investment; (vii) whether we intend to sell the investment or it was more likely than not that circumstances would require us to sell the investment before recovery occurs; (viii) the underlying current and prospective asset and enterprise values of the issuer and the extent to which the recoverability of the carrying value of our investment would be affected by changes in such values; (ix) projections of, and unfavorable changes in, cash flows on structured securities including mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities; (x) our best estimate of the value of any collateral; and (xi) other objective and subjective factors.
The manner in which impairment losses on fixed maturity securities, available for sale, were recognized in the financial statements was dependent on the facts and circumstances related to the specific security. If we intended to sell a security or it was more likely than not that we would be required to sell a security before the recovery of its amortized cost, the security was other-than-temporarily impaired and the full amount of the impairment was recognized as a loss through earnings. If we did not expect to recover the amortized cost basis, we did not plan to sell the security, and if it was not more likely than not that we would be required to sell a security before the recovery of its amortized cost, less any current period credit loss, the recognition of the other-than-temporary impairment was bifurcated. We recognized the credit loss portion in net income and the noncredit loss portion in accumulated other comprehensive income.
We estimated the amount of the credit loss component of a fixed maturity security impairment as the difference between amortized cost and the present value of the expected cash flows of the security. The present value was determined using the best estimate of future cash flows discounted at the effective interest rate implicit to the security at the date of purchase or the current yield to accrete an asset-backed or floating-rate security. The methodology and assumptions for establishing the best estimate of future cash flows varied depending on the type of security.
For most structured securities, cash flow estimates were based on bond-specific facts and circumstances that included collateral characteristics, expectations of delinquency and default rates, loss severity, prepayment speeds and structural support, including overcollateralization, excess spread, subordination and guarantees. For corporate bonds, cash flow estimates were derived from scenario-based outcomes of expected corporate restructurings or the disposition of assets using bond-specific facts and circumstances. The previous amortized cost basis less the impairment recognized in net income became the security's new cost basis. We accreted the new cost basis to the estimated future cash flows over the expected remaining life of the security, except when the security was in default or considered nonperforming.
The remaining noncredit impairment, which was recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income, was the difference between the security's estimated fair value and our best estimate of future cash flows discounted at the effective interest rate prior to impairment. The remaining noncredit impairment typically represented changes in the market interest rates, current market liquidity and risk premiums.
Below-investment grade corporate debt securities typically have different characteristics than investment grade corporate debt securities. Based on historical performance, probability of default by the borrower is significantly greater for below-investment grade corporate debt securities and in many cases severity of loss was relatively greater as such securities were generally unsecured and often subordinated to other indebtedness of the issuer. Also, issuers of below-investment grade corporate debt securities frequently had higher levels of debt relative to investment-grade issuers, hence, all other things being equal, were generally more sensitive to adverse economic conditions. The Company attempted to reduce the overall risk related to its investment in below-investment grade securities, as in all investments, through careful credit analysis, strict investment policy guidelines, and diversification by issuer and/or guarantor and by industry.
Future events may occur, or additional information may become available, which may necessitate future realized losses in our portfolio. Significant losses could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial statements in future periods.
For more information on our investment portfolio and our critical accounting policies related to investments, see the note to our consolidated financial statements entitled "Investments".
Present Value of Future Profits and Deferred Acquisition Costs
In conjunction with the implementation of fresh start accounting, we eliminated the historical balances of our Predecessor's deferred acquisition costs and the present value of future profits and replaced them with the present value of future profits as calculated on the Effective Date.
The value assigned to the right to receive future cash flows from contracts existing at the Effective Date is referred to as the present value of future profits. The balance of this account is amortized, evaluated for recovery, and adjusted for the impact of unrealized gains (losses) in the same manner as the deferred acquisition costs described below. We expect to amortize the balance of the present value of future profits as of December 31, 2020 as follows: 10 percent in 2021, 9 percent in 2022, 8 percent in 2023, 7 percent in 2024 and 6 percent in 2025.
Deferred acquisition costs represent incremental direct costs related to the successful acquisition of new or renewal insurance contracts. For interest-sensitive life or annuity products, we amortize these costs in relation to the estimated gross profits using the interest rate credited to the underlying policies. For other products, we generally amortize these costs in relation to future anticipated premium revenue using the projected investment earnings rate.
Insurance acquisition costs are amortized to expense over the lives of the underlying policies in relation to future anticipated premiums or gross profits. The insurance acquisition costs for policies other than interest-sensitive life and annuity products are amortized with interest (using the projected investment earnings rate) over the estimated premium-paying period of the policies, in a manner which recognizes amortization expense in proportion to each year's premium income. The insurance acquisition costs for interest-sensitive life and annuity products are amortized with interest (using the interest rate credited to the underlying policy) in proportion to estimated gross profits. The interest, mortality, morbidity and persistency assumptions used to amortize insurance acquisition costs are consistent with those assumptions used to estimate liabilities for insurance products. For interest-sensitive life and annuity products, these assumptions are reviewed on a regular basis. When actual profits or our current best estimates of future profits are different from previous estimates, we adjust cumulative amortization of insurance acquisition costs to maintain amortization expense as a constant percentage of gross profits over the entire life of the policies.
When we realize a gain or loss on investments backing our interest-sensitive life or annuity products, we adjust the amortization of insurance acquisition costs to reflect the change in estimated gross profits from the products due to the gain or loss realized and the effect on future investment yields. We increased (decreased) amortization expense for such changes by $(2.4) million, $.6 million and $(.4) million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We also adjust insurance acquisition costs for the change in amortization that would have been recorded if fixed maturity securities, available for sale, had been sold at their stated aggregate fair value and the proceeds reinvested at current yields. Such adjustments are commonly referred to as "shadow adjustments" and may include adjustments to: (i) deferred acquisition costs; (ii) the present value of future profits; (iii) loss recognition reserves; and (iv) income taxes. We include the impact of this adjustment in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) within shareholders' equity. The total pre-tax impact of such adjustments on accumulated other comprehensive income was a decrease of $665.7 million at December 31, 2020 (including $339.5 million for premium deficiencies that would exist on certain blocks of business if unrealized gains on the assets backing such products had been realized and the proceeds from our sales of such assets were invested at then current yields). The total pre-tax impact of such adjustments on accumulated other comprehensive income at December 31, 2019 was a decrease of $343.3 million (including $135.5 million for premium deficiencies that would exist on certain blocks of business if unrealized gains on the assets backing such products had been realized and the proceeds from our sales of such assets were invested at then current yields).
At December 31, 2020, the balance of insurance acquisition costs was $1.3 billion. The recoverability of this amount is dependent on the future profitability of the related business. Each year, we evaluate the recoverability of the unamortized balance of insurance acquisition costs. These evaluations are performed to determine whether estimates of the present value of future cash flows, in combination with the related liability for insurance products, will support the unamortized balance. These future cash flows are based on our best estimate of future premium income, less benefits and expenses. The present value of these cash flows, plus the related balance of liabilities for insurance products, is then compared with the unamortized balance of insurance acquisition costs. In the event of a deficiency, such amount would be charged to amortization expense. If the deficiency exceeds the balance of insurance acquisition costs, a premium deficiency reserve is established for the excess. The determination of future cash flows involves significant judgment. Revisions to the assumptions which determine such cash flows could have a significant adverse effect on our results of operations and financial position.
The table presented below summarizes our estimates of cumulative adjustments to insurance acquisition costs or premium deficiency reserves (when the deficiency exceeds the balance of insurance acquisition costs) resulting from hypothetical revisions to certain assumptions. Although such hypothetical revisions are not currently required or anticipated, we believe they could occur based on past variances in experience and our expectations of the ranges of future experience that could reasonably occur. We have assumed that revisions to assumptions resulting in the adjustments summarized below would occur equally among policy types, ages and durations within each product classification. Any actual adjustment would be dependent on the specific policies affected and, therefore, may differ from the estimates summarized below. In addition, the impact of actual adjustments would reflect the net effect of all changes in assumptions during the period.
__________________
(a)We have excluded the effect of reasonably likely changes in lapse, surrender and expense assumptions for policies other than interest-sensitive life and annuity products.
The following hypothetical scenarios illustrate the sensitivity of changes in interest rates to our products based on our 2020 comprehensive actuarial review (including the impacts of the changes on insurance acquisition costs, premium deficiency reserves and the valuation of the embedded derivatives related to our fixed index products):
•The first hypothetical scenario assumes immediate and permanent reductions to current interest rate spreads on interest-sensitive products. We estimate that a pre-tax charge of approximately $25 million would occur if we increased credited rates related to our interest-sensitive life and annuity products immediately and permanently by 10 basis points due to an increase in the rate credited to account values (or an equivalent increase to the amount allocated to the cost of options for our fixed index annuity products) with no change to assumed earned rates.
•The second scenario assumes that new money rates decrease to an overall average of 3.00 percent immediately and remain at that level indefinitely on non-interest sensitive products. We estimate that this scenario would not result in a pre-tax charge but would reduce future margins on non-interest sensitive products by approximately $205 million.
•The third scenario assumes that new money rates decrease to an overall average of 2.00 percent immediately and remain at that level indefinitely on non-interest sensitive products. We estimate that this scenario would result in a pre-tax charge of approximately $2 million on our life contingent payout annuity block and reduce the future margins on non-interest sensitive products by approximately $452 million.
Although the hypothetical revisions described in the scenarios summarized above are not currently required or anticipated, we believe similar changes could occur based on past variances in experience and our expectations of the ranges of future experience that could reasonably occur. We have assumed that revisions to assumptions resulting in such adjustments would occur equally among policy types, ages and durations within each product classification. Any actual adjustment would be dependent on the specific policies affected and, therefore, may differ from such estimates. In addition, the impact of actual adjustments would reflect the net effect of all changes in assumptions during the period.
The following summarizes the persistency of our major blocks of insurance business summarized by line of business:
_____________________
(1) Based on the total amount of death benefits, surrenders values and partial withdrawals divided by the average account value.
(2) Based on total reserves released at death divided by average account value.
(3) Based on number of inforce policies.
Liabilities for Insurance Products - reserves for the future payment of long-term care policy claims
We calculate and maintain reserves for the future payment of claims to our policyholders based on actuarial assumptions. For all our insurance products, we establish an active life reserve, a liability for due and unpaid claims, claims in the course of settlement and incurred but not reported claims. In addition, for our health insurance business, we establish a reserve for the present value of amounts not yet due on claims. Many factors can affect these reserves and liabilities, such as economic and social conditions, inflation, hospital and pharmaceutical costs, changes in doctrines of legal liability and extra-contractual damage awards. Therefore, our reserves and liabilities are necessarily based on numerous estimates and assumptions as well as historical experience. Establishing reserves is an uncertain process, and it is possible that actual claims will materially exceed our reserves and have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition. For example, our long-term care policy claims may be paid over a long period of time and, therefore, loss estimates have a higher degree of uncertainty.
The following summarizes the components of the reserves related to our long-term care business:
The significant assumptions used to calculate the active life reserves include morbidity, persistency and investment yields. These assumptions are determined at the issuance date and do not change over the life of the policy.
The significant assumptions used to calculate the reserves for the present value of amounts not yet due on claims include future benefit payments, interest rates and claim continuance patterns. Interest rates are used to determine the present value of the future benefit payments and are based on the investment yield of assets supporting the reserves. Claim continuance assumptions are estimates of the expected period of time that claim payments will continue before termination due to recovery, death or attainment of policy maximum benefits. These estimates are based on historical claim experience for similar policy and coverage types. Our estimates of benefit payments, interest rates and claim continuance are reviewed regularly and updated to consider current portfolio investment yields and recent claims experience.
The significant assumptions used to calculate the liability for due and unpaid claims, claims in the course of settlement and incurred but not reported claims are based on historical claim payment patterns and include assumptions related to the number of claims and the size and timing of claim payments. These assumptions are updated quarterly to reflect the most current information regarding claim payment patterns. In order to determine the accuracy of our prior estimates, we calculate the total redundancy (deficiency) of our prior claim reserve estimates. The 2019 claim reserve redundancy for long-term care claim reserves, as measured at December 31, 2020, was approximately $56 million.
Estimates of unpaid losses related to long-term care business have a higher degree of uncertainty than estimates for our other products due to the range of ultimate duration of these claims and the resulting variability in their cost (in addition to the variations in the lag time in reporting claims). Our financial results depend significantly upon the extent to which our actual claims experience is consistent with the assumptions we used in determining our reserves and pricing our products. If our assumptions with respect to future claims are incorrect, and our reserves are insufficient to cover our actual losses and expenses, we would be required to increase our liabilities, which would negatively affect our operating results.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense includes deferred income taxes arising from temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and NOLs. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply in the years in which temporary differences are expected to be recovered or paid. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in earnings in the period when the changes are enacted.
A reduction of the net carrying amount of deferred tax assets by establishing a valuation allowance is required if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, all available evidence, both positive and negative, shall be considered to determine whether, based on the weight of that evidence, a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is needed. This assessment requires significant judgment and considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the duration of carryforward periods, our experience with operating loss and tax credit carryforwards expiring unused, and tax planning strategies.
We evaluate the need to establish a valuation allowance for our deferred income tax assets on an ongoing basis using a deferred tax valuation model. Our model is adjusted to reflect changes in our projections of future taxable income including changes resulting from the Tax Reform Act, investment strategies, the impact of the sale or reinsurance of business, the recapture of business previously ceded, tax planning strategies and the COVID-19 pandemic. Our estimates of future taxable income are based on evidence we consider to be objectively verifiable. At December 31, 2020, our projection of future taxable income for purposes of determining the valuation allowance was based on our estimates of such future taxable income through the date our NOLs expire. Such estimates are subject to the risks and uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the extent to which actual impacts differ from the assumptions used in our deferred tax valuation model. Based on our assessment, we have concluded that it is more likely than not that all our deferred tax assets of $109.4 million will be realized through future taxable earnings.
Recovery of our deferred tax asset is dependent on achieving the level of future taxable income projected in our deferred tax valuation model and failure to do so could result in an increase in the valuation allowance in a future period. Any future increase in the valuation allowance may result in additional income tax expense and reduce shareholders' equity, and such an increase could have a significant impact upon our earnings in the future.
The Code limits the extent to which losses realized by a non-life entity (or entities) may offset income from a life insurance company (or companies) to the lesser of: (i) 35 percent of the income of the life insurance company; or (ii) 35 percent of the total loss of the non-life entities (including NOLs of the non-life entities). There is no similar limitation on the extent to which losses realized by a life insurance entity (or entities) may offset income from a non-life entity (or entities).
We have $1.6 billion of federal NOLs as of December 31, 2020, as summarized below (dollars in millions):
Our life NOLs were fully utilized in 2020. Our non-life NOLs can be used to offset 35 percent of life insurance company taxable income and 100 percent of non-life company taxable income until all non-life NOLs are utilized or expire.
Liabilities for Insurance Products
At December 31, 2020, the total balance of our liabilities for insurance products was $25.1 billion. These liabilities are generally payable over an extended period of time and the profitability of the related products is dependent on the pricing of the products and other factors. Differences between our expectations when we sold these products and our actual experience could result in future losses.
We calculate and maintain reserves for the future payment of claims to our policyholders based on actuarial assumptions. For our insurance products, we establish an active life reserve, a liability for due and unpaid claims, claims in the course of settlement and incurred but not reported claims. In addition, for our health insurance business, we establish a reserve for the present value of amounts not yet due on claims. Many factors can affect these reserves and liabilities, such as economic and social conditions, inflation, hospital and pharmaceutical costs, changes in doctrines of legal liability and extra-contractual damage awards. We establish liabilities for annuity and interest-sensitive life products equal to the accumulated policy account values, which include an accumulation of deposit payments plus credited interest, less withdrawals and the amounts assessed against the policyholder through the end of the period. In addition, policyholder account values for certain interest-sensitive life products are impacted by our assumptions related to changes of certain NGEs that we are allowed to make under the terms of the policy, such as cost of insurance charges, expense loads, credited interest rates and policyholder bonuses. Therefore, our reserves and liabilities are necessarily based on numerous estimates and assumptions as well as historical experience. Establishing reserves is an uncertain process, and it is possible that actual claims will materially exceed our reserves and have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition. Our financial results depend significantly upon the extent to which our actual claims experience is consistent with the assumptions we used in determining our reserves and pricing our products. If our assumptions with respect to future claims are incorrect, and our reserves are insufficient to cover our actual losses and expenses, we would be required to increase our liabilities, which would negatively affect our operating results. Liabilities for insurance products are calculated using management's best judgments, based on our past experience and standard actuarial tables, of mortality, morbidity, lapse rates, investment experience and expense levels.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following tables and narratives summarize the operating results of our segments (dollars in millions):
General: CNO is the top tier holding company for a group of insurance companies operating throughout the United States that develop, market and administer health insurance, annuity, individual life insurance and other insurance products. We view our operations by segments, which consist of insurance product lines. These products are distributed by our two divisions. The Consumer Division serves individual consumers, engaging with them on the phone, online, face-to-face with agents, or through a combination of sales channels. The Worksite Division focuses on worksite and group sales for businesses, associations, and other membership groups, interacting with customers at their place of employment.
Insurance product margin is management’s measure of the profitability of its annuity, health and life product lines’ performance and consists of premiums plus allocated investment income less insurance policy benefits, interest credited, commissions, advertising expense and amortization of acquisition costs. Income from insurance products is the sum of the insurance margins of the annuity, health and life product lines, less expenses allocated to the insurance lines. It excludes the income from our fee income business, investment income not allocated to product lines, net expenses not allocated to product lines (primarily holding company expenses) and income taxes. Management believes insurance product margin and income from insurance products help provide a better understanding of the business and a more meaningful analysis of the results of our insurance product lines.
Investment income is allocated to the product lines using the book yield of investments backing the block of business, which is applied to the average insurance liabilities, net of insurance intangibles, for the block in each period. Investment income not allocated to product lines represents net investment income less: (i) equity returns credited to policyholder account balances; (ii) the investment income allocated to our product lines; (iii) interest expense on notes payable and investment borrowings; and (iv) certain expenses related to benefit plans that are offset by special-purpose investment income. Investment income not allocated to product lines includes investment income on investments in excess of average insurance liabilities, investments held by our holding companies, the spread we earn from the FHLB investment borrowing program and variable components of investment income (including call and prepayment income, adjustments to returns on structured securities due to cash flow changes, income (loss) from COLI and alternative investment income not allocated to product lines), net of interest expense on corporate debt.
Management believes that an analysis of Net income applicable to common stock before: (i) loss related to reinsurance transaction, including impact of taxes; (ii) net realized investment gains (losses) from sales, impairments and change in allowance for credit losses, net of related amortization and taxes; (iii) net change in market value of investments recognized in earnings, net of taxes; (iv) fair value changes due to fluctuations in the interest rates used to discount embedded derivative liabilities related to our fixed index annuities, net of related amortization and taxes; (v) fair value changes related to the agent deferred compensation plan, net of taxes; (vi) loss on extinguishment of debt, net of taxes; (vii) changes in the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets and other tax items; and (viii) other non-operating items consisting primarily of earnings attributable to VIEs, net of taxes (“Net operating income,” a non-GAAP financial measure) is important to evaluate the financial performance of the company, and is a key measure commonly used in the life insurance industry. Management uses this measure to evaluate performance because the items excluded from net operating income can be affected by events that are unrelated to the company's underlying fundamentals.
Changes in Actuarial Assumptions: We update the assumptions and experience underlying the expected gross margins for policies accounted for as investment contracts annually in the fourth quarter of each year. In addition, we also review and update our assumptions on a more frequent basis to the extent current conditions or circumstances warrant changes that could be significant to our operating results. The impacts of these unlocking exercises have had a significant impact on our earnings.
In the second quarter of 2020, our expectation regarding future new money interest rates changed and we performed an actuarial unlocking exercise to reflect our assumption that average new money rates would remain flat at 4 percent for the long-term. This change and the related impacts to persistency assumptions had a $45.6 million unfavorable impact on pre-tax earnings. As part of the actuarial unlocking exercise, we also changed our assumptions related to the future option costs we incur in providing benefits on fixed index annuities which had a favorable impact on pre-tax earnings of $91.5 million. These future option costs represent the estimated cost we will incur to purchase a series of annual forward options over the duration of the policy that back the potential return based on a percentage of the amount of increase in the value of the appropriate index. When interest rates decrease, we are permitted (subject to policy minimums) to decrease this benefit, lowering the option costs. The magnitude of the offsetting impacts of the change in new money rate and the change in future option costs had significantly different impacts on our results in 2020. These results are consistent with the different accounting requirements for insurance intangibles and the embedded derivatives related to the future option budgets for our fixed index annuity products.
The actuarial unlocking exercise completed in the second quarter of 2020 did not replace our comprehensive annual review of all assumptions for our insurance products, which we completed in the fourth quarter of 2020. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we updated various assumptions including, but not limited to, earned rates and persistency which favorably impacted our annuity margins by $16.1 million and unfavorably impacted our life margin by $4.3 million.
The following tables summarize the impacts of our unlocking exercises in the second and fourth quarters of 2020 and the annual unlocking exercises in 2019 and 2018 (dollars in millions):
Impact of COVID-19 on Insurance Product Margin: COVID-19 had a significant impact on our insurance product margin in 2020. Our life margin reflected approximately $38 million of adverse mortality related to increased deaths caused by COVID-19. Our health margin reflected a favorable COVID-19 impact of approximately $97 million driven by the deferral of heath care. The annuity margin reflected an unfavorable net COVID-19 impact of approximately $4 million, primarily reflecting higher persistency.
Summary of Operating Results: Net operating income was $362.3 million in 2020, compared to $290.0 million in 2019 and $303.1 million in 2018.
Insurance product margin for 2020, was significantly impacted by: (i) changes in our actuarial assumptions as further described above under the caption "Changes in Actuarial Assumptions"; and (ii) pandemic-related impacts including lower health claims reflecting the deferral of health care, net of higher mortality claims, as further described above under the caption "Impact of COVID-19 on Insurance Product Margin".
Allocated expenses were higher in 2020 and 2019 primarily due to investing in growth initiatives, higher costs associated with various compliance requirements and managing cybersecurity.
The fee income segment is summarized below (dollars in millions):
The higher fee income in 2020 and 2019, relative to 2018, primarily reflects changes in assumptions used to estimate revenues on the sales of third-party products, net of related distribution expenses. Fee income in 2020 also reflects additional expenses of $13.1 million related to an initiative to sell third-party Medicare Advantage policies through direct-to-consumer channels.
Investment income not allocated to product lines generally fluctuates with variable investment income including income (loss) on alternative investments and prepayment and call income.
Expenses not allocated to product lines were higher in 2020, due to a $23.5 million increase (recognized in the second quarter of 2020) in our liability for claims and interest pursuant to the Global Resolution Agreement as the third-party auditor has provided information that we have processed and verified allowing us to more accurately estimate the ultimate liability pursuant to the agreement. See the note to the consolidated financial statements entitled "Litigation and Other Legal Proceedings - Regulatory Examinations and Fines" for further information about the Global Resolution Agreement. In addition, expenses not allocated to product lines in 2020 included a $3.7 million charge related to asset impairments. Expenses not allocated to product lines in 2019 included a $20 million expense reduction related to the net favorable impact from legal and regulatory matters.
The following summarizes total allocated and unallocated expenses adjusted for the significant items summarized above (dollars in millions):
Margin from Annuity Products (dollars in millions):
Margin from fixed index annuities was $250.8 million in 2020, compared to $179.4 million in 2019, and $145.3 million in 2018. The increase in margin in 2020 is primarily due to: (i) the favorable impact of actuarial assumption changes previously discussed; and (ii) growth in the block, net of (iii) decreases in margin due to lower yields on investments. Average net insurance liabilities (total insurance liabilities less: (i) amounts related to reinsured business; (ii) deferred acquisition costs; (iii) present value of future profits; and (iv) the value of unexpired options credited to insurance liabilities) were $7,123.4 million, $6,480.3 million and $5,731.2 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, driven by deposits and reinvested returns in excess of withdrawals. The increase in net insurance liabilities results in higher net investment income allocated, however, the earned yield was 4.66 percent in 2020, down from 4.79 percent in 2019, and 4.96 percent 2018, reflecting lower market yields and resulting in spread compression. In 2020, we experienced higher persistency in the fixed index annuity block. We believe such higher persistency was indirectly related to COVID-19 as policyholders continue to hold on to their current products due to lower yields on competing products and avoiding meeting with agents to discuss alternative products.
Net investment income and interest credited exclude the change in market values of the underlying options supporting the fixed index annuity products and corresponding offsetting amount credited to policyholder account balances. Such amounts were $32.3 million, $135.1 million and $(39.7) million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Margin from fixed interest annuities was $29.8 million in 2020, compared to $42.6 million in 2019, and $59.2 million in 2018. The decrease in margins in 2020 and 2019 is primarily due to: (i) the fluctuations resulting from actuarial assumption changes previously discussed; (ii) lower margins due to lower yields on investments; and (iii) a reduction in the size of the block. Average net insurance liabilities were $2,069.1 million, $2,305.7 million and $2,623.4 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, driven by withdrawals in excess of deposits and reinvested returns. The decrease in net insurance liabilities results in lower net investment income allocated. The earned yield was 5.10 percent in 2020, down from 5.34 percent in both 2019 and 2018, reflecting lower market yields.
Margin from other annuities in 2020 reflects favorable mortality compared to the prior years. We experienced higher than usual annuitant mortality related to contracts with life contingencies which resulted in a decrease in insurance liabilities and insurance policy benefits of $9.8 million in 2020.
Margin from Health Products (dollars in millions):
Margin from supplemental health business was $186.7 million in 2020, compared to $180.7 million in 2019, and $184.3 million in 2018. The margin as a percentage of insurance policy income was 27% in 2020, compared to 27% in 2019 and 29% in 2018. Insurance policy benefits in 2020 reflected better claims experience than expected which is attributable to policyholders deferring health care during the pandemic which is expected to normalize in future periods. This favorable impact was offset by higher than expected persistency which resulted in a lower release of reserves. Accordingly, we estimate that the supplemental health margin in 2020 was favorably impacted by approximately $11 million primarily driven by these items relative to our expectations and previous experience prior to COVID-19. Insurance policy income has increased due to new sales in recent periods.
Our supplemental health products (including specified disease, accident and hospital indemnity products) generally provide fixed or limited benefits. For example, payments under cancer insurance policies are generally made directly to, or at the direction of, the policyholder following diagnosis of, or treatment for, a covered type of cancer. Approximately three-fourths of our supplemental health policies inforce (based on policy count) are sold with return of premium or cash value riders. The return of premium rider generally provides that after a policy has been inforce for a specified number of years or upon the
policyholder reaching a specified age, we will pay to the policyholder, or a beneficiary under the policy, the aggregate amount of all premiums paid under the policy, without interest, less the aggregate amount of all claims incurred under the policy. The cash value rider is similar to the return of premium rider, but also provides for payment of a graded portion of the return of premium benefit if the policy terminates before the return of premium benefit is earned. Accordingly, the net cash flows from these products generally result in the accumulation of amounts in the early years of a policy (reflected in our earnings as reserve increases which is a component of insurance policy benefits) which will be paid out as benefits in later policy years (reflected in our earnings as reserve decreases which offset the recording of benefit payments). As the policies age, insurance policy benefits will typically increase, but the increase in benefits will be partially offset by investment income earned on the accumulated assets.
Margin from Medicare supplement business was $188.3 million in 2020, compared to $132.5 million in 2019, and $130.9 million in 2018. The increase in margin on the Medicare supplement business in 2020 reflects favorable claim experience. Such favorable claim experience in 2020 is attributable to policyholders deferring health care during the pandemic which is expected to normalize and may lead to higher claim costs in future periods. Based on actual claims incurred and persistency relative to our expectations and previous experience prior to COVID-19, we estimate that the Medicare supplement margin was favorably impacted by approximately $50 million in 2020. Insurance policy income was $754.7 million in 2020, compared to $773.0 million in 2019, and $787.0 million in 2018, reflecting lower sales in recent periods partially offset by premium rate increases.
Medicare supplement business consists of both individual and group policies. Government regulations generally require we attain and maintain a ratio of total benefits incurred to total premiums earned (excluding changes in policy benefits reserves which is a component of Insurance policy benefits) of not less than 65 percent on individual products and not less than 75 percent on group products. The ratio is determined after three years from the original issuance of the policy and over the lifetime of the policy and measured in accordance with statutory accounting principles. Since the insurance product liabilities we establish for Medicare supplement business are subject to significant estimates, the ultimate claim liability we incur for a particular period is likely to be different than our initial estimate. Changes to our estimates are reflected in Insurance policy benefits in the period the change is determined.
Margin from Long-term care products was $84.8 million in 2020, compared to $49.7 million in 2019, and $35.9 million in 2018. The margin as a percentage of insurance policy income increased to 32% in 2020, compared to 19% in 2019 and 13% in 2018. The margin in 2020 benefited from lower claims incurred attributable to policyholders deferring health care during the pandemic which is expected to normalize in future periods. In addition, an increase in policyholder deaths attributable to the pandemic resulted in higher than expected reserve releases. Based on actual claims incurred and persistency relative to our expectations and previous experience prior to COVID-19, we estimate that the long-term care margin was favorably impacted by approximately $36 million in 2020.
Margin from Life Products (dollars in millions):
Margin from interest-sensitive life business was $58.1 million in 2020, compared to $60.8 million in 2019, and $67.3 million in 2018. The decrease in margins in 2020 and 2019 is primarily due to: (i) the unfavorable impact of actuarial assumptions previously discussed; partially offset by (ii) growth in the block due to sales in recent periods. In addition, we estimate that the unfavorable impact from death claims related to COVID-19 on the margin of this block of business was approximately $9 million in 2020.
The interest margin was $3.6 million in 2020, compared to $5.6 million in 2019, and $5.8 million in 2018. Net investment income was comparable between years. The increase in average net insurance liabilities results in higher net investment income allocated, however, the decrease in earned yield has resulted in net investment income being relatively flat compared to prior years. The earned yield was 5.15 percent in 2020, down from 5.39 percent in 2019, and 5.52 percent 2018. Interest credited to policyholders may be changed annually but are subject to minimum guaranteed rates and, as a result, the reduction in our earned rate was not fully reflected in the rate credited to policyholders.
Net investment income and interest credited excludes the change in market values of the underlying options supporting the fixed index life products and corresponding offsetting amount credited to policyholder account balances. Such amounts were $5.5 million, $18.6 million and $(5.8) million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Margin from traditional life business was $106.9 million in 2020, compared to $135.3 million in 2019, and $137.1 million in 2018. Insurance policy income was $634.2 million in 2020, compared to $609.5 million in 2019, and $601.7 million in 2018, reflecting new sales and persistency in the block. Insurance policy benefits were $493.9 million in 2020, compared to $446.0 million in 2019, and $441.5 million in 2018. We estimate that the impact from death claims related to COVID-19 increased insurance policy benefits by approximately $29 million in 2020.
Allocated net investment income was comparable between years as the growth in the block was offset by lower average investment yields.
Advertising expense was $66.0 million in 2020, compared to $62.3 million in 2019, and $56.9 million in 2018. The demand and cost of television advertising can fluctuate from period to period. We are disciplined with our marketing expenditures and will increase or decrease our marketing spend depending on prices.
Investment Income Not Allocated to Product Lines (dollars in millions):
The above table reconciles net investment income to investment income not allocated to product lines. Such amount will fluctuate from period to period based on the level of prepayment income (including call premiums); the performance of our alternative investments (which are typically reported a quarter in arrears); and the earnings related to the investments underlying our COLI.
Net Non-Operating Income (Loss):
The following summarizes our net non-operating loss for the three years ended December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
Net realized investment losses, net of related amortization, were $31.1 million in 2020, including an increase in the allowance for credit losses and other-than-temporary impairment losses of $18.5 million. Net realized investment gains, net of related amortization, were $2.1 million in 2019, net of other-than-temporary impairment losses of $12.4 million. Net realized investment gains, net of related amortization, were $37.9 million in 2018, net of other-than-temporary impairment losses of $2.6 million.
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recognized an increase (decrease) in earnings of $(2.7) million, $25.5 million and $(48.8) million, respectively, due to the net change in market value of investments recognized in earnings.
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recognized an increase (decrease) in earnings of $(16.3) million, $(20.4) million and $11.9 million, respectively, for the mark-to-market change in the agent deferred compensation plan liability which was impacted by changes in the underlying actuarial assumptions used to value the liability. We recognize the mark-to-market change in the estimated value of this liability through earnings as assumptions change.
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recognized an increase (decrease) in earnings of $(79.1) million, $(81.4) million and $55.5 million, respectively, resulting from changes in the estimated fair value of embedded derivative liabilities related to our fixed index annuities, net of related amortization. Such amounts include the impacts of changes in market interest rates used to determine the derivative's estimated fair value. The discount rate is based on risk-free rates (U.S. Treasury rates for similar durations) adjusted for non-performance risk and risk margins for non-capital market inputs. The significant decrease in U.S. Treasury rates in 2020 and 2019 was the primary factor in the change in estimated fair value of the embedded derivative liabilities.
Loss related to reinsurance transaction in 2018 resulted from ceding our legacy (prior to 2003) comprehensive and nursing home long-term care policies in September 2018 through 100% indemnity coinsurance. We recognized a pre-tax loss related to the reinsurance transaction of $704.2 million (net of realized gains on the transfer of assets related to the transaction of $363.4 million) as further described in the note to the consolidated financial statements entitled "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Reinsurance".
Loss on extinguishment of debt in 2019 of $7.3 million consisted of: (i) a premium of $6.1 million due to the redemption of the 4.500% Senior Notes due May 2020 (the "2020 Notes"); and (ii) $1.2 million related to the write-off of unamortized issuance costs due to the redemption of the 2020 Notes.
Other non-operating items include earnings attributable to VIEs that we are required to consolidate, net of affiliated amounts. Such earnings are not indicative of, and are unrelated to, the Company's underlying fundamentals. Also, other non-operating items include the net revenue earned pursuant to a transition services agreement representing the difference between the fees we receive from Wilton Re and the overhead costs incurred to provide such services under the agreement in connection with the completion of a long-term care reinsurance transaction in September 2018. In addition, such non-operating items in 2019 include $15.9 million of one-time expenses associated with: (i) the new operating model announced in early January 2020 to create a more customer-centric structure and improve operating performance; and (ii) a new strategic technology partnership with two leading, global technology solutions providers for our application development, maintenance and testing functions as well as IT infrastructure and cybersecurity services.
PREMIUM COLLECTIONS
In accordance with GAAP, insurance policy income in our consolidated statement of operations consists of premiums earned for traditional insurance policies that have life contingencies or morbidity features. For annuity and interest-sensitive life contracts, premiums collected are not reported as revenues, but as deposits to insurance liabilities. We recognize revenues for these products over time in the form of investment income and surrender or other charges.
Agents, insurance brokers and marketing organizations who market our products and prospective purchasers of our products use the financial strength ratings of our insurance subsidiaries as an important factor in determining whether to market or purchase. Ratings have the most impact on our sales of supplemental health and life products to consumers at the worksite. The current financial strength ratings of our primary insurance subsidiaries from A.M. Best, Fitch, S&P and Moody's are "A-", "A-", "A-" and "A3", respectively. For a description of these ratings and additional information on our ratings, see "Consolidated Financial Condition - Financial Strength Ratings of our Insurance Subsidiaries."
We set premium rates on our health insurance policies based on facts and circumstances known at the time we issue the policies using assumptions about numerous variables, including the actuarial probability of a policyholder incurring a claim, the probable size of the claim, and the interest rate earned on our investment of premiums. We also consider historical claims information, industry statistics, the rates of our competitors and other factors. If our actual claims experience is less favorable than we anticipated and we are unable to raise our premium rates, our financial results may be adversely affected. We generally cannot raise our health insurance premiums in any state until we obtain the approval of the state insurance regulator. We review the adequacy of our premium rates regularly and file for rate increases on our products when we believe such rates are too low. It is likely that we will not be able to obtain approval for all requested premium rate increases. If such requests are denied in one or more states, our net income may decrease. If such requests are approved, increased premium rates may reduce the volume of our new sales and may cause existing policyholders to lapse their policies. If the healthier policyholders allow their policies to lapse, this would reduce our premium income and profitability in the future.
Total premium collections were as follows (dollars in millions):
Annuities include fixed index, fixed interest and other annuities sold to the senior market. Annuity collections were $1,165.0 million in 2020, compared to $1,306.4 million in 2019 and $1,164.5 million in 2018. The decrease in premium collections from our fixed index products in 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily reflects our pricing discipline and current market conditions. We have proactively managed the participation rates on our fixed index products in order to balance sales growth and profitability in the current low interest rate environment. The increase in premium collections from our fixed index products in 2019, as compared to 2018, was primarily due to the general stock market performance which made these products attractive to certain customers. Premium collections from our fixed interest products reflect consumer preference for fixed index products in the current low interest rate environment.
Health products include supplemental health, Medicare supplement and long-term care products. Our profits on health policies depend on the overall level of sales, the length of time the business remains inforce, investment yields, claims experience and expense management.
Premiums collected on supplemental health products (including specified disease, accident and hospital indemnity insurance products) were $677.2 million in 2020, compared to $663.1 million in 2019 and $642.8 million in 2018. Such increases are primarily due to new sales.
Collected premiums on Medicare supplement policies were $750.5 million, $776.0 million and $782.1 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decrease in 2020 is due to lower sales of such products.
In 2018, premiums collected on long-term care policies included $130.5 million of premiums collected from certain legacy (prior to 2003) comprehensive and nursing home long-term care policies which were ceded in September 2018 under a 100% indemnity coinsurance agreement.
Life products include interest-sensitive and traditional life products. Life premiums were $839.6 million, $811.2 million and $794.8 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Premiums collected reflect both recent sales activity and steady persistency.
INVESTMENTS
Our investment strategy is to: (i) provide largely stable investment income from a diversified high quality fixed income portfolio; (ii) mitigate the effect of changing interest rates through active asset/liability management; (iii) provide liquidity to meet our cash obligations to policyholders and others; and (iv) maximize total return through active strategic asset allocation and investment management. Consistent with this strategy, investments in fixed maturity securities and mortgage loans made up 90 percent of our $27.6 billion investment portfolio at December 31, 2020. The remainder of the invested assets was trading securities, investments held by VIEs, COLI, equity securities, policy loans and other invested assets.
The following table summarizes the composition of our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
The following table summarizes investment yields earned over the past three years on the investments allocated to our product lines. General account investments exclude the value of options.
Insurance statutes regulate the types of investments that our insurance subsidiaries are permitted to make and limit the amount of funds that may be used for any one type of investment. In addition, we have internal management compliance limits on various exposures and activities which are typically more restrictive than insurance statutes. In light of these statutes and regulations and our business and investment strategy, we generally seek to invest in United States government and government-
agency securities and corporate securities rated investment grade by established nationally recognized rating organizations or in securities of comparable investment quality, if not rated.
Fixed Maturities, Available for Sale
The following table summarizes the carrying values and gross unrealized losses of our fixed maturity securities, available for sale, by category as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
The following table summarizes the gross unrealized losses of our fixed maturity securities, available for sale, by category and ratings category as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
Investment ratings are assigned the second lowest rating by Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations (Moody's, S&P or Fitch), or if not rated by such firms, the rating assigned by the NAIC. NAIC designations of "1" or "2" include fixed maturities generally rated investment grade (rated "Baa3" or higher by Moody's or rated "BBB-" or higher by S&P and Fitch). NAIC designations of "3" through "6" are referred to as below-investment grade (which generally are rated "Ba1" or lower by Moody's or rated "BB+" or lower by S&P and Fitch). References to investment grade or below-investment grade throughout our consolidated financial statements are determined as described above. The following table sets forth fixed maturity investments at December 31, 2020, classified by ratings (dollars in millions):
We continually evaluate the creditworthiness of each issuer whose securities we hold. We pay special attention to large investments, investments which have significant risk characteristics and to those securities whose fair values have declined materially for reasons other than changes in general market conditions. We evaluate the realizable value of the investment, the specific condition of the issuer and the issuer's ability to comply with the material terms of the security. We review the historical and recent operational results and financial position of the issuer, information about its industry, information about factors affecting the issuer's performance and other information. 40|86 Advisors employs experienced securities analysts in a broad variety of specialty areas who compile and review such data. During 2020, we recognized net realized investment losses
of $36.2 million, which were comprised of: (i) $15.1 million of net losses from the sales of investments; (ii) $5.1 million of losses related to equity securities, including the change in fair value; (iii) the decrease in fair value of certain fixed maturity investments with embedded derivatives of $.1 million; (iv) the increase in fair value of embedded derivatives related to a modified coinsurance agreement of $2.6 million; and (v) an increase in the allowance for credit losses and other-than temporary impairment losses of $18.5 million.
During 2020, we sold $507.1 million of fixed maturity investments which resulted in gross investment losses (before income taxes) of $53.7 million. Securities are generally sold at a loss following unforeseen issue-specific events or conditions or shifts in perceived relative values. These reasons include but are not limited to: (i) changes in the investment environment; (ii) expectation that the market value could deteriorate; (iii) our desire to reduce our exposure to an asset class, an issuer or an industry; (iv) prospective or actual changes in credit quality; or (v) changes in expected portfolio cash flows.
Our investment portfolio is subject to the risk of declines in realizable value. However, we attempt to mitigate this risk through the diversification and active management of our portfolio.
The Company reports accrued investment income separately from fixed maturities, available for sale, and has elected not to measure an allowance for credit losses for accrued investment income. Accrued investment income is written off through net investment income at the time the issuer of the bond defaults or is expected to default on payments.
As of December 31, 2020, we had fixed maturity securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $1.0 million and nil, respectively, that were in substantive default (i.e., in default due to nonpayment of interest or principal). There were no other investments about which we had serious doubts as to the recoverability of the carrying value of the investment.
Other Investments
At December 31, 2020, we held commercial mortgage loan investments with an amortized cost of $1,285.7 million (or 4.7 percent of total invested assets) and a fair value of $1,339.9 million. Our commercial mortgage loan portfolio is comprised of large commercial mortgage loans. Approximately 14 percent, 10 percent, 8 percent and 7 percent of the commercial mortgage loan balance were on properties located in California, Texas, Maryland and Wisconsin, respectively. No other state comprised greater than six percent of the mortgage loan balance. At December 31, 2020, there were no commercial mortgage loans in process of foreclosure. At December 31, 2020, we held residential mortgage loan investments with an amortized cost of $84.8 million and a fair value of $84.9 million. At December 31, 2020, there were 19 residential mortgage loans that were noncurrent with a carrying value of $6.1 million (of which, 15 such loans with a carrying value of $5.1 million were in forbearance and 3 loans with a carrying value of $.5 million were in foreclosure). The allowance for credit losses related to mortgage loans was $11.8 million at December 31, 2020, and increased $5.1 million in 2020. During 2019 and 2018, we recognized nil and $2.1 million, respectively, of impairments on commercial mortgage loans.
The following table shows the distribution of our commercial mortgage loan portfolio by property type as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
The following table shows our commercial mortgage loan portfolio by loan size as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
The following table summarizes the distribution of maturities of our commercial mortgage loans as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
The following table provides the amortized cost by year of origination and estimated fair value of our outstanding commercial mortgage loans and the underlying collateral as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
________________
(a)Loan-to-value ratios are calculated as the ratio of: (i) the amortized cost of the commercial mortgage loans; to (ii) the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral.
At December 31, 2020, we held $232.0 million of trading securities. We carry trading securities at estimated fair value; changes in fair value are reflected in the statement of operations. Our trading securities include: (i) investments purchased with the intent of selling in the near term to generate income; (ii) investments supporting certain insurance liabilities; and (iii) certain fixed maturity securities containing embedded derivatives for which we have elected the fair value option. Investment income from trading securities backing certain insurance liabilities is substantially offset by the change in insurance policy benefits related to certain products and agreements.
Other invested assets include options backing our fixed index annuity and life insurance products, COLI, FHLB common stock and certain nontraditional investments, including investments in limited partnerships, hedge funds and real estate investments held for sale.
At December 31, 2020, we held investments with an amortized cost of $1,211.3 million and an estimated fair value of $1,189.4 million related to VIEs that we are required to consolidate. The investment portfolio held by the VIEs is primarily
comprised of commercial bank loans, the borrowers for which are almost entirely rated below-investment grade. Refer to the note to the consolidated financial statements entitled "Investments in Variable Interest Entities" for additional information on these investments.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Potential Future Impacts of COVID-19 Pandemic
We expect the potential impact of the pandemic on our future results will be largely driven by three things which are already impacting our business, but the duration and severity of which are currently unknown:
•the impact of the COVID-19 environment on the sales of some of our insurance products;
•changes in mortality, morbidity, and persistency (or lapse rates) impacting insurance product margin; and
•general economic impacts, driving: (i) lower net investment income through lower interest rates; (ii) the impact of credit deterioration on invested assets and capital; and (iii) potential impacts to reserves and deferred acquisition costs resulting from lower interest rates, equity performance, and market volatility.
Given the ongoing uncertainty related to how the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our results and the continued economic impact it will have, we continue to model a range of potential outcomes taking into account these three things. The purpose of our modeling is not to predict certain outcomes, but to develop a range of potential outcomes and manage capital and liquidity in the context of outcomes within the range. We most recently updated our models for two scenarios in January 2021. These scenarios incorporate many assumptions. Actual conditions in future periods may differ materially from the assumptions used in modeling the two scenarios. In the first scenario, which assumes that vaccines are sufficient in achieving herd immunity in 2021 and the impacts of the pandemic trail off through 2021, we assumed approximately 360,000 additional deaths from the virus in 2021 in the United States and modest economic growth in 2021 compared to 2020. In the second scenario, which assumes that vaccines are insufficient to achieve herd immunity in 2021, we assumed approximately 500,000 additional deaths from the virus in 2021 in the United States and recessionary economic conditions in 2021 compared to 2020.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our consolidated sales volumes. In 2020, our sales of health and life insurance products (measured by new annualized premiums) across both our Consumer and Worksite Divisions decreased by 6 percent compared to 2019. The lower sales in 2020 will adversely impact our earnings in future periods.
In 2020, our Consumer Division health sales (new annualized premiums) decreased by 16 percent compared to 2019. Sales of life products increased 19 percent in 2020 compared to 2019. Collected premiums from our annuity products decreased 11 percent in 2020 compared to 2019. As the economy has partially reopened, albeit largely on a work-from-home basis, and our customers and agents have become more accustomed to virtual transactions, sales in the Consumer Division have improved.
Similar to other insurance companies selling insurance products at the workplace, sales within our Worksite Division have been significantly below prior year levels. In 2020, our Worksite Division life and health sales (new annualized premiums) decreased 43 percent compared to 2019.
With respect to changes in mortality and morbidity, we estimate that COVID-19 could have a modestly favorable impact on total insurance product margin during the first half of 2021; a modestly unfavorable impact in the second half of 2021; and a neutral impact for the entire year, including the negative impact on insurance product margin from lower sales in 2020. In 2020, our margin on life insurance products reflected an estimated $38 million of adverse mortality impact related to COVID-19. While higher mortality claims unfavorably impacted our life product margins, our health product margins have generally benefited due to lower claims experience. We estimate the COVID-19 environment favorably impacted our health margins by approximately $97 million in 2020 primarily due to consumers deferring medical care treatments. We expect this trend to revert to normal over time. Such deferral of care and possible long-term health complications from COVID-19 may lead to higher life and health claim costs in future periods.
The persistency of policies has generally been higher than pre-COVID-19 periods and we expect persistency to have a neutral impact going forward in both of our scenarios. However, there remains a possibility that high unemployment could translate to an increase in lapse rates in future periods. If higher lapse rates do occur, we expect that current period earnings
would generally be favorably impacted but earnings in future periods would be unfavorably impacted, as the base of our inforce business would be lower.
Regarding our investment portfolio, we have evaluated a range of potential impacts from the pandemic, including impacts on credit migration, default levels, net investment income and capital. We used a range of assumptions which are market-consistent, or in-line with downside assumptions from rating agencies and generally consistent with past financial crises.
We believe our earnings over the long-term will be impacted by lower interest rates consistent with the assumptions reflected in our actuarial unlocking exercise in the second quarter of 2020 which were further refined by our comprehensive review of actuarial assumptions completed in the fourth quarter of 2020. Refer to "Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Results of Operations - Changes in Actuarial Assumptions" for further information related to changes in certain actuarial assumptions and their impact on our operating results in 2020.
With respect to capital, based on the modeling described above, even with the more adverse impacts of the second scenario, we believe we would be able to:
•maintain our target RBC levels, debt to capital ratios and minimum holding company liquidity;
•maintain our quarterly dividend to shareholders; and
•have continued, but modest, capacity for share repurchases.
The two modeling scenarios described above, and the resulting range of estimated outcomes, are hypothetical and have been provided to give a general sense of how certain aspects of our business could be affected by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, depending on the duration and severity of the pandemic and related governmental and social responses and the economic consequences of the pandemic. There are many modeling scenarios which could result in materially different projected outcomes from the two described above and, accordingly the modeling scenarios described above do not constitute an exhaustive set of possible outcomes resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic which could affect our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. Similarly, given the unprecedented nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, the assumptions used in these modeling scenarios, and the related range of outcomes, are based on assumed facts which are inherently unpredictable and, accordingly, if the pandemic progresses and updated assumptions were to be applied to the modeling scenarios the outcome generated by the application of updated assumptions to these modeling scenarios may be materially different from those described above. For example, the actual number of U.S. deaths, the effectiveness of vaccines and the related economic impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic may differ materially from the assumptions used to generate the outcomes from the two scenarios. In addition, policies and actions taken by the U.S. and foreign governments and central banks have mitigated the impacts of COVID-19 on the financial markets, investment performance and valuations. There can be no assurance that these policies or actions will continue or continue to be effective. If the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is ultimately worse than contemplated by our modeled scenarios, the impact to our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity could be significantly different than described above.
Changes in the Consolidated Balance Sheet
Changes in our consolidated balance sheet between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, primarily reflect: (i) our net income for 2020; (ii) changes in the fair value of our fixed maturity securities, available for sale; (iii) the issuance of the Debentures; and (iv) payments to repurchase common stock of $263.0 million.
Our capital structure as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was as follows (dollars in millions):
The following table summarizes certain financial ratios as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
_____________________
(a)This non-GAAP measure differs from the corresponding GAAP measure presented immediately above, because accumulated other comprehensive income has been excluded from the value of capital used to determine this measure. Management believes this non-GAAP measure is useful because it removes the volatility that arises from changes in accumulated other comprehensive income. Such volatility is often caused by changes in the estimated fair value of our investment portfolio resulting from changes in general market interest rates rather than the business decisions made by management. However, this measure does not replace the corresponding GAAP measure.
Contractual Obligations
The Company's significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, were as follows (dollars in millions):
________________
(a) These cash flows represent our estimates of the payments we expect to make to our policyholders, without consideration of future premiums or reinsurance recoveries. These estimates are based on numerous assumptions (depending on the
product type) related to mortality, morbidity, lapses, withdrawals, future premiums, future deposits, interest rates on investments, credited rates, expenses and other factors which affect our future payments. The cash flows presented are undiscounted for interest. As a result, total outflows for all years exceed the corresponding liabilities of $25.1 billion included in our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. As such payments are based on numerous assumptions, the actual payments may vary significantly from the amounts shown.
In estimating the payments we expect to make to our policyholders, we considered the following:
•For products such as immediate annuities and structured settlement annuities without life contingencies, the payment obligation is fixed and determinable based on the terms of the policy.
•For products such as universal life, ordinary life, long-term care, supplemental health and fixed rate annuities, the future payments are not due until the occurrence of an insurable event (such as death or disability) or a triggering event (such as a surrender or partial withdrawal). We estimated these payments using actuarial models based on historical experience and our expectation of the future payment patterns which is consistent with the assumptions used in our loss recognition testing for these blocks of business.
•For short-term insurance products such as Medicare supplement insurance, the future payments relate only to amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including those that have been incurred but not reported as of the balance sheet date. We estimated these payments based on our historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns which is consistent with the assumptions used in our loss recognition testing for these blocks of business.
•The average interest rate we assumed would be credited to our total insurance liabilities (excluding interest rate bonuses for the first policy year only and excluding the effect of credited rates attributable to variable or fixed index products) over the term of the contracts was 4.6 percent.
(b) Includes projected interest payments based on interest rates, as applicable, as of December 31, 2020. Refer to the note to the consolidated financial statements entitled "Notes Payable - Direct Corporate Obligations" for additional information on notes payable.
(c) These borrowings represent collateralized borrowings from the FHLB.
(d) These borrowings represent the securities issued by VIEs and include projected interest payments based on interest rates, as applicable, as of December 31, 2020.
(e) Includes benefits expected to be paid pursuant to our deferred compensation plan and postretirement plans based on numerous actuarial assumptions and interest credited at 2.50 percent.
(f) Includes obligations to third parties for information technology services, software maintenance and license agreements, consulting services and sponsorship agreements.
It is possible that the ultimate outcomes of various uncertainties could affect our liquidity in future periods. For example, the following events could have a material adverse effect on our cash flows:
•An adverse decision in pending or future litigation.
•An inability to obtain rate increases on certain of our insurance products.
•Worse than anticipated claims experience.
•Lower than expected dividends and/or surplus debenture interest payments from our insurance subsidiaries (resulting from inadequate earnings or capital or regulatory requirements).
•An inability to meet and/or maintain the covenants in our Revolving Credit Agreement.
•A significant increase in policy surrender levels.
•A significant increase in investment defaults.
•An inability of our reinsurers to meet their financial obligations.
While we actively manage the relationship between the duration and cash flows of our invested assets and the estimated duration and cash flows of benefit payments arising from contract liabilities, there could be significant variations in the timing of such cash flows. Although we believe our current estimates properly project future claim experience, if these estimates prove to be wrong, and our experience worsens (as it did in some prior periods), our future liquidity could be adversely affected.
Liquidity for Insurance Operations
Our insurance companies generally receive adequate cash flows from premium collections and investment income to meet their obligations. Life insurance, long-term care insurance and annuity liabilities are generally long-term in nature. Life and annuity policyholders may, however, withdraw funds or surrender their policies, subject to any applicable penalty provisions; there are generally no withdrawal or surrender benefits for long-term care insurance. We actively manage the relationship between the duration of our invested assets and the estimated duration of benefit payments arising from contract liabilities.
Three of the Company's insurance subsidiaries (Bankers Life, Washington National and Colonial Penn) are members of the FHLB. As members of the FHLB, our insurance subsidiaries have the ability to borrow on a collateralized basis from the FHLB. We are required to hold certain minimum amounts of FHLB common stock as a condition of membership in the FHLB, and additional amounts based on the amount of the borrowings. At December 31, 2020, the carrying value of the FHLB common stock was $71.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, collateralized borrowings from the FHLB totaled $1.6 billion and the proceeds were used to purchase fixed maturity securities. The borrowings are classified as investment borrowings in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet. The borrowings are collateralized by investments with an estimated fair value of $2.0 billion at December 31, 2020, which are maintained in custodial accounts for the benefit of the FHLB.
State laws generally give state insurance regulatory agencies broad authority to protect policyholders in their jurisdictions. Regulators have used this authority in the past to restrict the ability of our insurance subsidiaries to pay any dividends or other amounts without prior approval. We cannot be assured that the regulators will not seek to assert greater supervision and control over our insurance subsidiaries' businesses and financial affairs.
Our estimated consolidated statutory RBC ratio was 411 percent at December 31, 2020, compared to 408 percent at December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to statutory operating earnings and the impacts of a change in principle related to certain reserve calculations, net of dividends paid to the holding company, which were partially offset by a 24 percentage point decrease due to investment valuation-related items (of which, 15 percentage points related to credit migration and 9 percentage points related to changes in carrying values within our investment portfolio). In 2020, our estimated consolidated statutory operating earnings were $421 million and insurance company dividends of $294.1 million were paid to the holding company. Statutory operating income and capital and surplus were favorably impacted by $99 million and $53 million, respectively, related to certain provisions in the CARES Act. The favorable impact resulted from provisions that permitted the carryback of net operating losses that were created after 2017 and the temporary repeal of the 80% limitation on the utilization of NOLs created after 2017.
During 2020, the financial statements of three of our insurance subsidiaries prepared in accordance with statutory accounting practices prescribed or permitted by regulatory authorities reflected asset adequacy or premium deficiency reserves. Total asset adequacy and premium deficiency reserves for Bankers Life, Washington National and Bankers Conseco Life Insurance Company were $10.0 million, $125.5 million and $39.5 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020. Due to differences between statutory and GAAP insurance liabilities, we were not required to recognize a similar asset adequacy or premium deficiency reserve in our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. The determination of the need for and amount of asset adequacy or premium deficiency reserves is subject to numerous actuarial assumptions, including the Company's ability to change NGEs related to certain products consistent with contract provisions.
Our insurance subsidiaries transfer exposure to certain risk to others through reinsurance arrangements. When we obtain reinsurance, we are still liable for those transferred risks in the event the reinsurer defaults on its obligations. The failure, insolvency, inability or unwillingness of one or more of the Company's reinsurers to perform in accordance with the terms of its reinsurance agreement could negatively impact our earnings or financial position and our consolidated statutory RBC ratio.
Financial Strength Ratings of our Insurance Subsidiaries
Financial strength ratings provided by A.M. Best, Fitch, S&P and Moody's and are the rating agency's opinions of the ability of our insurance subsidiaries to pay policyholder claims and obligations when due.
On January 28, 2021, A.M. Best affirmed its "A-" financial strength ratings of our primary insurance subsidiaries and revised the outlook for these ratings to positive from stable. The "A-" rating is assigned to companies that have an excellent ability, in A.M. Best's opinion, to meet their ongoing obligations to policyholders. A.M. Best ratings for the industry currently range from "A++ (Superior)" to "F (In Liquidation)" and some companies are not rated. An "A++" rating indicates a superior ability to meet ongoing obligations to policyholders. A.M. Best has sixteen possible ratings. There are three ratings above the "A-" rating of our primary insurance subsidiaries and twelve ratings that are below that rating.
On December 17, 2020, Fitch affirmed its "A-" financial strength ratings of our primary insurance subsidiaries. The outlook for these ratings remain stable. An insurer rated "A", in Fitch's opinion, indicates a low expectation of ceased or interrupted payments and indicates strong capacity to meet policyholder and contract obligations. This capacity may, nonetheless, be more vulnerable to changes in circumstances or in economic conditions than is the case for higher ratings. Fitch ratings for the industry range from "AAA Exceptionally Strong" to "C Distressed" and some companies are not rated. Pluses and minuses show the relative standing within a category. Fitch has nineteen possible ratings. There are six ratings above the "A-" rating of our primary insurance subsidiaries and twelve ratings that are below that rating.
On June 21, 2019, S&P upgraded the financial strength ratings of our primary insurance subsidiaries to "A-" from
"BBB+" and the outlook for these ratings is stable. S&P financial strength ratings range from "AAA" to "R" and some companies are not rated. An insurer rated "A", in S&P's opinion, has strong financial security characteristics, but is somewhat more likely to be affected by adverse business conditions than are insurers with higher ratings. Pluses and minuses show the relative standing within a category. S&P has twenty-one possible ratings. There are six ratings above the "A-" rating of our primary insurance subsidiaries and fourteen ratings that are below that rating.
On October 4, 2018, Moody's upgraded the financial strength ratings of our primary insurance subsidiaries to "A3" from "Baa1" and the outlook for these ratings is stable. Moody's actions resulted from the Company's announcement that Bankers Life had closed on its agreement to cede certain long-term care policies. Moody’s financial strength ratings range from "Aaa" to "C". These ratings may be supplemented with numbers "1", "2", or "3" to show relative standing within a category. In Moody's view, an insurer rated "A" offers good financial security, however, certain elements may be present which suggests a susceptibility to impairment sometime in the future. Moody's has twenty-one possible ratings. There are six ratings above the "A3" rating of our primary insurance subsidiaries and fourteen ratings that are below that rating.
Rating agencies have increased the frequency and scope of their credit reviews and requested additional information from the companies that they rate, including us. They may also adjust upward the capital and other requirements employed in the rating agency models for maintenance of certain ratings levels. We cannot predict what actions rating agencies may take, or what actions we may take in response. Accordingly, downgrades and outlook revisions related to us or the life insurance industry may occur in the future at any time and without notice by any rating agency. These could increase policy surrenders and withdrawals, adversely affect relationships with our distribution channels, reduce new sales, reduce our ability to borrow and increase our future borrowing costs.
Liquidity of the Holding Companies
Availability and Sources and Uses of Holding Company Liquidity; Limitations on Ability of Insurance Subsidiaries to Make Dividend and Surplus Debenture Interest Payments to the Holding Companies; Limitations on Holding Company Activities
At December 31, 2020, CNO, CDOC and our other non-insurance subsidiaries held unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $388.1 million. CNO and CDOC are holding companies with no business operations of their own; they depend on their operating subsidiaries for cash to make principal and interest payments on debt, and to pay administrative expenses and income taxes. CNO and CDOC receive cash from insurance subsidiaries, consisting of dividends and distributions, interest payments on surplus debentures and tax-sharing payments, as well as cash from non-insurance subsidiaries consisting of dividends, distributions, loans and advances. The principal non-insurance subsidiaries that provide cash to CNO and CDOC are 40|86 Advisors, which receives fees from the insurance subsidiaries for investment services, and CNO Services which receives fees from the insurance subsidiaries for providing administrative services. The agreements between our insurance subsidiaries
and CNO Services and 40|86 Advisors, respectively, were previously approved by the domestic insurance regulator for each insurance company, and any payments thereunder do not require further regulatory approval.
The following table sets forth the aggregate amount of dividends (net of capital contributions) and other distributions that our insurance subsidiaries paid to our non-insurance subsidiaries in each of the last three fiscal years (dollars in millions):
The following summarizes the current ownership structure of CNO’s primary subsidiaries:
The ability of our insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends is subject to state insurance department regulations and is based on the financial statements of our insurance subsidiaries prepared in accordance with statutory accounting practices prescribed or permitted by regulatory authorities, which differ from GAAP. These regulations generally permit dividends to be paid from statutory earned surplus of the insurance company without regulatory approval for any 12-month period in amounts equal to the greater of (or in some states, the lesser of): (i) statutory net gain from operations or net income for the prior year; or (ii) 10 percent of statutory capital and surplus as of the end of the preceding year. However, as each of the immediate insurance subsidiaries of CDOC has significant negative earned surplus, any dividend payments from the insurance subsidiaries require the prior approval of the director or commissioner of the applicable state insurance department. In 2020, our insurance subsidiaries paid dividends to CDOC totaling $294.1 million. We expect to receive regulatory approval for future dividends from our subsidiaries, but there can be no assurance that such payments will be approved or that the financial condition of our insurance subsidiaries will not change, making future approvals less likely.
CDOC holds surplus debentures from CLTX with an aggregate principal amount of $749.6 million. Interest payments on those surplus debentures do not require additional approval provided the RBC ratio of CLTX exceeds 100 percent (but do require prior written notice to the Texas state insurance department). The estimated RBC ratio of CLTX was 352 percent at December 31, 2020. CDOC also holds a surplus debenture from Colonial Penn with a principal balance of $160.0 million. Interest payments on that surplus debenture require prior approval by the Pennsylvania state insurance department. Dividends and other payments from our non-insurance subsidiaries, including 40|86 Advisors and CNO Services, to CNO or CDOC do not require approval by any regulatory authority or other third party. However, insurance regulators may prohibit payments by our insurance subsidiaries to parent companies if they determine that such payments could be adverse to our policyholders or contractholders.
The insurance subsidiaries of CDOC receive funds to pay dividends primarily from: (i) the earnings of their direct businesses; (ii) tax sharing payments received from subsidiaries (if applicable); and (iii) with respect to CLTX, dividends received from subsidiaries. At December 31, 2020, the subsidiaries of CLTX had earned surplus (deficit) as summarized below (dollars in millions):
____________________
(a)Bankers Life paid dividends of $232.9 million to CLTX in 2020. Bankers Life may pay dividends without regulatory approval or prior notice for any 12-month period if such dividends are less than the greater of: (i) statutory net income for the prior year; or (ii) 10 percent of statutory capital and surplus as of the end of the preceding year. Dividends in excess of these levels require 30 days prior notice.
(b)The deficit is primarily due to transactions which occurred several years ago, including a tax planning transaction and the fee paid to recapture a block of business previously ceded to an unaffiliated insurer.
A significant deterioration in the financial condition, earnings or cash flow of the material subsidiaries of CNO or CDOC for any reason could hinder such subsidiaries' ability to pay cash dividends or other disbursements to CNO and/or CDOC, which, in turn, could limit CNO's ability to meet debt service requirements and satisfy other financial obligations. In addition, we may choose to retain capital in our insurance subsidiaries or to contribute additional capital to our insurance subsidiaries to maintain or strengthen their surplus or fund a long-term care reinsurance transaction, and these decisions could limit the amount available at our top tier insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to the holding companies.
In November 2020, the Company issued the Debentures. The terms of the Debentures are set forth in the Indenture, dated as of June 12, 2019, as supplemented by the Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 25, 2020, each between the Company and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. The Debentures bear interest at an annual rate of 5.125%, payable quarterly in arrears on February 25, May 25, August 25 and November 25 commencing on February 25, 2021. The Debentures mature on November 25, 2060. The Company used the net proceeds from the issuance of the Debentures for general corporate purposes.
On October 13, 2017, the Company entered into the Amendment Agreement with respect to its Revolving Credit Agreement. The Amendment Agreement, among other things, increased the total commitments available under the revolving credit facility from $150.0 million to $250.0 million, increased the aggregate amount of additional incremental loans the Company may incur from $50.0 million to $100.0 million and extended the maturity date of the revolving credit facility from May 19, 2019 to October 13, 2022. There were no amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Agreement at December 31, 2020.
The scheduled principal and interest payments on our direct corporate obligations are as follows (dollars in millions):
_________________________
(a)Based on interest rates as of December 31, 2020.
(b)The maturity date of the Revolving Credit Agreement is October 13, 2022.
(c)Such amount represents our 5.250% Notes due 2025.
(d)Such amount includes $500.0 million of 5.250% Notes due 2029 and the Debentures.
Free cash flow is a measure of holding company liquidity and is calculated as: (i) dividends, management fees and surplus debenture interest payments received from our subsidiaries; plus (ii) earnings on corporate investments; less (iii) interest expense, corporate expenses and net tax payments. In 2020, we generated $387 million of such free cash flow. The Company is committed to deploying 100 percent of its free cash flow into investments to accelerate profitable growth, common stock dividends and share repurchases. In late June 2020, we resumed share repurchase activity after suspending such share repurchases in mid-March 2020 in light of the uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our current estimate of free cash flow generation in 2021, combined with holding company liquidity existing at December 31, 2020, is expected to result in share repurchase capacity that exceeds our actual share repurchase activity in 2020. The amount and timing of future share repurchases (if any) will be based on business and market conditions and other factors including, but not limited to, available free cash flow, the current price of our common stock and investment opportunities. In 2020, we repurchased 14.5 million shares of common stock for $263.0 million under our securities repurchase program. The Company had remaining repurchase authority of $269.3 million as of December 31, 2020.
In 2020, 2019 and 2018, dividends declared on common stock totaled $67.4 million ($0.47 per common share), $67.2 million ($0.43 per common share) and $64.8 million ($0.39 per common share), respectively. In May 2020, the Company increased its quarterly common stock dividend to $0.12 per share from $0.11 per share.
On January 28, 2021, A.M. Best affirmed its "bbb-" issuer credit and senior unsecured debt ratings and revised the outlook for these ratings to positive from stable. In A.M. Best's view, a company rated "bbb-" has an adequate ability to meet the terms of its obligations; however, the issuer is more susceptible to changes in economic or other conditions. Pluses and minuses show the relative standing within a category. A.M. Best has a total of 22 possible ratings ranging from "aaa (Exceptional)" to "d (In default)". There are nine ratings above CNO's "bbb-" rating and twelve ratings that are below its rating.
On December 17, 2020, Fitch affirmed its "BBB-" rating on our senior unsecured debt. The outlook for these ratings remain stable. In Fitch's view, an obligation rated "BBB" indicates that expectations of default risk are currently low. The capacity for payment of financial commitments is considered adequate but adverse business or economic conditions are more likely to impair this capacity. Pluses and minuses show the relative standing within a category. Fitch has a total of 21 possible ratings ranging from "AAA" to "D". There are nine ratings above CNO's "BBB-" rating and eleven ratings that are below its rating.
On June 21, 2019, S&P upgraded our senior unsecured debt rating to "BBB-" from "BB+" and the outlook for these ratings is stable. In S&P's view, an obligation rated "BBB" exhibits adequate protection parameters. However, adverse economic conditions or changing circumstances are more likely to lead to a weakened capacity of the obligor to meet its financial commitment on the obligation. Pluses and minuses show the relative standing within a category. S&P has a total of 22 possible ratings ranging from "AAA (Extremely Strong)" to "D (Payment Default)". There are nine ratings above CNO's "BBB-" rating and twelve ratings that are below its rating.
On October 4, 2018, Moody's upgraded our senior unsecured debt rating to "Baa3" from "Ba1" and the outlook for these ratings is stable. Moody's actions resulted from the Company's announcement that Bankers Life had closed on its agreement to cede certain long-term care policies. In Moody's view, obligations rated "Baa" are subject to moderate credit risk and may possess certain speculative characteristics. A rating is supplemented with numerical modifiers "1", "2" or "3" to show the relative standing within a category. Moody's has a total of 21 possible ratings ranging from "Aaa" to "C". There are nine ratings above CNO's "Baa3" rating and eleven ratings that are below its rating.
Outlook
We believe that the existing cash available to the holding company, the cash flows to be generated from operations and other transactions will be sufficient to allow us to meet our debt service obligations, pay corporate expenses and satisfy other financial obligations. However, our cash flow is affected by a variety of factors, many of which are outside of our control, including insurance regulatory issues, competition, financial markets and other general business conditions. We cannot provide assurance that we will possess sufficient income and liquidity to meet all of our debt service requirements and other holding company obligations. For additional discussion regarding the liquidity and other risks that we face, see "Risk Factors".
MARKET-SENSITIVE INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT
Our spread-based insurance business is subject to several inherent risks arising from movements in interest rates, especially if we fail to anticipate or respond to such movements. First, interest rate changes can cause compression of our net spread between interest earned on investments and interest credited on customer deposits, thereby adversely affecting our
results. Second, if interest rate changes produce an unanticipated increase in surrenders of our spread-based products, we may be forced to sell invested assets at a loss in order to fund such surrenders. Many of our products include surrender charges, market interest rate adjustments or other features to encourage persistency; however, at December 31, 2020, approximately $4.4 billion of our total insurance liabilities could be surrendered by the policyholder without penalty. Finally, changes in interest rates can have significant effects on our investment portfolio. We use asset/liability strategies that are designed to mitigate the effect of interest rate changes on our profitability. However, there can be no assurance that management will be successful in implementing such strategies and sustaining adequate investment spreads.
We seek to invest our available funds in a manner that will fund future obligations to policyholders, subject to appropriate risk considerations. We seek to meet this objective through investments that: (i) have similar cash flow characteristics with the liabilities they support; (ii) are diversified (including by types of obligors); and (iii) are predominantly investment-grade in quality.
Our investment strategy is to maximize, over a sustained period and within acceptable parameters of quality and risk, investment income and total investment return through active strategic asset allocation and investment management. Accordingly, we may sell securities at a gain or a loss to enhance the projected total return of the portfolio as market opportunities change, to reflect changing perceptions of risk, or to better match certain characteristics of our investment portfolio with the corresponding characteristics of our insurance liabilities.
The profitability of many of our products depends on the spread between the interest earned on investments and the rates credited on our insurance liabilities. In addition, changes in competition and other factors, including the level of surrenders and withdrawals, may limit our ability to adjust or to maintain crediting rates at levels necessary to avoid narrowing of spreads under certain market conditions. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 16 percent of our insurance liabilities had interest rates that may be reset annually; 49 percent had a fixed explicit interest rate for the duration of the contract; 33 percent had credited rates which approximate the income earned by the Company; and the remainder had no explicit interest rates.
The following table summarizes the distribution of annuity and universal life account values, net of amounts ceded, by guaranteed interest crediting rates as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
At December 31, 2020, $2.9 billion and $0.3 billion of our fixed interest annuity and universal life account values, respectively, net of amounts ceded, were at minimum guaranteed crediting rates. The weighted average crediting rates at December 31, 2020, related to such annuity and universal life account values, that were at the minimum guaranteed crediting rate were 1.85 percent and 1.59 percent, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, the weighted average yield, computed on the cost basis of our fixed maturity portfolio, was 4.6 percent, and the average interest rate credited or accruing to our total insurance liabilities (excluding interest rate bonuses for the first policy year only and excluding the effect of credited rates attributable to variable or fixed index products) was 4.6 percent. Refer to "Part 1 - Item 1A. Risk Factors - Potential continuation of a low interest rate environment for an extended period of time may negatively impact our results of operations, financial position and cash flows" for additional information on interest rate risks.
We simulate the cash flows expected from our existing insurance business under various interest rate scenarios. These simulations help us to measure the potential gain or loss in fair value of our interest rate-sensitive investments and to manage the relationship between the interest sensitivity of our assets and liabilities. When the estimated durations of assets and liabilities are similar, absent other factors, a change in the value of assets related to changes in interest rates should be largely
offset by a change in the value of liabilities. At December 31, 2020, the estimated duration of our fixed income securities (as modified to reflect estimated prepayments and call premiums) and the estimated duration of our insurance liabilities were approximately 10.2 years and 9.7 years, respectively. We estimate that our fixed maturity securities and short-term investments (net of corresponding changes in insurance acquisition costs) would decline in fair value by approximately $145 million if interest rates were to increase by 10 percent from their levels at December 31, 2020. Our simulations incorporate numerous assumptions, require significant estimates and assume an immediate change in interest rates without any management of the investment portfolio in reaction to such change. Consequently, potential changes in value of our financial instruments indicated by the simulations will likely be different from the actual changes experienced under given interest rate scenarios, and the differences may be material. Because we actively manage our investments and liabilities, our net exposure to interest rates can vary over time.
We are subject to the risk that our investments will decline in value. This has occurred in the past and may occur again, particularly if interest rates rise from their current low levels.
The Company is subject to risk resulting from fluctuations in market prices of our equity securities. In general, these investments have more year-to-year price variability than our fixed maturity investments. However, returns over longer time frames have been consistently higher. We manage this risk by limiting our equity securities to a relatively small portion of our total investments.
Our investment in options backing our equity-linked products is closely matched with our obligation to fixed index annuity holders. Fair value changes associated with that investment are substantially offset by an increase or decrease in the amounts added to policyholder account liabilities for fixed index products.
Inflation
Inflation rates may impact the financial statements and operating results in several areas. Inflation influences interest rates, which in turn impact the fair value of the investment portfolio and yields on new investments. Inflation also impacts a portion of our insurance policy benefits affected by increased medical coverage costs. Operating expenses, including payrolls, are impacted to a certain degree by the inflation rate.