Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Reference is made to Part I - Item 1 - “Note About Forward-Looking Statements” and Part I - Item 1A - “Risk Factors” which describes important factors that could cause actual results to differ from expectations and non-historical information contained herein. In addition, the following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of Consolidated Communications Holdings, Inc. (“Consolidated,” the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us”). MD&A should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements (“Notes”) as of and for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Throughout MD&A, we refer to certain measures that are not a measure of financial performance in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“US GAAP” or “GAAP”). We believe the use of these non-GAAP measures on a consolidated basis provides the reader with additional information that is useful in understanding our operating results and trends. These measures should be viewed in addition to, rather than as a substitute for, those measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. See the Non-GAAP Measures section below for a more detailed discussion on the use and calculation of these measures.
Overview
Consolidated is a broadband and business communications provider offering a wide range of communication solutions to consumer, commercial and carrier customers across a 23-state service area. We operate an advanced fiber network spanning over 46,600 fiber route miles across many rural areas and metro communities. Our business product suite includes: data and Internet solutions, voice, data center services, security services, managed and IT services, and an expanded suite of cloud services. We provide wholesale solutions to wireless and wireline carriers and other service providers including data, voice, network connections and custom fiber builds and last mile connections. We offer residential high-speed Internet, video, phone and home security services as well as multi-service residential and small business bundles.
We generate the majority of our consolidated operating revenues primarily from monthly subscriptions to our broadband, data and transport services (collectively “broadband services”) marketed to business and residential customers. Commercial and carrier services represent the largest source of our operating revenues and are expected to be key growth areas in the future. We are focused on expanding our broadband and commercial product suite and are continually enhancing our commercial product offerings to meet the needs of our business customers. We leverage our advanced fiber network and tailor our services by developing solutions to fit their specific needs and leveraging a value- based sales approach. We continue to enhance our suite of managed and cloud services, which increases efficiency and enables greater scalability and reliability for our business customers. In April 2020, we launched ProConnect Unified Communications to businesses in our northern New England markets. This cloud-based collaboration solution enables users to easily make and receive calls, host video conferences and share files, message and manage features from anywhere and any device. In October 2020, we expanded the availability of our Microsoft Productivity Suite, another cloud-based collaboration solution, across our entire service area. This solution includes the Microsoft Teams collaboration platform that combines video meetings, chat, file storage and application integration. We anticipate future momentum in commercial and carrier services as these products gain traction as well as from the demand from customers for additional bandwidth and data-based services.
We market our residential services by leading with broadband services. As consumer demands for bandwidth continue to increase, our focus is on enhancing our broadband services and progressively increasing broadband speeds. We offer data speeds of up to 1 Gbps in select markets, and up to 100 Mbps in markets where 1 Gbps is not yet available, depending on the geographical region. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 58% of the homes we serve on our legacy Consolidated network had availability to broadband speeds of up to 100 Mbps or greater. The majority of the homes in our northern New England service areas have availability to broadband speeds of 20 Mbps or less. We continue to focus on bringing higher broadband speeds and improving customer experience by expanding the availability of multi-Gig broadband services. As part of our fiber build plan, we plan to upgrade approximately 1.6 million passings across select service areas over the next five years to enable multi gigabit-capable services to these homes and small businesses of which 300,000 passings will be upgraded in 2021. This will provide our residential customers with a highly competitive broadband service. Businesses also get a boost by being able to take full advantage of higher bandwidth option and cloud-based applications.
Our competitive broadband speeds enable us to meet the need for higher bandwidth from the growing consumer demand for streaming live programming or in-demand content on any device. The consumers demand for streaming services, either to augment their current video subscription plan or to entirely replace their video subscription may impact our future video subscriber base and, accordingly, reduce our video revenue as well as our video programing costs. Total video connections decreased 10% as of December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. We believe the trend in changing consumer viewing habits will continue to impact our business results and complement our strategy of providing consumers with higher broadband speeds to facilitate streaming content. In 2019, we launched in our northern New England markets, CCiTV, which is a customizable, cloud-enabled video service that supports a wide variety of viewing habits. Content can be delivered in high-definition quality to a big-screen TV, as well as to tablets and mobile devices. CCiTV helps align our product offering with consumer habits using an app-based approach to video as well as reduce our operating costs. We expanded CCiTV to customers in our Texas markets in June 2020 and in our California and Illinois markets in October 2020.
Operating revenues also continue to be impacted by the anticipated industry-wide trend of declines in voice services, access lines and related network access revenue. Many customers are choosing to subscribe to alternative communication services and competition for these subscribers continues to increase. Total voice connections decreased 7% as of December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Competition from wireless providers, Competitive Local Exchange Carriers and cable television providers has increased in recent years in the markets we serve. We have been able to mitigate some of the access line losses through marketing initiatives and product offerings, such as our VoIP service.
As discussed in the “Regulatory Matters” section below, our operating revenues are impacted by legislative or regulatory changes at the federal and state levels, which could reduce or eliminate the current subsidies revenue we receive. A number of proceedings and recent orders relate to universal service reform, intercarrier compensation (“ICC”) and network access charges. There are various ongoing legal challenges to the orders that have been issued. As a result, it is not yet possible to fully determine the impact of the regulatory changes on our operations.
Significant Recent Developments
Searchlight Investment
On September 13, 2020, we entered into an investment agreement (the “Investment Agreement”) with an affiliate of Searchlight Capital Partners, L.P. (“Searchlight”). In connection with the Investment Agreement, affiliates of Searchlight have committed to invest up to an aggregate of $425.0 million in the Company. The investment commitment is structured in two stages. In the first stage of the transaction, which was completed on October 2, 2020, Searchlight invested $350.0 million in the Company in exchange for 6,352,842 shares, or approximately 8%, of the Company’s common stock and a contingent payment right (“CPR”) that is convertible, upon the receipt of certain regulatory and shareholder approvals, into an additional 17,870,012 shares, or 16.9% of the Company’s common stock. In addition, Searchlight will receive the right to an unsecured subordinated note with an aggregate principal amount of approximately $395.5 million (the “Note”).
In the second stage of the transaction, Searchlight will invest an additional $75.0 million and will be issued the Note, which will be convertible into shares of a new series of perpetual preferred stock of the Company with an aggregate liquidation preference equal to the principal amount of the Note plus accrued interest as of the date of conversion. The Note may be issued to Searchlight prior to the closing of the second stage of the transaction upon the occurrence of certain events. The Note bears interest at 9.0% per annum from the date of the closing of the first stage of the transaction and is payable semi-annually in arrears. Upon conversion of the Note, dividends on the preferred stock will accrue daily on the liquidation preference at a rate of 9.0% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears. In addition, following shareholder approval, if received, the CPR will be convertible into an additional 15,115,899 shares, or an additional 10.1%, of the Company’s common stock. Upon completion of both stages, the common stock and CPR issued to Searchlight will represent approximately 35% of the Company’s common stock on an as-converted basis. The closing of the second stage of the transaction is subject to the receipt of Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”) and Hart Scott Rodino approvals and the satisfaction of certain other customary closing conditions. We expect the closing of the second stage to be completed in mid-2021.
The proceeds from the strategic investment with Searchlight provides us additional capital to accelerate our growth plans and provide significant benefits to our consumer, commercial and carrier customers. With the strategic investment, we intend to enhance our fiber infrastructure and accelerate our investments in high-growth and competitive areas. We will
continue to invest in the expansion of commercial and carrier services, particularly through building fiber laterals and expanding our network in existing markets. In addition, we will continue to focus on significantly increasing broadband speeds, expanding the availability of our multi-Gig broadband services and providing a faster and more efficient network in targeted regions. Through the five-year expansion plan of our fiber network, we intend to upgrade approximately 1.6 million residential and small business premises to fiber-to-the-home/premise (“FTTP”). Our investment in more competitive broadband speeds is critical to our long-term success. The strategic investment with Searchlight provides us a valued partner with significant experience deploying broadband infrastructure as we continue to execute our fiber-focused strategy and grow broadband services.
Refinancing of Long-term Debt
On October 2, 2020, the Company and certain of its wholly-owned subsidiaries completed a refinancing of our long-term debt through the issuance of $2,250.0 million in new secured debt and retired all of our then existing outstanding debt obligations. As described in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section, we entered into a new credit agreement which consists of term loans in the aggregate amount of $1,250.0 million and a $250.0 million revolving credit facility. On October 2, 2020, we also issued $750.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.50% senior secured notes due 2028. On January 15, 2021, the Company issued an additional $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of incremental term loans under the credit agreement. The refinancing extended the maturities of our debt obligations and improved our liquidity, which, combined with the strategic investment with Searchlight, provides us the immediate flexibility to support our planned expansion of our fiber network and revenue growth plan.
COVID-19 Pandemic
We are closely monitoring the impact on our business of the outbreak of the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic. We are taking precautions to ensure the safety of our employees, customers and business partners, while assuring business continuity and reliable service and support to our customers. Health and safety measures implemented include transitioning to remote work-from-home policies, providing our field technicians with personal protective equipment and additional safety training, practicing social distancing and adding call aheads for work that must be performed inside customer premises. We are proactively monitoring and augmenting our network capacity, to meet the higher demands for data usage during the pandemic as a result of increased usage from work from home and remote learning applications. As a result of the pandemic, the demand for bandwidth upgrades has increased for our consumer, commercial and carrier customers. Our existing network enables us to efficiently respond and adapt to the increase in internet traffic during this time.
While we have not seen a significant adverse impact to our financial results from COVID-19 to date, the extent of the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is highly uncertain and difficult to predict. Capital markets and the US economy have also been significantly impacted by the pandemic and an economic recession. Adverse economic and market conditions as a result of COVID-19 could also adversely affect the demand for our products and services and may also impact the ability of our customers to satisfy their obligations to us. If the pandemic continues to cause significant negative impacts to economic conditions, our results of operations, financial condition and liquidity could be materially and adversely impacted. See Part I, Item 1A - “Risk Factors”.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted by the U.S. government as an emergency economic stimulus package that includes spending and tax breaks to strengthen the US economy and fund a nationwide effort to curtail the economic effects of COVID-19. The CARES Act includes, among other things, deferral of certain employer payroll tax payments, the delay in payment of minimum required pension contributions due in 2020 until January 1, 2021 and certain income tax law changes including modifications to the net interest deduction limitations. In 2020, we deferred the payment of approximately $12.0 million for the employer portion of Social Security taxes otherwise due in 2020 of which 50% will be due by December 31, 2021 and the remaining 50% by December 31, 2022. We elected not to delay the payment of our minimum required pension contributions due in 2020 and have made all scheduled quarterly pension contributions during 2020. The CARES Act is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
The following tables reflect our financial results on a consolidated basis and key operating statistics as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Financial Data
(1) A non-GAAP measure. See the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for additional information and reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
Key Operating Statistics
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
We account for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 606 (“ASC 606”), Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which we adopted on January 1, 2018. Promised goods and services in our revenue contracts with customers are considered distinct and are accounted for as separate performance obligations. Revenue is recognized when or as performance obligations are satisfied. The impact on revenue as a result of the adoption of ASC 606 was not material.
In accordance with ASC 606, contract acquisition costs are deferred and amortized over the expected customer life. Historically, these costs were expensed as incurred. The change in accounting for contract acquisition costs was the largest impact to the Company upon adoption of ASC 606.
For a more complete discussion of the adoption impacts, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in this report in Part II - Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
Operating Revenues
Commercial and Carrier
Data and Transport Services
We provide a variety of business communication services to business customers of all sizes, including many services over our advanced fiber network. The services we offer include scalable high-speed broadband Internet access and VoIP phone services, which range from basic service plans to virtual hosted systems. In addition to Internet and VoIP services, we also offer a variety of commercial data connectivity services in select markets including Ethernet services; private line data services; software defined wide area network (“SD-WAN”) and multi-protocol label switching (“MPLS”). Our networking services include point-to-point and multi-point deployments from 2.5 Mbps to 10 Gbps to accommodate the growth patterns of our business customers. We offer a suite of cloud-based services, which includes a hosted unified communications solution that replaces the customer’s on-site phone systems and data networks, managed network security services and data protection services. Data center and disaster recovery solutions provide a reliable and local colocation option for commercial customers. We also offer wholesale services to regional and national interexchange and wireless carriers, including cellular backhaul and other fiber transport solutions.
Data and transport services revenues increased $6.8 million during 2020 compared to 2019 due to continued growth in Metro Ethernet and VoIP services. Data and transport services revenues increased $5.9 million during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to revenue related to sales-type leases recognized during 2019 (see Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements included in this report in Part II - Item 8 - “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a more detailed discussion of our leasing arrangements) as well as continued growth in Metro Ethernet and VoIP services. In recent years, the growth in data and transport services revenues has been impacted by increased competition and price compression as customers are migrating from legacy data connection products to Ethernet based products, which have a lower average revenue per user. Future declines are expected to be partially offset with the increasing demand for bandwidth and other Ethernet services.
Voice Services
Voice services include basic local phone and long-distance service packages for business customers. The plans include options for voicemail, conference calling, linking multiple office locations and other custom calling features such as caller ID, call forwarding, speed dialing and call waiting. Services can be charged at a fixed monthly rate, a measured rate or can be bundled with selected services at a discounted rate. We are also a full service 9-1-1 provider and have installed and maintained two turn-key, state of the art statewide next-generation emergency 9-1-1 systems. These systems, located in Maine and Vermont, have processed several million calls relying on the caller's location information for routing. As of October 29, 2020, we were no longer the 9-1-1 service provider in Vermont. Next-generation emergency 9-1-1 systems are an improvement over traditional 9-1-1 and are expected to provide the foundation to handle future communication modes such as texting and video.
Voice services revenues decreased $6.6 million during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a 7% decline in access lines in 2020 compared to 2019. Voice services revenues decreased $14.6 million during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to an 8% decline in access lines in 2019 compared to 2018. Commercial customers are increasingly choosing alternative technologies, including our own VoIP product, and the broad range of features that Internet-based voice services can offer.
Other
Other services include business equipment sales and related hardware and maintenance support, video services and other miscellaneous revenues. Other services revenues decreased $7.8 million during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a decrease in business system sales in 2020. Other services revenues decreased $3.5 million during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to the expiration of a co-marketing agreement in November 2018 as well as a decrease in business system sales in 2019.
Consumer
Broadband Services
Broadband services include revenues from residential customers for subscriptions to our VoIP and data products. We offer high-speed Internet access at speeds of up to 1 Gbps, depending on the nature of the network facilities that are available, the level of service selected and the location. Our VoIP digital phone service is also available in certain markets as an alternative to the traditional telephone line.
Broadband services revenues increased $6.0 million during 2020 compared to 2019 and $4.0 million during 2019 compared to 2018 despite a 4% decrease in data connections in both 2020 and 2019 primarily due to an increase in Internet services as a result of price increases. However, the increase in data revenue was partially offset by a decline in VoIP revenue due to a 15% and 14% decline in connections in 2020 and 2019, respectively, as more customers continue to rely exclusively on wireless service.
Video Services
Depending on geographic market availability, our video services range from limited basic service to advanced digital television, which includes several plans, each with hundreds of local, national and music channels including premium and Pay-Per-View channels as well as video On-Demand service. Certain customers may also subscribe to our advanced video services, which consist of high-definition television, digital video recorders (“DVR”) and/or a whole home DVR. Our TV Everywhere service allows our video subscribers to watch their favorite shows, movies and livestreams on any device. In addition, we offer in-demand streaming content, including: ATT TV, fuboTV, Philo and HBO NOW®.
Video services revenues decreased $7.1 million during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a decrease in connections of 10% in 2020 compared to 2019. Video services revenues decreased $7.0 million during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to a decrease in connections of 10% in 2019 compared to 2018. Consumers are choosing to subscribe to alternative video services such as over-the-top streaming services.
Voice Services
We offer several different basic local phone service packages and long-distance calling plans, including unlimited flat-rate calling plans. The plans include options for voicemail and other custom calling features such as caller ID, call forwarding and call waiting.
Voice services revenues decreased $10.3 million during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to an 8% decline in access lines during 2020 compared to 2019. Voice services revenues decreased $21.2 million during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to a 9% decline in access lines during 2019 compared to 2018. The number of local access lines in service directly affects the recurring revenue we generate from end users and continues to be impacted by the industry-wide decline in access lines. We expect to continue to experience erosion in voice connections due to competition from alternative technologies, including our own competing VoIP product.
Subsidies
Subsidies consist of both federal and state subsidies, which are designed to promote widely available, quality broadband services at affordable prices with higher data speeds in rural areas. Subsidies revenues decreased $0.4 million during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a reduction in state subsidies support in 2020.
Subsidies revenues decreased $11.0 million during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to a settlement for frozen local switching support of $7.2 million recognized during 2018 as well as the scheduled reductions in the annual Connect America Fund (“CAF”) Phase II funding rate in August 2018. See the “Regulatory Matters” section below for further discussion of the subsidies we receive.
Network Access Services
Network access services include interstate and intrastate switched access, network special access and end user access. Switched access revenues include access services to other communications carriers to terminate or originate long-distance calls on our network. Special access circuits provide dedicated lines and trunks to business customers and interexchange carriers. Network access services revenues decreased $12.8 million during 2020 compared to 2019 and $14.5 million in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily as a result of the continuing decline in interstate rates, minutes of use, voice connections and carrier circuits; however, a portion of the decrease can be attributed to carriers shifting to our fiber Metro Ethernet product, contributing to the growth in that area.
Other Products and Services
Other products and services include revenues from telephone directory publishing, video advertising, billing and support services and other miscellaneous revenues. Other products and services revenues decreased $0.3 million during 2020 compared to 2019 and $0.7 million during 2019 compared to 2018. The decline in other products and services revenues was primarily due to a decline in telephone directory advertising revenues.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Services and Products
Cost of services and products decreased $14.3 million during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a reduction in video programming costs as a result of a 10% decline in video connections, which was offset in part by an increase in programming costs per channel as costs continue to rise as a result of annual rate increases. Video programming costs are impacted by license fees charged by cable networks, the amount and quality of the content we provide and the number of video subscribers we serve. Cost of goods sold related to equipment sales also decreased from a decline in business system sales in the current year. Employee salaries and benefits declined in 2020 as a result of a reduction in staff through continued cost savings initiatives. Cost of services and products was also reduced by insurance recoveries received in 2020 for hurricane damage incurred in prior years. However, access expense increased due to new fiber and co-location costs as a result of an increase in commercial and carrier services.
In 2019, cost of services and products decreased $37.0 million compared to 2018 primarily due to a decline in employee salaries and benefits in 2019 as a result of a reduction in headcount through cost savings initiatives. Pension costs also
decreased as a result of the freezing of certain benefit plans in connection with new collective bargaining agreements ratified in 2018. Access expense decreased primarily due to a decline in usage and rates. Video programming costs also decreased due to a 10% decline in video connections, which was largely offset by an increase in programming costs per channel as costs continue to rise as a result of annual rate increases.
Selling, General and Administrative Costs
Selling, general and administrative costs decreased $23.7 million during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a decline in integration and severance costs in connection with cost savings initiatives. Employee salaries and benefits also declined in 2020 as a result of a reduction in headcount. In addition, contract labor costs decreased as a result of operating efficiency improvements. However, customer acquisition costs increased related to the amortization of sales commissions following the adoption of ASC 606. Real estate taxes also increased due to property tax abatements received in 2019.
Selling, general and administrative costs decreased $34.5 million during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to operating synergies achieved in connection with the integration of FairPoint Communications, Inc. (“FairPoint”) during 2018 which resulted in a reduction in operating costs and decline in integration costs in 2019. The decline in selling, general and administrative costs was also due to a decline in employee salaries and benefits in 2019 as a result of a reduction in headcount. In addition, real estate taxes decreased primarily due to property tax abatements received in 2019.
Acquisition and Other Transaction Costs
Acquisition and other transaction costs of $7.6 million includes costs incurred in 2020 in connection with the investment agreement entered into with Searchlight in October 2020. Transaction costs consist primarily of legal, finance and other professional fees incurred in connection with the CPRs issued as part of the transaction.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $56.3 million during 2020 compared to 2019 and decreased $51.4 million during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to acquired assets becoming fully depreciated or amortized. Depreciation expense also declined due to the sale of utility poles located in the state of Vermont in 2019. These declines in depreciation and amortization expense were offset in part by ongoing capital expenditures related to CAF Phase II funding requirements and success-based capital projects for consumer, commercial and carrier services as well as network enhancements and customer service improvements.
Regulatory Matters
Our revenues are subject to broad federal and/or state regulations, which include such telecommunications services as local telephone service, network access service and toll service. The telecommunications industry is subject to extensive federal, state and local regulation. Under the Telecommunications Act of 1996, federal and state regulators share responsibility for implementing and enforcing statutes and regulations designed to encourage competition and to preserve and advance widely available, quality telephone service at affordable prices.
At the federal level, the FCC generally exercises jurisdiction over facilities and services of local exchange carriers, such as our rural telephone companies, to the extent they are used to provide, originate or terminate interstate or international communications. The FCC has the authority to condition, modify, cancel, terminate or revoke our operating authority for failure to comply with applicable federal laws or FCC rules, regulations and policies. Fines or penalties also may be imposed for any of these violations.
State regulatory commissions generally exercise jurisdiction over carriers’ facilities and services to the extent they are used to provide, originate or terminate intrastate communications. In particular, state regulatory agencies have substantial oversight over interconnection and network access by competitors of our rural telephone companies. In addition, municipalities and other local government agencies regulate the public rights-of-way necessary to install and operate networks. State regulators can sanction our rural telephone companies or revoke our certifications if we violate relevant laws or regulations.
FCC Matters
In general, telecommunications service in rural areas is costlier to provide than service in urban areas. The lower customer density means that switching and other facilities serve fewer customers and loops are typically longer, requiring greater expenditures per customer to build and maintain. By supporting the high-cost of operations in rural markets, Universal Service Fund (“USF”) subsidies promote widely available, quality telephone service at affordable prices in rural areas.
Our current annual support through the FCC’s CAF Phase II funding is $48.1 million through 2021, as described below. The specific obligations associated with CAF Phase II funding include the obligation to serve approximately 124,500 locations by December 31, 2020 (with interim milestones of 40%, 60% and 80% completion by December 2017, 2018 and 2019, respectively); to provide broadband service to those locations with speeds of 10 Mbps downstream and 1 Mbps upstream; to achieve latency of less than 100 milliseconds; to provide data of at least 100 gigabytes per month; and to offer pricing reasonably comparable to pricing in urban areas. The Company met the milestones for 2017 through 2020 for all states where it operates.
We accepted CAF Phase II support in all of our operating states except Colorado and Kansas where the offered CAF Phase II support was declined. We continued to receive annual frozen CAF Phase I support of $1.0 million in Colorado and Kansas until April 2019, when the FCC CAF Phase II auction assigned support to another provider.
The annual FCC price cap filing was made on June 15, 2020 and became effective on July 1, 2020. This filing reflects the final phase down of end office switching rates for our rate of return companies. The net impact is a decrease of approximately $2.0 million in network access and CAF ICC support funding for the July 2020 through June 2021 tariff period.
In April 2019, the FCC announced plans for the Rural Digital Opportunity Fund (“RDOF”), the next phase of the CAF program. The RDOF is a $20.4 billion fund to bring speeds of 25 Mbps downstream and 3 Mbps upstream to unserved and underserved areas of America. The FCC issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking at their August 2019 Open Commission Meeting. The order prioritizes terrestrial broadband as a bridge to rural 5G networks by providing a significant weight advantage to traditional broadband providers. Funding will occur in two phases with the first phase auctioning $16.0 billion and the second phase auctioning $4.4 billion, each to be distributed over 10 years. The minimum speed required to receive funding is 25 Mbps downstream and 3 Mbps upstream. CAF Phase II funding has been extended through December 31, 2021 for price cap holding companies. The FCC has issued the final census block groups with locations and reserve price. We filed the RDOF short form application on July 14, 2020 and were listed as a qualified bidder by the FCC on October 13, 2020 and participated in the auction. The auction began on October 29, 2020 and ended on November 24, 2020. Consolidated won 246 census block groups serving in seven states. The bids we won are at the 1 Gbps downstream and 500 Mbps upstream speed tier to approximately 27,000 locations at a funding level of $5.9 million annually over 10 years. Consolidated filed its long form application with supporting documents on January 29, 2021.
State Matters
Texas
The Texas Universal Service Fund (“TUSF”) is administered by the National Exchange Carrier Association (“NECA”). The Texas Public Utilities Regulatory Act directs the Public Utilities Commission of Texas (“PUCT”) to adopt and enforce rules requiring local exchange carriers to contribute to a state universal service fund that helps telecommunications providers offer basic local telecommunications service at reasonable rates in high-cost rural areas. The TUSF is also used to reimburse telecommunications providers for revenues lost by providing lifeline service. Our Texas rural telephone companies receive disbursements from this fund.
Our Texas Incumbent Local Exchange Carriers (“ILECs”) have historically received support from two state funds, the small and rural incumbent local exchange company plan High Cost Fund (“HCF”) and the High Cost Assistance Fund (“HCAF”). In December 2020, the PUCT announced a TUSF funding shortfall and would be reducing all funded carriers support by 64% beginning January 15, 2021. The Texas Telephone Association, which Consolidated is a member, filed a lawsuit seeking to overturn the PUCT decision as well as a temporary injunction on the funding reduction. The potential impact is a reduction in support of approximately $4.0 million annually.
FairPoint Merger Requirements
As part of our acquisition of FairPoint in 2017, we have regulatory commitments that vary by state, some of which required capital investments in our network over several years through 2020. The requirements included improved data speeds and other service quality improvements in select locations primarily in our northern New England, New York and Illinois markets. In New Hampshire and Vermont, we were required to invest 13% and 14%, respectively, of total state revenues in capital improvements per year for 2018, 2019 and 2020. For our service territory in Maine, we were required to make capital expenditures of $16.4 million per year from 2018 through 2020. In addition, we were required to invest an incremental $1.0 million per year in each of these three states for service quality improvements. In New York, we were required to invest $4.0 million over three years to expand the broadband network to over 300 locations. In Illinois, we were required to invest an additional $1.0 million by the end of 2018 to increase broadband availability and speeds in areas served by the FairPoint Illinois ILECs. We met all of the regulatory commitments for 2017 through 2020 for Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont. We completed merger requirements for Illinois in December 2018 and New York in June 2020, both within the required time commitment.
CARES Act Funding
States are reviewing opportunities to use federal CARES Act funding to assist in the deployment of broadband to unserved and underserved areas within their respective states. All broadband build outs were required to be completed by December 31, 2020 in order to receive funding. New Hampshire allocated $50.0 million of CARES Act funding to fund broadband expansion to unserved and underserved locations throughout the state. Consolidated was granted up to $3.5 million to build high-speed Internet networks for homes and businesses in New Hampshire towns of Danbury, Springfield and Mason. The state funded 10% upfront with the remainder received upon completion of projects by December 31, 2020.
COVID-19
On March 13, 2020, the FCC issued a pledge to Keep America Connected through May 13, 2020, which was later extended to June 30, 2020. The pledge asked all communications providers to not terminate service to any residential or small business customers because of their inability to pay their bills due to the disruptions caused by the coronavirus pandemic; to waive any late fees that any residential or small business customers incur because of their economic circumstances related to the coronavirus pandemic; and to open their Wi-Fi hotspots to any American who needs them.
Consolidated signed on to the pledge through June 30, 2020. Several states took the FCC pledge a step further by not allowing any carrier to disconnect service within their state during the Governors’ declared state of emergency, which Consolidated also supported.
Other Regulatory Matters
We are also subject to a number of regulatory proceedings occurring at the federal and state levels that may have a material impact on our operations. The FCC and state commissions have authority to issue rules and regulations related to our business. A number of proceedings are pending or anticipated that are related to such telecommunications issues as competition, interconnection, access charges, ICC, broadband deployment, consumer protection and universal service reform. Some proceedings may authorize new services to compete with our existing services. Proceedings that relate to our cable television operations include rulemakings on set top boxes, carriage of programming, industry consolidation and ways to promote additional competition. There are various on-going legal challenges to the scope or validity of FCC orders that have been issued. As a result, it is not yet possible to fully determine the impact of the related FCC rules and regulations on our operations.
Non-Operating Items
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net of interest income, increased $6.9 million during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to additional interest of $7.9 million recognized on the Note issued to Searchlight as part of the investment agreement entered into in October 2020. Interest on our outstanding senior notes also increased in 2020 due to the issuance of $750.0 million in 6.50% Senior Notes due 2028, which were used in part, to redeem the then-remaining amount of our outstanding 6.50% Senior Notes due 2022 as part of the refinancing of our long-term debt in October 2020 as described in the “Liquidity and
Capital Resources” section below. However, interest expense was reduced in part by a reduction in outstanding debt under our revolving credit facility and a decline in variable interest rates in the current year.
Interest expense, net of interest income, increased $2.2 million during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to an increase in variable interest rates in 2019. The increase in interest expense was offset in part by noncash charges recognized in 2018 related to our re-designated interest rate swap agreements.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
As described in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section below, we incurred a loss on the extinguishment of debt of $18.3 million in connection with the refinancing of our credit agreement and the redemption of our 6.50% Senior Notes due 2022 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
In 2019, we repurchased $55.0 million of the aggregate principal amount of our 6.50% Senior Notes due 2022. In connection with the partial repurchase of the Senior Notes, we recognized a gain on extinguishment of debt of $4.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Payment Obligations
We are required to measure our contingent payment obligations at fair value until they are converted into shares of the Company’s common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a gain of $23.8 million on the decline in the fair value of the contingent payment rights issued to Searchlight.
Other Income
Other income increased $23.6 million during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a decrease in pension and post-retirement benefit expense of $15.5 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a pension settlement charge of $6.7 million as a result of the transfer of the pension liability for a select group of retirees to an annuity provider. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for a more detailed discussion regarding our pension and other post-retirement plans. Investment income increased $3.0 million during 2020 from our wireless partnership interests. In addition, during 2020, we recognized a gain of $3.7 million on the sale of our 39 GHz wireless spectrum licenses as part of the FCC’s efforts to reclaim broadcast TV spectrum for wireless use.
Other income decreased $13.7 million during 2019 compared to 2018. Investment income decreased $1.5 million during 2019 primarily as a result of lower earnings from our wireless partnership interests. Pension and post-retirement benefit expense increased $11.2 million as compared to 2018 primarily from a pension settlement charge of $6.7 million recognized in 2019 as a result of the transfer of the pension liability for a select group of retirees to an annuity provider.
Income Taxes
Income taxes increased $14.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily related to the change in pretax income. Our effective tax rate was 22.7% for 2020 compared to 15.7% for 2019. In 2020 and 2019, we placed additional valuation allowances on deferred tax assets related to state NOL and state tax credit carryforwards of $1.3 million and $1.1 million, respectively. The investment transaction with Searchlight on October 2, 2020 resulted in a net decrease to our tax provision of $1.6 million due to various permanent income taxes differences. In addition, for 2020 and 2019, the effective tax rate differed from the federal and state statutory rates due to various permanent income tax differences and differences in allocable income for the Company’s state tax filings. Exclusive of discrete adjustments, our effective tax rate for 2020 would have been approximately 24.8% compared to 27.1% for 2019.
Income taxes increased $20.4 million in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily related to the change in pretax income. Our effective tax rate was 15.7% for 2019 compared to 32.3% for 2018. We recorded a net increase of $0.7 million in 2019 and a net decrease of $2.8 million in 2018 to our state tax expense due to changes in unitary filings and state deferred income tax rates. In 2019 and 2018, we placed additional valuation allowances on deferred tax assets related to state NOL and state tax credit carryforwards of $1.1 million and $1.7 million, respectively. During 2018, adjustments were made to the provisional estimates that were disclosed as of December 31, 2017 under Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 for the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Tax Act”) that resulted in a $5.2 million decrease to our tax provision. During 2019 and 2018, we recorded various other adjustments related to a state examination, acquisition purchase accounting and disposition of a subsidiary. In addition, for 2019 and 2018, the effective tax rate differed from the federal and state statutory rates due to various permanent income tax differences and differences in allocable income
for the Company’s state tax filings. Exclusive of discrete adjustments, our effective tax rate for 2019 would have been approximately 27.1% compared to 25.3% for 2018.
Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to the results reported in accordance with US GAAP, we also use certain non-GAAP measures such as EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate operating performance and to facilitate the comparison of our historical results and trends. These financial measures are not a measure of financial performance under US GAAP and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net income as a measure of performance and net cash provided by operating activities as a measure of liquidity. They are not, on their own, necessarily indicative of cash available to fund cash needs as determined in accordance with GAAP. The calculation of these non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Reconciliations of these non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP are provided below.
EBITDA is defined as net earnings before interest expense, income taxes, and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is comprised of EBITDA, adjusted for certain items as permitted or required under our credit facility as described in the reconciliations below. These measures are a common measure of operating performance in the telecommunications industry and are useful, with other data, as a means to evaluate our ability to fund our estimated uses of cash.
The following tables are a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1) Other, net includes the equity earnings from our investments, dividend income, income attributable to noncontrolling interests in subsidiaries, acquisition and transaction related costs including integration and severance, non-cash pension and post-retirement benefits and certain other miscellaneous items.
(2) Includes all cash dividends and other cash distributions received from our investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Outlook and Overview
Our operating requirements have historically been funded from cash flows generated from our business and borrowings under our credit facilities. We expect that our future operating requirements will continue to be funded from cash flows from operating activities, existing cash and cash equivalents, and, if needed, from borrowings under our revolving credit facility and our ability to obtain future external financing. We anticipate that we will continue to use a substantial portion of our cash flow to fund capital expenditures, meet scheduled payments of long-term debt, and to invest in future business opportunities.
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $365.0 million in 2020, an increase of $25.9 million compared to the same period in 2019. Cash flows provided by operating activities increased as a result of an increase in earnings primarily from a reduction in operating expenses through cost management initiatives and improved operating efficiencies. Cash distributions received from our wireless partnerships also increased $5.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Interest payments decreased approximately $8.6 million from prior year due a decrease in variable interest rates in 2020. In response to the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, we elected the deferral of certain employer payroll tax payments under the CARES Act of approximately $12.0 million during 2020. In addition, cash contributions to our defined benefit pension plans decreased $3.5 million in 2020 compared to 2019. However, income tax refunds decreased approximately $7.8 million from 2019.
In 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $339.1 million, a decrease of $18.2 million compared to the same period in 2018 primarily as a result of changes in working capital and the timing of payments for accrued compensation. In addition, interest payments increased approximately $7.1 million from prior year due to an increase in variable interest rates in 2019. Cash distributions received from our wireless partnerships also decreased $3.3 million in 2019 compared to 2018.
Cash Flows Used In Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities consists primarily of cash used for capital expenditures and cash received from business dispositions and the sale of assets.
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures continue to be our primary recurring investing activity and were $217.6 million, $232.2 million and $244.8 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Capital expenditures for 2021 are expected to be $400.0 million to $420.0 million, which will be used to support success-based capital projects for commercial, carrier and consumer initiatives and for our planned fiber projects and broadband network expansion, which will include the upgrade in 2021 of more than 300,000 passings with multi-Gig data speeds. We expect to continue to invest in the enhancement and expansion of our fiber network in order to retain and acquire more customers through a broader set of products and an expanded network footprint.
Divestitures
Cash proceeds from the sale of assets decreased $7.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019. In 2020, we received cash proceeds of $3.7 million on the sale of our 39 GHz wireless spectrum licenses as part of the FCC’s spectrum recovery efforts. In 2019, we received cash proceeds of approximately $12.4 million for the sale of utility poles located in the state of Vermont. In 2018, we received cash proceeds of $21.0 million for the sale of our subsidiaries Peoples Mutual Telephone Company and Peoples Mutual Long Distance Company, our local exchange carrier in Virginia.
Cash Flows Provided by (Used In) Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities consists primarily of our proceeds from and principal payments on long-term borrowings and repurchases of debt.
Long-term Debt
The following table summarizes our indebtedness as of December 31, 2020:
(1)At December 31, 2020, the 1-month LIBOR applicable to our borrowings was 0.15%. The term loans are subject to a 1.00% LIBOR floor.
(2)Weighted-average rate.
Credit Agreement
On October 2, 2020, the Company, through certain of its wholly-owned subsidiaries, entered into a Credit Agreement with various financial institutions (the “Credit Agreement”) to replace the Company’s previous credit agreement in its entirety. The Credit Agreement consists of term loans in the aggregate amount of $1,250.0 million (the “Term Loans”) and a revolving loan facility of $250.0 million, which replaced the previous $110.0 million revolving loan facility scheduled to mature on October 5, 2021. The Credit Agreement also includes an incremental loan facility which provides the ability to borrow, subject to certain terms and conditions, incremental loans in an aggregate amount of up to the greater of (a) $300.0 million plus (b) an amount which would not cause its senior secured leverage ratio not to exceed 3.70:1.00 (the “Incremental Facility”). Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company and its subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions.
The Term Loans were issued in an original aggregate principal amount of $1,250.0 million with a maturity date of October 2, 2027 and contain an original issuance discount of 1.5% or $18.8 million, which is being amortized over the term of the loan. The Term Loans require quarterly principal payments of $3.1 million, which commenced December 31, 2020, and bear interest at a rate 4.75% plus the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) subject to a 1.00% LIBOR floor.
The revolving credit facility has a maturity date of October 2, 2025 and an applicable margin (at our election) of 4.00% for LIBOR-based borrowings or 3.00% for alternate base rate borrowings, with a 0.25% reduction in each case if the consolidated first lien leverage ratio, as defined in the Credit Agreement, does not exceed 3.20 to 1.00. As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding under the revolving credit facility. At December 31, 2019, borrowings of $40.0 million were outstanding under the previous revolving credit facility, which consisted of LIBOR-based borrowings of $30.0 million and alternate base rate borrowings of $10.0 million. Stand-by letters of credit of $18.1 million were outstanding under our revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2020. The stand-by letters of credit are renewable annually and reduce the borrowing availability under the revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2020, $231.9 million was available for borrowing under the revolving credit facility.
The weighted-average interest rate on outstanding borrowings under our credit facilities was 5.75% and 4.80% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest is payable at least quarterly.
Financing Costs
In connection with entering into the Credit Agreement in October 2020, fees of $29.1 million were capitalized as deferred debt issuance costs. These capitalized costs are amortized over the term of the debt and are included as a component of interest expense in the consolidated statements of operations. We also incurred a loss on the extinguishment of debt of $12.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the repayment of the outstanding term loan under the previous credit agreement.
Credit Agreement Covenant Compliance
The Credit Agreement contains various provisions and covenants, including, among other items, restrictions on the ability to pay dividends, incur additional indebtedness, and issue certain capital stock. We have agreed to maintain certain
financial ratios, including a maximum consolidated first lien leverage ratio, as defined in the Credit Agreement. Among other things, it will be an event of default, with respect to the revolving credit facility only, if our consolidated first lien leverage ratio as of the end of any fiscal quarter is greater than 5.85:1.00. As of December 31, 2020, our consolidated first lien leverage ratio under the Credit Agreement was 3.56:1.00. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the Credit Agreement covenants.
Credit Agreement Amendment
On January 15, 2021, the Company entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Credit Agreement in which we borrowed an additional $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of incremental term loans (the “Incremental Term Loans”). The Incremental Term Loans have terms and conditions identical to the Term Loans including the same maturity date and interest rate. The Term Loans and Incremental Term Loans will collectively comprise a single class of term loans under the Credit Agreement, as amended. The Term Loans will require quarterly principal payments of $3.5 million beginning on March 31, 2021.
Senior Notes
6.50% Senior Notes due 2028
On October 2, 2020, we completed an offering of $750.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.50% unsubordinated secured notes due 2028 (the “Senior Notes”). The Senior Notes were priced at par and bear interest at a rate of 6.50%, payable semi-annually on April 1 and October 1 of each year, beginning on April 1, 2021. The Senior Notes will mature on October 1, 2028. Deferred debt issuance costs of $17.0 million incurred in connection with the issuance of the Senior Notes are being amortized using the effective interest method over the term of the Senior Notes.
The Senior Notes are unsubordinated secured obligations of the Company, secured by a first priority lien on the collateral that secures the Company’s obligations under the Credit Agreement. The Senior Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a first priority secured basis by the Company and the majority of our wholly-owned subsidiaries. The offering of the Senior Notes has not been registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended or any state securities laws.
Senior Notes Covenant Compliance
Subject to certain exceptions and qualifications, the indenture governing the Senior Notes contains customary covenants that, among other things, limits the Company and its restricted subsidiaries’ ability to: incur additional debt or issue certain preferred stock; pay dividends or make other distributions on capital stock or prepay subordinated indebtedness; purchase or redeem any equity interests; make investments; create liens; sell assets; enter into agreements that restrict dividends or other payments by restricted subsidiaries; consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of its assets; engage in transactions with its affiliates; or enter into any sale and leaseback transactions. The indenture also contains customary events of default. At December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all terms, conditions and covenants under the indenture governing the Senior Notes.
Redemption of 6.50% Senior Notes due 2022
On October 2, 2020, a notice of redemption was issued to holders of our then outstanding $440.5 million aggregate principal amount of 6.50% Senior Notes due in October 2022 (the “2022 Notes”) to redeem all outstanding 2022 Notes at a price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest through the redemption date. A portion of the proceeds from the issuance of the Senior Notes was deposited with the trustee to pay and discharge the entire indebtedness under the 2022 Notes. The 2022 Notes were redeemed on November 2, 2020, in accordance with the notice of redemption.
In connection with the redemption of the 2022 Notes, we recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $5.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we repurchased $55.0 million of the aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes for $49.8 million and recognized a gain on extinguishment of debt of $4.5 million.
Finance Leases
We lease certain facilities and equipment under various finance leases which expire between 2021 and 2040. As of December 31, 2020, the present value of the minimum remaining lease commitments was approximately $17.5 million, of which $5.1 million was due and payable within the next twelve months. The leases require total remaining rental payments of $20.6 million as of December 31, 2020.
Searchlight Investment
On October 2, 2020, we closed on the first stage of the strategic investment of $350.0 million with Searchlight. Searchlight will invest up to a total of $425.0 million in Consolidated and, assuming satisfaction of certain conditions set forth in the Investment Agreement will hold a combination of perpetual Series A preferred stock and up to 35% of the Company’s outstanding common stock. The Searchlight investment will enable us to accelerate investment in our network over a multi-year period. The Investment is structured to maximize the proceeds to the Company in the near term so that we can invest in our network immediately, and then the Investment converts into an equity-like structure upon receipt of certain required regulatory approvals. We expect the closing of the second stage of the investment to be completed in mid-2021 at which time, we will receive the additional investment of $75.0 million from Searchlight.
Dividends
We paid $55.4 million in dividend payments to shareholders during 2019. On April 25, 2019, we announced the elimination of the payment of quarterly dividends on our stock beginning in the second quarter of 2019 in order to focus on deleveraging, fiber network investments and create long-term value for our stockholders. Future dividend payments, if any, are at the discretion of our Board of Directors. Changes in our dividend program will depend on our earnings, capital requirements, financial condition, debt covenant compliance, expected cash needs and other factors considered relevant by our Board of Directors.
Sufficiency of Cash Resources
The following table sets forth selected information regarding our financial condition:
Our net working capital position improved $137.6 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 primarily as a result of an increase in cash and cash equivalents of $143.2 million driven by our capital allocation plan implemented in 2019, which prioritized improving our leverage ratio and maximizing our cash and liquidity position. In addition, on October 2, 2020, we closed on the first stage of the strategic investment with Searchlight and completed a global refinancing of our long-term debt. Working capital also improved from a decline in the current portion of long-term debt and finance lease obligations of $9.7 million as a result of the refinancing which reduced our outstanding term loans and the expiration of several finance leases in 2020. However, working capital was reduced by an increase in accrued interest of $13.3 million at December 31, 2020 related to an increase in interest for our Senior Notes and the addition of accrued interest on the Searchlight Note of $7.9 million.
Our most significant use of funds in 2021 is expected to be for: (i) interest payments on our indebtedness of between $145.0 million and $150.0 million and principal payments on debt of $12.5 million; and (ii) capital expenditures of between $400.0 million and $420.0 million. The refinancing of our capital structure in 2020 combined with the Searchlight investment provides us the capital and financial flexibility to fund our accelerated fiber network expansion and growth plans. In addition, on January 15, 2021, we borrowed an additional $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of incremental term loans under our Credit Agreement. In the future, our ability to use cash may be limited by our other expected uses of cash and our ability to incur additional debt will be limited by our existing and future debt agreements.
We believe that cash flows from operating activities, together with our existing cash and borrowings available under our revolving credit facility, will be sufficient for at least the next twelve months to fund our current anticipated uses of cash. After that, our ability to fund these expected uses of cash and to comply with the financial covenants under our debt
agreements will depend on the results of future operations, performance and cash flow. Our ability to fund these expected uses from the results of future operations will be subject to prevailing economic conditions and to financial, business, regulatory, legislative and other factors, many of which are beyond our control. Due to the uncertainty and unpredictability related to the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, we will continue to closely manage our cash and liquidity.
We may be unable to access the cash flows of our subsidiaries since certain of our subsidiaries are parties to credit or other borrowing agreements, or subject to statutory or regulatory restrictions, that restrict the payment of dividends or making intercompany loans and investments, and those subsidiaries are likely to continue to be subject to such restrictions and prohibitions for the foreseeable future. In addition, future agreements that our subsidiaries may enter into governing the terms of indebtedness may restrict our subsidiaries’ ability to pay dividends or advance cash in any other manner to us.
To the extent that our business plans or projections change or prove to be inaccurate, we may require additional financing or require financing sooner than we currently anticipate. Sources of additional financing may include commercial bank borrowings, other strategic debt financing, sales of nonstrategic assets, vendor financing or the private or public sales of equity and debt securities. There can be no assurance that we will be able to generate sufficient cash flows from operations in the future, that anticipated revenue growth will be realized, or that future borrowings or equity issuances will be available in amounts sufficient to provide adequate sources of cash to fund our expected uses of cash. Failure to obtain adequate financing, if necessary, could require us to significantly reduce our operations or level of capital expenditures, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and the results of operations.
Surety Bonds
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into surety, performance and similar bonds as required by certain jurisdictions in which we provide services. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $6.1 million of these bonds outstanding.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations were as follows:
(1) Interest on long-term debt includes amounts due on fixed and variable rate debt. As the rates on our variable debt are subject to change, the rates in effect at December 31, 2020 were used in determining our future interest obligations. Amounts do not include interest on the Note issued to Searchlight as part of the investment agreement which includes a paid-in-kind (“PIK”) option for a five-year period beginning as of October 2, 2020. The Company intends to exercise the PIK interest option on the Note through at least 2022.
(2) Unrecorded purchase obligations include binding commitments for future capital expenditures and service and maintenance agreements to support various computer hardware and software applications and certain equipment. If we terminate any of the contracts prior to their expiration date, we would be liable for minimum commitment payments as defined by the contractual terms of the contracts.
(3)Recorded obligations include amounts in accounts payable and accrued expenses for external goods and services received as of December 31, 2020 and expected to be settled in cash.
(4)Expected contributions to our pension and post-retirement benefit plans for the next 5 years. Actual contributions could differ from these estimates and are expected to extend beyond 5 years.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
As required, we contribute to qualified defined pension plans and non-qualified supplemental retirement plans (collectively the “Pension Plans”) and other post-retirement benefit plans, which provide retirement benefits to certain eligible employees. Contributions are intended to provide for benefits attributed to service to date. Our funding policy is to contribute annually an actuarially determined amount consistent with applicable federal income tax regulations.
The cost to maintain our Pension Plans and future funding requirements are affected by several factors including the expected return on investment of the assets held by the Pension Plans, changes in the discount rate used to calculate pension expense and the amortization of unrecognized gains and losses. Returns generated on the Pension Plans assets have historically funded a significant portion of the benefits paid under the Pension Plans. We used a weighted-average expected long-term rate of return of 6.25% and 6.97% in 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of January 1, 2021, we estimate the long-term rate of return of Plan assets will be 6.00%. The Pension Plans invest in marketable equity securities which are exposed to changes in the financial markets. If the financial markets experience a downturn and returns fall below our estimate, we could be required to make material contributions to the Pension Plans, which could adversely affect our cash flows from operations.
Net pension and post-retirement (benefit)/costs were $(4.1) million, $11.5 million and $5.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We contributed $24.0 million, $27.5 million and $26.2 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively to our Pension Plans. For our other post-retirement plans, we contributed $9.2 million, $8.5 million and $9.7 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. In 2021, we expect to make contributions totaling approximately $20.7 million to our Pension Plans and $8.8 million to our other post-retirement benefit plans. Our contribution amounts meet the minimum funding requirements as set forth in employee benefit and tax laws. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for a more detailed discussion regarding our pension and other post-retirement plans.
Income Taxes
The timing of cash payments for income taxes, which is governed by the Internal Revenue Service and other taxing jurisdictions, will differ from the timing of recording tax expense and deferred income taxes, which are reported in accordance with GAAP. For example, tax laws in effect regarding accelerated or “bonus” depreciation for tax reporting resulted in less cash payments than the GAAP tax expense. Acceleration of tax deductions could eventually result in situations where cash payments will exceed GAAP tax expense.
Related Party Transactions
A trust, the beneficiary of which was Mr. Richard A. Lumpkin, who was a member of the Company’s Board of Directors until April 4, 2019, owned $5.0 million of the 2022 Senior Notes. We recognized approximately $0.1 million through April 4, 2019 and $0.3 million in 2018 in interest expense for the 2022 Senior Notes owned by the related party.
We have lease agreements with LATEL LLC (“LATEL”) for the occupancy of three buildings on a triple net lease basis. One of the lease agreements was terminated on October 31, 2019 while the remaining two lease agreements have a maturity date of May 31, 2021, and have been accounted for as finance leases. Each of the remaining lease agreements have two five-year options to extend the term of the lease after the expiration date. Mr. Lumpkin and his immediate family had a beneficial ownership interest of 68.5% of LATEL, directly or through Agracel, Inc. (“Agracel”) as of April 4, 2019, and December 31, 2018. Agracel is a real estate investment company of which Mr. Lumpkin, together with his family, had a beneficial interest of 37.0% at April 4, 2019 and December 31, 2018. Agracel was the sole managing member and 50% owner of LATEL. In addition, Mr. Lumpkin was a former director of Agracel. The three leases required total rental payments to LATEL of approximately $7.9 million over the initial terms of the leases. We recognized $0.1 million through April 4, 2019 and $0.3 million in 2018 in interest expense. We also recognized $0.1 million through April 4, 2019 and $0.4 million in 2018 in amortization expense related to the finance leases.
Mr. Lumpkin also had a minority ownership interest in First Mid Bank & Trust (“First Mid”). We provided telecommunications products and services to First Mid and in return received approximately $0.2 million through April 4, 2019 and $0.9 million in 2018 for these services.
Regulatory Matters
We receive ongoing ICC Eligible Recovery support for our rate of return ILECs that participate in the NECA pooling process. The support for 2020 is approximately $3.2 million and is expected to decline by 5% per year through 2021. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recognized subsidies revenue of $3.2 million, $3.4 million and $3.6 million, respectively, related to our ongoing ICC Eligible Recovery support.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our significant accounting policies and estimates are discussed in the Notes to our consolidated financial statements. We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by management’s application of our accounting policies. Our judgments are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making estimates about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. However, because future events and the related effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results may differ from our estimates and assumptions and such differences could be material. Management believes that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets are not subject to amortization and are tested for impairment annually or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. We evaluate the carrying value of our indefinite-lived assets as of November 30 of each year.
Goodwill
As discussed more fully in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, goodwill is not amortized but instead evaluated for impairment annually, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate potential impairment. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the carrying value of our goodwill was $1,035.3 million. The evaluation of goodwill may first include a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Events and circumstances integrated into the qualitative assessment process include a combination of macroeconomic conditions affecting equity and credit markets, significant changes to the cost structure, overall financial performance and other relevant events affecting the reporting unit.
Functional management within the organization evaluates the operations of our single reporting unit on a consolidated basis rather than at a geographic level or on any other component basis. In general, product managers and cost managers are responsible for managing costs and services across territories rather than treating the territories as separate business units. All of the properties are managed at a functional level. As a result, we evaluate the operations for all our service territories as a single reporting unit.
As a result of industry conditions and a decrease in our market capitalization, we evaluated the fair value of the goodwill compared to the carrying value using the quantitative approach for the 2020 assessment. When we use the quantitative approach to assess the goodwill carrying value and the fair value of our single reporting unit, the fair value of our reporting unit is compared to its carrying amount, including goodwill. The estimated fair value of the reporting unit is determined using a combination of market-based approaches and a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) model and reconciled to our market capitalization plus an estimated control premium. The assumptions used in the estimate of fair value are based upon a combination of historical results and trends, new industry developments and future cash flow projections, as well as relevant comparable company earnings multiples for the market-based approaches. Such assumptions are subject to change as a result of changing economic and competitive conditions. We use a weighting of the results derived from the valuation approaches to estimate the fair value of the reporting unit.
Based on our assessment at November 30, 2020, using the quantitative approach, we concluded that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded the carrying value at November 30, 2020 by approximately 120% and that there was no impairment of goodwill.
Trade Name
As discussed more fully in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, trade names are generally not amortized, but instead evaluated annually, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate potential impairment using a preliminary qualitative assessment and a quantitative process, if deemed necessary. The carrying value of our trade name, excluding any finite lived trade names, was $10.6 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
For the 2020 assessment, we used the quantitative approach to evaluate the fair value compared to the carrying value of the trade name. Based on our assessment, we concluded that the fair value of the trade name continued to exceed the carrying value. When we use the quantitative approach to estimate the fair value of our trade name, we use DCFs based on a relief from royalty method. If the fair value of our trade name was less than the carrying amount, we would recognize an impairment charge for the difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of the asset. We perform our impairment testing of our trade name as a single unit of accounting based on its use in our single reporting unit.
Income Taxes
Our current and deferred income taxes and associated valuation allowances are impacted by events and transactions arising in the normal course of business as well as in connection with the adoption of new accounting standards, acquisitions of businesses and non-recurring items. Assessment of the appropriate amount and classification of income taxes is dependent on several factors, including estimates of the timing and realization of deferred income tax assets and the timing of income tax payments. Actual amounts may materially differ from these estimates as a result of changes in tax laws as well as unanticipated future transactions impacting related income tax balances. We account for tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in our tax returns in accordance with the accounting guidance applicable for uncertainty in income taxes, which requires the use of a two-step approach for recognizing and measuring tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
Pension and Post-Retirement Benefits
The amounts recognized in our financial statements for pension and post-retirement benefits are determined on an actuarial basis utilizing several critical assumptions. We make significant assumptions in regards to our pension and post-retirement plans, including the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, the discount rate used to value the periodic pension expense and liabilities, future salary increases and actuarial assumptions relating to mortality rates and healthcare trend rates. Changes in these estimates and other factors could significantly impact our benefit cost and obligations to maintain pension and post-retirement plans.
Our pension investment strategy is to maximize long-term returns on invested plan assets while minimizing the risk of volatility. Accordingly, we target our allocation percentage at approximately 70 - 90% in return seeking assets consisting primarily of equity and fixed income funds with the remainder in hedge funds. Our assumed rate considers this investment mix as well as past trends. We used a weighted-average expected long-term rate of return of 6.25% and 6.97% in 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of January 1, 2021, we estimate that the expected long-term rate of return of pension plan assets will be 6.00%.
In determining the appropriate discount rate, we consider the current yields on high-quality corporate fixed-income investments with maturities that correspond to the expected duration of our pension and post-retirement benefit plan obligations. For our 2020 and 2019 projected benefit obligations, we used a weighted-average discount rate of 2.81% and 3.51%, respectively, for our pension plans and 2.56% and 3.34%, respectively, for our other post-retirement plans.
Our Pension Plans are sensitive to changes in the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. A one percentage-point increase or decrease in the discount rate and expected long-term rate of return would have the following effects on net periodic pension cost of the Pension Plans:
Our post-retirement benefit plans are sensitive to the healthcare cost trend rate assumption. For purposes of determining the cost and obligation for post-retirement medical benefits, a 6.50% healthcare cost trend rate was assumed for 2020, declining to the ultimate trend rate of 5.00% in 2027. A 1.00% increase in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate would result in increases of approximately $4.6 million and $0.3 million in the post-retirement benefit obligation and total service and interest cost, respectively. A 1.00% decrease in the assumed healthcare cost trend would result in decreases of approximately $4.8 million and $0.2 million in the post-retirement benefit obligation and in the total service and interest cost, respectively.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding the impact of certain recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 1 “Business Description & Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in this report in Part II -Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.