ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our historical combined financial statements and the notes to those combined financial statements. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements. The matters discussed in these forward-looking statements are subject to risk, uncertainties, and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected or implied in the forward-looking statements. Please see “Risk Factors” and “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements.
The following discussion compares our results for the year ended November 30, 2020 to the year ended November 30, 2019. The discussion comparing our results for the year ended November 30, 2019 to the year ended November 30, 2018 is included within Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Information Statement filed as Exhibit 99.1 to Amendment No. 3 to our Registration Statement on Form 10 filed with the SEC on November 4, 2020, and is incorporated by reference herein.
Unless otherwise indicated or except where the context otherwise requires, references to “we,” “our,” “us,” “the Company” or “Concentrix” in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations refer to the combined entities of the customer experience business of SYNNEX Corporation (“SYNNEX” or the “Parent”) prior to the spin-off.
Overview and Basis of Presentation
Concentrix is a leading global provider of technology-infused Customer Experience (“CX”) solutions that help iconic and disruptive brands drive deep understanding, full lifecycle engagement, and differentiated experiences for their end-customers. We provide end-to-end capabilities, including CX process optimization, technology innovation, front- and back-office automation, analytics and business transformation services to clients in five primary industry verticals. Our differentiated portfolio of solutions supports Fortune Global 500 as well as high-growth companies across the globe in their efforts to deliver an optimized, consistent brand experience across all channels of communication, such as voice, chat, email, social media, asynchronous messaging, and custom applications. We strive to deliver exceptional services globally supported by our deep industry knowledge, technology and security practices, talented people, and digital and analytics expertise.
We generate revenue from performing services that are generally tied to our clients’ products and services. Any shift in business or the size of the market for our clients’ products or services, or any failure of technology or failure of acceptance of our clients’ products or services in the market may impact our business. The employee turnover rate in our business is high, as is the risk of losing experienced employees. High employee turnover rates may increase costs and decrease operating efficiencies and productivity.
On December 1, 2020, the previously announced separation (the “separation”) of Concentrix and our technology-infused customer experience solutions business from SYNNEX was completed through a tax-free distribution of all of the issued and outstanding shares of our common stock to SYNNEX stockholders (the distribution and, together with the separation, the “spin-off”). SYNNEX stockholders received one share of our common stock for each share of SYNNEX common stock held as of the close of business on November 17, 2020. As a result of the spin-off, we became an independent public company and our common stock commenced trading on the Nasdaq Stock Market (“Nasdaq”) under the symbol “CNXC” on December 1, 2020. In connection with the spin-off, on November 30, 2020, we entered into a separation and distribution agreement, an employee matters agreement, a tax matters agreement and a commercial agreement with SYNNEX to set forth the principal actions to be taken in connection with the spin-off and define our ongoing relationship with SYNNEX after the spin-off.
The combined financial statements, which are discussed below, reflect the results of operations, financial position, and cash flows of our business and are derived from the historical results of operations and the historical basis of the assets and liabilities of the CX business of SYNNEX from its consolidated financial statements as if we
had been operating on a stand-alone basis prior to the spin-off and related transactions. We believe that the assumptions made in preparing our combined financial statements are reasonable. However, our historical results may not be indicative of our future performance and do not necessarily reflect what our financial condition and results of operations would have been had we operated as an independent, stand-alone entity during the periods presented, particularly because changes will occur in our operations and capitalization as a result of the spin-off and related transactions.
In December 2019, there was an outbreak of a new strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”). In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and labor force participation, and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. “Shelter-in-place” restrictions by various governments around the world negatively impacted our results of operations for the year ended November 30, 2020, and was most acute during the second quarter of fiscal year 2020, as many of our employees were unable to work productively during the period despite client demand. During the year ended November 30, 2020, we incurred incremental costs of approximately $86 million associated with non-productive workforce and other costs. We successfully transitioned a significant portion of our workforce to a remote working environment throughout the second quarter of 2020 and implemented a number of safety and social distancing measures in our sites to protect the health and safety of employees. As of the end of the third quarter of fiscal year 2020 and through the remainder of the year, almost all of our workforce was productive.
The extent of the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance, including our ability to execute our business strategies and initiatives in the expected time frame, will depend on future developments, including the duration, spread and severity of the pandemic, country and state restrictions regarding virus containment, the availability and effectiveness of vaccines and treatment options, accessibility to the Company’s delivery and operations locations, our continued utilization of remote work environments in response to future health and safety restrictions, and the impact to the Company’s clients’ businesses and the demand for their products and services, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. We are unable to predict how long the pandemic conditions will persist, what additional measures may be introduced by governments or our clients and the effect of any such additional measures on our business. As a result, many of the estimates and assumptions involved in preparation of the combined financial statements included required increased judgment and carry a higher degree of variability and volatility. As events continue to evolve with respect to the pandemic, our estimates may materially change in future periods. Accordingly, current results and financial condition discussed herein may not be indicative of future operating results and trends.
Revenue and Cost of Revenue
We generate revenue through the provision of customer experience solutions to our clients pursuant to client contracts. Our client contracts typically consist of a master services agreement, supported in most cases by multiple statements of work, which contains the terms and conditions of each contracted solution. Our agreements can range from less than one year to over five years in term and are subject to early termination by our clients for any reason, typically with 30 to 90 days’ notice.
Our technology-infused customer experience solutions are generally characterized by flat unit prices. Approximately 96% of our revenue is recognized as services are performed, based on staffing hours or the number of client customer interactions handled using contractual rates. Remaining revenues from the sale of these solutions are typically recognized as the services are provided over the duration of the contract using contractual rates.
Our cost of revenue consists primarily of personnel costs related to the delivery of our solutions. The costs of our revenue can be impacted by the mix of client contracts, where we deliver the customer experience solution, additional lead time for programs to be fully scalable and transition and initial set-up costs. Our cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue has also fluctuated in the past, based primarily on our ability to achieve economies of scale, the management of our operating expenses, and the timing and costs incurred related to our acquisitions and investments.
In fiscal years 2020 and 2019, approximately 78% and 76%, respectively, of our combined revenue was generated from our non-U.S. operations, and approximately 63% and 66%, respectively, of our combined revenue was priced in U.S. dollars and we expect this to continue. As a result, we have certain client contracts that are priced in non-U.S. dollar currencies for which a substantial portion of the costs to deliver the services are in other currencies. Accordingly, our revenue may be earned in currencies that are different from the currencies in which we incur corresponding expenses. Fluctuations in the value of currencies, such as the Philippine Peso, the Indian Rupee, and the Canadian Dollar, against the U.S. Dollar or other currencies in which we bill our clients, and inflation in the local economies in which these delivery centers are located, can impact the operating and labor costs in these delivery centers, which can result in reduced profitability. As a result, our revenue growth, costs and profitability has been impacted, and we expect will continue to be impacted, by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
Margins
Our gross margins fluctuate and can be impacted by the mix of client contracts, services provided, shifts in the geography from which our customer experience services are delivered, client volume trends, and the amount of lead time that is required for programs to become fully scaled and transition and set-up costs. Our operating margin fluctuates based on changes in gross margins as well as overall volume levels, as we are able to gain scale efficiencies in our selling, general and administrative costs in periods of higher volume.
Economic and Industry Trends
The customer experience solutions industry in which we operate is competitive. Clients’ performance measures are based on competitive pricing terms and quality of services. Accordingly, we could be subject to pricing pressure and may experience a decrease in revenue and operating income. Our business operates in over 40 countries across 6 continents. We have significant concentrations in the Philippines, India, the United States, the United Kingdom, throughout Europe, China and Japan. Accordingly, we would be impacted by economic strength or weakness in these geographies and by the strengthening or weakening of local currencies relative to the U.S. Dollar.
Seasonality
Our revenue and margins fluctuate with the underlying trends in our clients’ businesses and trends in the level of consumer activity. As a result, our revenues and margins are typically higher in the fourth quarter of the year than in any other quarter.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our combined financial condition and results of operations are based on our combined financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of any contingent assets and liabilities at the financial statement date and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, we review and evaluate our estimates and assumptions. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and a variety of other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making our judgment about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the more significant judgments, estimates and/or assumptions used in the preparation of our combined financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
On December 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606 applying the full retrospective method. See Note 2 to the combined financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding the impact of adopting this new revenue standard.
We recognize revenue from our customer experience solutions contracts over time as the promised services are delivered to clients for an amount that reflects the consideration to which we are entitled in exchange for those services. We account for a contract with a client when it has written approval, the contract is committed, the rights of the parties, including payments terms, are identified, the contract has commercial substance and the consideration is probable of collection. Revenue is presented net of taxes collected from clients and remitted to government authorities. We generally invoice a client after the performance of services, or in accordance with the specific contractual provisions. Payments are due as per contract terms and do not contain a significant financing component. Service contracts may be based on a fixed price or on a fixed unit-price per transaction or other objective measure of output. We determine whether services performed during the initial phases of an arrangement, such as setup services, are distinct. In most cases, the arrangement is a single performance obligation comprised of a series of distinct services that are substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer (i.e., distinct days of service). We record deferred revenue attributable to certain process transition and setup activities where such activities do not represent separate performance obligations. Billings related to such transition activities are classified under contract liabilities and subsequently recognized ratably over the period in which the related services are performed. We apply a measure of progress (typically time-based) to any fixed consideration and allocate variable consideration to the distinct periods of service based on usage. As a result, revenue is generally recognized over the period the services are provided on a usage basis. This results in revenue recognition that corresponds to the benefit to the client of the services transferred relative to the remaining services promised. Revenue on fixed price contracts is recognized on the straight-line basis over the term of contract service as the services are provided. Revenue on unit-price transactions is recognized using an objective measure of output including staffing hours or the number of transactions processed by service staff. Client contract terms can range from less than one year to more than five years.
Certain client contracts include additional payments from the client based upon the achievement of certain agreed-upon service levels and performance metrics. Certain contracts also provide for a reduction in consideration paid to the Company in the event that certain agreed-upon service levels or performance metrics are not achieved. Revenue related to such arrangements is accounted for as variable consideration when the likely amount of revenue to be recognized can be estimated to the extent that it is unlikely that a significant reversal will occur.
Business Combinations
We continually seek to augment organic growth with strategic acquisitions of businesses and assets that complement and expand our existing capabilities. Recent acquisitions have sought to enhance our capabilities and domain expertise in our key verticals, expand our geographic footprint, and further expand into higher value service offerings. We are also strategically focused on further increasing our scale to support our clients.
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed generally based on their fair values at the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. The determination of the fair value of assets and liabilities may involve engaging independent third parties to perform an appraisal. When determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Critical estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, expected future cash flows, which includes consideration of future growth rates and margins, attrition rates, and discount rates. Fair value estimates are based on the assumptions we believe a market participant would use in pricing the asset or liability. Amounts recorded in a business combination may change during the measurement period, which is a period not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, as additional information about conditions existing at the acquisition date becomes available. At November 30, 2019, the measurement period has ended for all acquisitions.
Goodwill
As of November 30, 2020, we had goodwill of $1,836.1 million recorded on our combined balance sheet. The Company tests goodwill for impairment annually at the reporting unit level in the fiscal fourth quarter or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that it may be impaired. For purposes of the goodwill impairment test, the Company can elect to perform a quantitative or qualitative analysis. If the qualitative analysis is elected, goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level by performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. The factors that are considered in the qualitative analysis include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors such as increases in labor, or other costs that would have a negative effect on earnings and cash flows; and other relevant entity-specific events and information.
If we elect to perform or are required to perform a quantitative analysis, then the reporting unit’s carrying value is compared to its fair value. The fair value of the reporting unit is estimated using a market approach and an income approach (discounted cash flows). Under the market approach, the Company utilizes the guideline company method, which involves calculating valuation multiples based on operating data from comparable publicly traded companies. Multiples derived from these companies provide an indication of how much a knowledgeable investor in the marketplace would be willing to pay for a company. These multiples are then applied to the operating data to arrive at an indication of value. Under the income approach, the fair value of the reporting unit is based on the present value of estimated future cash flows utilizing a market-based weighted-average cost of capital determined separately for each reporting unit. The assumptions used in the market approach are based on the value of a business through an analysis of revenue and other multiples of guideline companies and recent sales of or offerings by a comparable entity. The assumptions used in the discounted cash flow approach are based on historical and forecasted revenue, operating costs, future economic conditions, a market-based weighted average cost of capital and other relevant factors. Goodwill is considered impaired if the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value and the excess is recognized as an impairment loss.
Based on our 2020 impairment assessment, we concluded that no impairment charges were necessary. We have not recorded any impairment charges related to goodwill during the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019.
Other Intangible Assets
As of November 30, 2020, we had other intangible assets, net of amortization, of $799.0 million. This amount consists primarily of $794.3 million in client relationship intangible assets. As amortizable intangible assets, we evaluate the intangible assets for recoverability on an annual basis or if events or circumstances indicate a possible inability to recover their carrying value, by comparing estimates of undiscounted future cash flows to the carrying values of the related assets. We have not recorded any impairment charges related to other intangible assets during the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements and the anticipated effects on our combined financial statements, see Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the combined financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations - Years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
We generate revenue by delivering our customer experience solutions to our clients categorized in the above primary industry verticals. These solutions focus on customer engagement, process optimization, and back-office automation. Included in our revenue is $20.9 million and $20.6 million for customer experience solutions that we delivered to SYNNEX during fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our revenue increased 0.2% in fiscal year 2020, compared to fiscal year 2019, primarily due to a net increase in volumes across our key verticals. Revenue from clients in our technology and consumer electronics vertical increased as a result of increased volumes from several hardware and software manufacturing clients, including our largest client in this vertical. Revenue from clients in our communications and media vertical decreased primarily
due to a decrease in revenues from several clients in this vertical, including our largest communications client, caused by a combination of lower volumes, more services provided from our offshore locations and COVID-19 impacts on our employees’ ability to work productively despite client demand. This decrease in communications and media revenues also represents a continuation of our repositioning of our vertical mix to be less reliant on this vertical. Revenue from clients in our retail, travel and ecommerce vertical increased due to increased volume from several retail and ecommerce clients partially offset by reduced volumes from several travel and tourism clients. Revenues from clients in the banking, financial services and insurance vertical increased due to increased volumes from several clients in this vertical. Revenues from clients in our healthcare vertical increased primarily due to an increase in volumes with a few health insurance clients. Revenues from clients in our other vertical decreased, reflecting a decrease in revenues from our largest automotive client and a few other automotive clients, partially offset by growth with a few government clients. The increase in revenues is partially offset by a negative translation effect of foreign currencies of $20.7 million. The negative foreign currency translation effect on revenue was primarily due to the weakening of the Brazilian real, Australian dollar and Indian Rupee against the U.S. dollar.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin Percentage
Cost of revenue consists primarily of personnel costs. Gross margins can be impacted by resource location, client mix and pricing, additional lead time for programs to be fully scalable, and transition and initial set-up costs. Additionally, for the year ended November 30, 2020, gross margin was impacted due to COVID-19 by the cost of employees who were unable to work productively during portions of the period and additional costs incurred related to our response to COVID-19.
Our cost of revenue increased by 3.3% in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019, primarily due to the incremental impact of approximately $75.8 million in COVID-19 related non-productive workforce and other costs and the increase in revenue, partially offset by reductions in employee training, recruiting and transportation costs and a net favorable foreign currency impact of $3.2 million on the cost of revenue. The net favorable foreign currency impact on the cost of revenue was caused primarily by the weakening of the Indian Rupee, the Brazilian real, the Australian dollar and the Colombian Peso against the U.S. dollar, partially offset by the strengthening of the Philippine Peso against the U.S. dollar.
Our gross profit decreased 5.0% in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to the incremental impact of COVID-19 related non-productive workforce and other costs, and a net unfavorable foreign currency impact of $17.5 million on gross profit. In addition, our gross margin was temporarily impacted by decreased productivity as we transitioned some of our employees to work-from-home during the fiscal year. The factors caused our gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2020 to decrease to 35.2% compared to 37.1% in 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Our selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of support personnel costs such as salaries, commissions, bonuses, employee benefits and share-based compensation costs. Selling, general and administrative expenses also include the cost of our global delivery facilities, utility expenses, hardware and software costs related to our technology infrastructure, legal and professional fees, depreciation on our technology and facility equipment, amortization of intangible assets resulting from acquisitions, marketing expenses, acquisition-related transaction and integration expenses and spin-off related expenses.
Our selling, general and administrative expenses decreased in fiscal year 2020 compared to 2019 due to a decrease in acquisition-related and integration expenses of $42.5 million, a decrease in amortization of intangible assets included in selling, general and administrative expenses of $19.3 million, a decrease in depreciation expense included in selling, general and administrative expenses of $12.1 million, reductions in various cost areas as a result of our response to COVID-19 and increased cost efficiencies related to Convergys acquisition synergies. The decreases were partially offset by incremental COVID-19 costs of approximately $10.3 million and spin-off related expenses of $9.5 million. These factors resulted in a net decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue in comparison to the prior fiscal year.
Operating Income
Our operating income and operating margin increased during fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019, primarily due to decreased selling, general and administrative expenses slightly offset by a decrease in gross margin, due to certain impacts from COVID-19 related non-productive workforce and other costs.
Interest Expense and Finance Charges, Net
Amounts recorded in interest expense and finance charges, net, consist primarily of interest on borrowings from SYNNEX. Net interest expense on borrowings from and to SYNNEX was $48.6 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to $93.3 million in fiscal year 2019.
The decrease in our interest expense and finance charges, net in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019, reflects the decrease in interest expense on borrowings from and to SYNNEX due to the reduction in outstanding borrowings and a reduction in LIBOR-based interest rates. Interest expense associated with our new third-party borrowings was not material during fiscal year 2020 due to the funding occurring on November 30, 2020.
Other Income, Net
Amounts recorded as other income, net include foreign currency transaction gains and losses, other than cash flow hedges, investment gains and losses, non-service component of pension costs, and other non-operating gains and losses.
Other income, net in fiscal year 2020 was $7.4 million compared to $2.3 million in fiscal year 2019. The increase in other income, net was due to the favorable resolution of a previously recognized tax indemnity obligation in 2020 and an increase in net foreign currency gains.
Provision for Income Taxes
Income taxes consist of our current and deferred tax expense resulting from our income earned in domestic and international jurisdictions. Although we have been included in the consolidated tax returns of SYNNEX in certain jurisdictions, our tax provisions included herein has been recorded as if we had filed our taxes on a stand-alone basis. Income taxes were negatively impacted due to limits to deductions which we do not expect post-separation.
Our provision for income taxes increased for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020 compared to November 30, 2019 due to the increase in our income before taxes.
Provision for income taxes for the fiscal years 2020 and 2019 was increased by an adjustment of $26.8 million and $23.8 million, respectively, to reflect the hypothetical tax impact if Concentrix was not part of SYNNEX’ U.S. consolidated group and thereby suffered a much higher U.S. foreign tax credit limitation.
The effective tax rate for fiscal year ended November 30, 2020 decreased compared to the effective tax rate for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019 due to increased tax expense recorded in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019 resulting from an increase in reserves for uncertain tax positions and an increased provision for the transition tax related to mandatory repatriation under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “TCJA”).
See Note 14-Income Taxes to the combined financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
Certain non-GAAP financial information
In addition to disclosing financial results that are determined in accordance with GAAP, we also disclose certain non-GAAP financial information, including:
•Revenue in constant currency, which is revenue adjusted for the translation effect of foreign currencies so that certain financial results can be viewed without the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, thereby facilitating period-to-period comparisons of our business performance. Revenue in constant currency is calculated by translating the revenue of each fiscal year in the billing currency using their comparable prior year’s currency conversion rate. Generally, when the dollar either strengthens or weakens against other currencies, the growth at constant currency rates or adjusting for currency will be higher or lower than growth reported at actual exchange rates.
•Non-GAAP operating income, which is operating income, adjusted to exclude acquisition-related and integration expenses, including related restructuring costs, spin-off related expenses, amortization of intangible assets and share-based compensation.
•Non-GAAP operating margin, which is non-GAAP operating income, as defined above, divided by revenue.
•Adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization, or adjusted EBITDA, which is non-GAAP operating income, as defined above, plus depreciation.
•Adjusted EBITDA margin, which is adjusted EBITDA, as defined above, divided by revenue.
•Non-GAAP net income, which is net income excluding the tax effected impact of acquisition-related and integration expenses, including related restructuring costs, spin-off related expenses, amortization of intangible assets and share-based compensation.
•Free cash flow, which is cash flows from operating activities less capital expenditures. We believe that free cash flow is a meaningful measure of cash flows since capital expenditures are a necessary component of ongoing operations. However, free cash flow has limitations because it does not represent the residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures. For example, free cash flow does not incorporate payments for business acquisitions.
We believe that providing this additional information is useful to the reader to better assess and understand our base operating performance, especially when comparing results with previous periods and for planning and forecasting in future periods, primarily because management typically monitors the business adjusted for these items in addition to GAAP results. Management also uses these non-GAAP measures to establish operational goals and, in some cases, for measuring performance for compensation purposes. These non-GAAP financial measures exclude amortization of intangible assets. Our acquisition activities have resulted in the recognition of intangible assets, which consist primarily of client relationships, technology and trade names. Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives and are tested for impairment when events indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The amortization of intangible assets is reflected in our statements of operations. Although intangible assets contribute to our revenue generation, the amortization of intangible assets does not directly relate to the services performed for our clients. Additionally, intangible asset amortization expense typically fluctuates based on the size and timing of our acquisition activity. Accordingly, we believe excluding the amortization of intangible assets, along with the other non-GAAP adjustments which neither relate to the ordinary course of our business nor reflect our underlying business performance, enhances our and our investors’ ability to compare our past financial performance with its current performance and to analyze underlying business performance and trends. Intangible asset amortization excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure represents the entire amount recorded within our GAAP financial statements, and the revenue generated by the associated intangible assets has not been excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure. Intangible asset amortization is excluded from the related non-GAAP financial measure because the amortization, unlike the related revenue, is not affected by operations of any particular period unless an intangible asset becomes impaired or the estimated useful life of an intangible asset is revised. These non-GAAP financial measures also exclude share-based compensation expense. Given the subjective assumptions and the variety of award types that companies can use
when calculating share-based compensation expense, management believes this additional information allows investors to make additional comparisons between our operating results and those of our peers. As these non-GAAP financial measures are not calculated in accordance with GAAP, they may not necessarily be comparable to similarly titled measures employed by other companies. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the comparable GAAP measures and should be used as a complement to, and in conjunction with, data presented in accordance with GAAP.
(1) Weighted average number of shares used for both basic and diluted EPS is based on the number of common shares issued and outstanding in connection with the spin-off of 51.6 million for both periods presented.
(2) The tax effect of taxable and deductible non-GAAP adjustments was calculated using the tax-deductible portion of the expenses and applying the entity-specific, statutory tax rates applicable to each item during the respective fiscal years.
Client Concentration
Our largest client accounted for 11.5% and 10.4% of our revenues in fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively. The revenues that we recognize from this client are earned under multiple contracts and statements of work. No other client accounted for more than 10% of our revenues in 2020 or 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary uses of cash are working capital, capital expenditures to expand our delivery footprint and enhance our technology solutions, and acquisitions. Our financing needs for these uses of cash have been a combination of operating cash flows and related party borrowings from SYNNEX and third-party debt arrangements entered into in connection with the spin-off. Our working capital needs are primarily to finance accounts receivable. When our revenues are increasing, our net investment in working capital typically increases. Conversely, when revenue is decreasing, our net investment in working capital typically decreases. To increase our market share and better serve our clients, we may further expand our operations through investments or acquisitions. We expect that such expansion would require an initial investment in working capital, personnel, facilities, and operations. These investments or acquisitions would likely be funded primarily with our existing cash and cash equivalents, available liquidity, including capacity on our debt arrangements, or the issuance of securities.
Debt Arrangements
In connection with the spin-off, we entered into two third-party debt arrangements. On October 16, 2020, we entered into a new senior secured credit facility, which provides for the extension of revolving loans of up to $600 million (the “Revolver”) and term loan borrowings of up to $900 million (the “Term Loan” and, together with the Revolver, the “Credit Facility”). On October 30, 2020, we entered into a new $350 million accounts receivable securitization facility (the “Securitization Facility”) pursuant to certain agreements, including a receivables financing agreement and a receivables purchase agreement.
On November 30, 2020, in connection with the spin-off, we incurred $900 million of initial Term Loan borrowings under the Credit Facility and $250 million of borrowings under the Securitization Facility. Substantially all of the proceeds from such indebtedness, net of debt issuance costs, were transferred to SYNNEX on November 30, 2020 to eliminate debt owed by the Company to SYNNEX and in exchange for the contribution of certain Company trademarks from SYNNEX to the Company. We had no outstanding borrowings on the Revolver as of November 30, 2020.
The Credit Facility matures on November 30, 2025. The outstanding principal amount of the Term Loan is payable in quarterly installments of $11.25 million commencing on May 31, 2021, with the unpaid balance due in full on the maturity date. We may prepay the loans under the Credit Facility at any time without penalty, other than
breakage fees. We may request, subject to obtaining commitments from any participating lenders and certain other conditions, incremental commitments to increase the amount of the Revolver or Term Loan available under the Credit Facility in an aggregate principal amount equal to $450.0 million, plus an additional amount, so long as after giving effect to the incurrence of such additional amount, our pro forma first lien leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility) would not exceed 3.00 to 1.00.
Obligations under the Credit Facility are secured by substantially all of the assets of Concentrix and certain of its U.S. subsidiaries and are guaranteed by certain of its U.S. subsidiaries.
Borrowings under the Revolver and the Term Loan bear interest, in the case of LIBOR rate loans, at a per annum rate equal to the applicable LIBOR rate (but not less than 0.25%), plus an applicable margin, which ranges from 1.25% to 2.25%, based on our consolidated leverage ratio. Borrowings under the Credit Facility that are not LIBOR rate loans bear interest at a per annum rate equal to (i) the greatest of (a) the Federal Funds Rate in effect on such day plus 1/2 of 1.0%, (b) the rate of interest last publicly announced by Bank of America as its “prime rate” and (c) the LIBOR rate plus 1.0%, plus (ii) an applicable margin, which ranges from 0.25% to 1.25%, based on our consolidated leverage ratio. Commitments under the Revolver are subject to a commitment fee on the unused portion of the Revolver, which fee ranges from 25 to 45 basis points, based on our consolidated leverage ratio.
The Credit Facility contains various loan covenants that restrict the ability of Concentrix and its subsidiaries to take certain actions, including incurrence of indebtedness, creation of liens, mergers or consolidations, dispositions of assets, repurchase or redemption of capital stock, making certain investments, entering into certain transactions with affiliates or changing the nature of our business. In addition, the Credit Facility contains financial covenants that require us to maintain at the end of each fiscal quarter commencing with the quarter ending February 28, 2021, (i) a consolidated leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility) not to exceed 3.75 to 1.0 and (ii) a consolidated interest coverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility) equal to or greater than 3.00 to 1.0. The Credit Facility also contains various customary events of default, including payment defaults, defaults under certain other indebtedness, and a change of control of Concentrix.
The Securitization Facility has an initial termination date of October 28, 2022. Under the Securitization Facility, Concentrix and certain of its U.S. based subsidiaries sell or otherwise transfer all of their accounts receivable to a special purpose bankruptcy-remote subsidiary of Concentrix that grants a security interest in the receivables to the lenders in exchange for available borrowings of up to $350 million. Borrowing availability under the Securitization Facility may be limited by our accounts receivables balances, changes in the credit ratings of our clients comprising the receivables, client concentration levels in the receivables, and certain characteristics of the accounts receivable being transferred (including factors tracking performance of the accounts receivable over time).
Borrowings under the Securitization Facility bear interest with respect to loans that are funded through the issuance of commercial paper at the applicable commercial paper rate plus a spread of 1.05% and, otherwise, at a per annum rate equal to the applicable LIBOR rate plus a spread of 1.15%. We are also obligated to pay a monthly undrawn fee that ranges from 30 to 37.5 basis points based on the portion of the Securitization Facility that is undrawn.
The Securitization Facility contains various affirmative and negative covenants, including a consolidated leverage ratio covenant that is consistent with the Credit Facility and customary events of default, including payment defaults, defaults under certain other indebtedness, a change in control of Concentrix, and certain events negatively affecting the overall credit quality of the transferred accounts receivable.
As of November 30, 2020, we were in compliance with the debt covenants related to our debt arrangements.
Prior to the spin-off, our primary source of financing was intercompany borrowings from SYNNEX. At November 30, 2019, the outstanding borrowings from SYNNEX totaled $1,721.2 million. All outstanding borrowings with SYNNEX were settled on November 30, 2020 through payment of proceeds from our third-party debt arrangements and a capital contribution from SYNNEX.
Cash Flows - Years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019
The following summarizes our cash flows for the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, as reported in our combined statement of cash flows in the accompanying combined financial statements.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $507.6 million in fiscal year 2020, primarily generated from our net income of $164.8 million and adjustments for non-cash items. Adjustments for non-cash items primarily consist of $276.6 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $17.2 million of hypothetical current tax expense recorded for separate tax return basis presentation and share-based compensation of $15.6 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $449.7 million in fiscal year 2019, primarily generated from our net income of $117.2 million and adjustments for non-cash items. Adjustments for non-cash items primarily consist of $305.8 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $33.4 million of hypothetical current tax expense recorded for separate tax return basis presentation and share-based compensation of $10.4 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities in fiscal year 2020 was $109.2 million, primarily for capital expenditures of $171.3 million to support our growth offset by proceeds of $67.7 million from loan of non-Concentrix subsidiary of Parent as part of its centralized treasury operations and $5.6 million of acquisition-related payments.
Net cash used in investing activities in fiscal year 2019 was $151.0 million, primarily for capital expenditures of $111.1 million to support our growth, $30.4 million loan to non-Concentrix subsidiary of Parent as part of its centralized treasury operations and $9.4 million of acquisition-related payments.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities in fiscal year 2020 was $335.2 million, consisting of third-party borrowings of $900 million under the Credit Facility and $250 million under the Securitization Facility, more than offset by $1,476.7 million in repayments on borrowings from SYNNEX and debt issuance costs related to these facilities.
Net cash used in financing activities in fiscal year 2019 was $339.6 million, consisting of $191.6 million in repayments on borrowings from SYNNEX and $148.0 million to redeem the convertible debentures assumed in the Convergys acquisition.
We believe our current cash balances and credit availability are enough to support our operating activities for at least the next twelve months.
Free Cash Flow (a non-GAAP measure)
Our free cash flow was $336.3 million in fiscal year 2020, compared to $338.6 million in fiscal year 2019. The decrease in free cash flow in fiscal year 2020 primarily reflects increased net cash provided by operating activities as a result of the increase in net income, more than offset by an increase in capital expenditures to support our growth.
Capital Resources
As of November 30, 2020, we had total liquidity of $853 million, which includes undrawn capacity of $600 million on the Credit Facility, undrawn capacity of $100 million on the Securitization Facility and cash and cash equivalents.
Our cash and cash equivalents totaled $152.7 million and $79.7 million as of November 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Of our total cash and cash equivalents, 89% and 94% was held by our non-U.S. legal entities as of November 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our cash and cash equivalents held by our non-U.S. legal entities are no longer subject to U.S. federal tax on repatriation into the United States. Repatriation of some non-U.S. balances is restricted by local laws. Historically, we have fully utilized and reinvested all non-U.S. cash to fund our international operations and expansion; however, the Company has recorded deferred tax liabilities related to non-U.S. withholding taxes on the earnings of certain previously acquired non-U.S. entities that are likely to be repatriated in the future. If in the future our intentions change, and we repatriate the cash back to the United States, we will report in our combined financial statements the impact of the state and withholding taxes depending upon the planned timing and manner of such repatriation. Presently, we believe we have sufficient resources, cash flow and liquidity within the United States to fund current and expected future working capital, investment and other general corporate funding requirements.
We believe that our available cash and cash equivalents balances, the cash flows expected to be generated from operations, and our sources of liquidity will be sufficient to satisfy our current and planned working capital and investment needs for the next twelve months. We also believe that our longer-term working capital, planned capital expenditures and other general corporate funding requirements will be satisfied through cash flows from operations and, to the extent necessary, from our borrowing facilities and future financial market activities.
Contractual Obligations to Third Parties
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at November 30, 2020:
(a) Cash obligations for interest requirement related to our variable-rate debt obligations at the current rates as of November 30, 2020.
(b) Includes projected contributions to achieve minimum funding objectives for our cash balance pension plan.
As of November 30, 2020, we have established a reserve of $62.3 million for unrecognized tax benefits. As we are unable to reasonably predict the timing of settlement of these guarantees and the reserve for unrecognized tax benefits, the table above excludes such liabilities.
Through November 30, 2020, certain of the Concentrix legal entities in the United States jointly and severally guaranteed SYNNEX’ obligations under its senior secured credit agreement (the “SYNNEX Credit Agreement”) and SYNNEX’ secured term loan credit agreement (the “SYNNEX Term Loan Credit Agreement”) and substantially all of the assets of these legal entities secured SYNNEX’ obligations under the SYNNEX Credit Agreement and the SYNNEX Term Loan Credit Agreement. The amounts guaranteed by us under these agreements are recorded in our combined financial statements to the extent drawn from the Parent, net of repayments to the Parent.
In connection with the spin-off, the Concentrix legal entities were released as guarantors and the Concentrix legal entities’ assets were released as collateral from the SYNNEX Credit Agreement and the SYNNEX Term Loan Credit Agreement, and thereafter serve as security for Credit Facility or, in the case of our receivables and related assets generated by us and certain of our subsidiaries in the United States, as security for our Securitization Facility.