ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
The information herein contains forward-looking statements. All statements other than statements of historical fact made herein are forward looking. In particular, the statements herein regarding industry prospects and future results of operations or financial position are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of words such as “believes,” “estimates,” “could,” “possibly,” “probably,” anticipates,” “projects,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” or “should” or other variations or similar words. No assurances can be given that the future results anticipated by the forward-looking statements will be achieved. Forward-looking statements reflect management’s current expectations and are inherently uncertain. Our actual results may differ significantly from management’s expectations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements, included herewith. This discussion should not be construed to imply that the results discussed herein will necessarily continue into the future, or that any conclusion reached herein will necessarily be indicative of actual operating results in the future. Such discussion represents only the best present assessment of our management.
General Overview
We operate two distinct business operations. These are:
● the Marine Technology Business (also referred to in this Form 10-K as “Products Business”, “Products Operations” or “Products Segment”); and
● the Marine Engineering Business (also referred to in this Form 10-K as “Engineering Business”, “Engineering Operations”, or “Services Segment”).
Our Marine Technology Business is a technology solution provider to the subsea and underwater market. It has a long-established pedigree in this market, and it innovates, designs, develops and manufactures proprietary solutions for this market (both for commercial and defense applications) including our range of flagship volumetric real time sonar solutions.
These solutions and products are used primarily in the underwater construction market, offshore oil and gas, offshore wind energy industry, and in the complex dredging, port security, mining and marine sciences sectors. Our customers include service providers to major oil and gas (“O&G”) companies, law enforcement agencies, ports, mining companies, defense bodies, fisheries and research institutes.
Our Marine Engineering Business is a supplier of engineering services and embedded solutions (such as mission computers) to prime defense contractors such as Raytheon and Northrop Grumman. Generally, the items supplied into the defense market are sub-systems in broader mission critical integrated systems and thus requires a high level of reliability, consistency in standards and robustness.
We have long-standing relationships with prime defense contractors, and we use these credentials to secure more business. We support some significant defense programs by supplying and maintaining proprietary parts (or parts for which we are preferred suppliers) through obsolescence management programs. These services provide recurring stream of revenues for our Services segment.
Both the Marine Technology Business and Marine Engineering Business have established synergies in terms of customers and specialized engineering skill sets (hardware, firmware and software) encompassing capturing, computing, processing and displaying data in harsh environments.
Our business is affected by a number of factors including those set out below:
A. United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European Union (“Brexit”)
The UK was a member of the European Union member states for close to 50 years. This membership enabled the freedom of movement of goods, persons, capital and services between member states. Following a referendum in 2016 where the country voted to leave the EU, the UK withdrew from its membership of the EU on December 31, 2020. This withdrawal removed these rights.
As part of the withdrawal, the UK Government and EU reached an agreement on December 30, 2020 on trade in certain areas. At this stage there is scant analysis available on the details of the trade agreement concluded between the parties. However, from the information available we understand that for the solutions and products we supply to the EU member states, there will be no trade tariffs or quotas (applicable at this stage).
However, the change in the UK EU membership status still adversely impacts our business in a number of important areas:
● We will not be able to recruit workers from the EU member states without getting a work permit.
● Our technology requires training to support its effective implementation. Typically for sales and rentals we would mobilize our engineers to train and assist these customers in set up of the equipment. Under the new trade agreement, we will need to obtain the necessary work permits from the EU member state to which we intend to send our engineer. This will be time consuming and costly and the rules for granting such permit will vary from member state to member state. Furthermore, we have no precedent to know if these permits will be granted.
● We are now subject to custom procedures for exporting our goods to EU member states. Furthermore, the introduction of border controls, where the infrastructure is not in place to support the expeditious movement of vehicles across border, could result in delays of exports and supply chain delays, which could impact on our ability to manufacture our products and meet customer demand in a timely manner.
Since there is scant detailed analysis available on the recently concluded trade agreement between the UK and the EU, including preconditions, reservations and exclusions that may be present, the full implications for the Company are, at this stage, not completely clear.
The Company established a company, Coda Octopus Products A/S, in Denmark to maintain a presence in the European Union and to address some of the foreseeable issues. Even with the trade deal in place, this subsidiary is still considered important for the Company.
B. Currency Risks:
The Company’s operations are split between the United States, United Kingdom, Denmark and Australia. A large proportion of our revenues (approximately 47%) and costs are incurred outside of the USA with a significant part (46% of our total revenues) of that in the United Kingdom (“UK”). In addition, a significant part of our assets (both current and fixed) is held in British Pounds by our foreign subsidiaries. Significant currency fluctuations (particularly the British Pound versus the US Dollar) may affect our financial results and the value of our assets. With the conclusion of the trade agreement between the UK and EU, we anticipate that unlike the last 4 years which saw increased volatility between the British Pound and other major currencies, including the US Dollar, it will be more stable.
C. Impact of Coronavirus Outbreak (referred to in this Form 10-K as “Coronavirus”, (“Pandemic”) or (“COVID-19”)
General Impact
The global outbreak of the Coronavirus has resulted in governments throughout the world, implementing measures restricting the freedom of movement of people and curtailment of business activities including business closure to curb the spread of the coronavirus.
Our business started to be impacted in February 2020 when several significant industry events such as trade shows important for the promotion and marketing of our products were cancelled. In addition, several navy projects which had been scheduled for implementation were indefinitely postponed in February 2020. During March 2020, governments introduced “global restrictions of movement” that impacted our ability to conduct much of our income generating business activities. Our financial performance was materially impacted in the second quarter of 2020. In the Third Quarter we saw improvement in market conditions. However, in the Fourth Quarter with the resurgence of the so-called “second wave”, our operations were once again hampered with various degrees of closure of the business or reduction in activities to comply with Government regulations or to perform company-wide COVID-19 tests, all of which resulted in substantial fall in business productivity, the decline of revenues in the Fourth Quarter of our fiscal year along with increased costs of operation associated with our Pandemic response. The Pandemic has affected the industry in which our businesses operate in and has resulted in reduced demand for our goods and services in the 2020 FY resulting in a material fall in our revenues with total operating expenses remaining at the same level thus resulting in a fall in our net earnings in the 2020 FY.
In January 2021, the UK Government imposed the highest level of restrictions limiting business operations. Our UK Business is therefore affected and will largely remain closed for the months of January and February 2021. Since we are a manufacturing company, it is increasingly difficult and not financially viable to institute remote working.
Impact on Revenues and Earnings
Until the business environment normalizes, we are uncertain as to the extent of the impact the coronavirus outbreak will have on our future financial results. In the 2020 FY we have experienced three full quarters of the coronavirus impact and our financial results have been negatively impacted as we are seeing less demand for our goods and services and at the same time increased costs associated with managing the Pandemic response in the Company. Furthermore, the ability to continue to implement projects successfully is impacted by rules requiring staff to quarantine (which can be for many weeks). This is further compounded by the size of our business, where often, key functions are concentrated in a small team of staff members who may all be affected by this issue at the same time.
On the Products Business side, a significant part of our revenues is generated from field customer support work (training, assistance in mobilization of equipment or operating the equipment on behalf of our customers). Coronavirus has caused many of these field projects to be postponed indefinitely - which in turn negatively affects our revenues and financial results. This is evident in our rental income which is down by 51.5% in the 2020 FY over the 2019 FY. We believe that travel will not be normalized for much of 2021 and therefore we believe that we will continue to be impacted by the Pandemic (even with the vaccination program now being implemented).
On the Services Business side, travel is also an important element as many of its engineering projects require customers to attend its premises to conduct Critical Design Reviews (“CDRs”). The Coronavirus outbreak has resulted in travel restrictions due to customers’ policy or quarantine requirements. This in turn has resulted in the delay in many engineering projects, thus negatively impacting our revenues and financial results. This business is also affected by the same business interruptions caused by requirements for staff members to self-isolate and this may be an entire team, affecting our ability to operate the business and perform customer projects. It has also dampened demand for our services as many purchasing decisions have been deferred due to many Government employees’ working from home making it difficult to take these decisions in accordance with their practices.
Government Policies on Coronavirus
Our operations are based in a number of countries, with each country establishing different rules related to coronavirus including rules on restricting business operations, limiting staff travel work and quarantining rules. This has generally resulted in a much less predictable working environment for planning and delivering customer projects and project cost management. Several implications flow from this including:
● Impairment of the business’ productivity
● Project over runs
● Increased operation costs resulting from our Pandemic response
● Increase project costs due to the delay caused by self-isolation rules or business closure or restriction on travel to work
● Higher staff costs due to increased sick pay allowance which varies according to the country where the business operations are located, combined with lower overall productivity.
Impact on Liquidity, Balance Sheet and Assets
Failure to curb the coronavirus Pandemic in the near future, coupled with a downturn in the global economic outlook, may adversely impact on our availability of our free cashflow, working capital and business prospects. As of October 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $15.1 million and for the year then ended we generated approximately $4.4 M of cash from operations. Based on our outstanding obligations including loans and notes payable, their terms and our cash balances we believe we have sufficient working capital to effectively continue our business operations for the foreseeable future.
Products Business Outlook
In the 2020 FY the Products Business revenues fell by 12.6% compared to the previous 2019 FY. This was largely due to the business interruption caused by the coronavirus outbreak and the restrictive measures put in place by various governments to contain the virus.
The coronavirus outbreak started to impact our business at the beginning of the second quarter of the current fiscal year (February 2020). The outbreak has limited the number of offshore projects which are undertaken by our customers. This has resulted in a significant fall in the category of revenues relating to project work (rentals) which fell in the 2020 FY by 49.4% and was $1,361,151 compared to $2,688,570 in the 2019 FY. In addition, we have seen a reduced demand for our products and services, which are attributed to the Pandemic, its impact on spending by our customers and also change in policy of the United Kingdom and USA Government concerning exporting of our products to China. In the current fiscal year, we have had the equivalent of $1,300,000 of orders intended for China refused by the UK Government. This is material for our business.
The Products Business operations are global and much of our income generating activities require us to attend customer sites, often on an offshore vessel. Offshore activities now require more planning to ensure personnel entering the offshore facility are virus-free. The new norm requires personnel to be quarantined for a 14-day period in the country where the job site is located, prior to entering the vessel. This limits available resources for customer projects (as project implementation time is likely to increase by the 14 days arrival quarantine and the additional 14 days upon return to home country). It also increases the costs of executing these projects.
A significant part of the Products Business human capital and resources are based in the UK. The UK Government has introduced a tiered system to manage the coronavirus outbreak in various regions of the UK. In January 2021, the Scottish Government moved to the highest levels of restrictions which introduced a national lockdown for the period of January. This restricts our ability to operate the business and we anticipate that this will adversely affect our revenues.
A substantial part of our revenues is generated by our UK operations. With the UK leaving the European Union, we believe that we will realize less sales from the EU member states countries.
We rely on specialist software development skills. There is an acute shortage of these skills which has resulted in reduced resourcing of these skills in our business and at the same time significantly increased costs associated with securing these skills. This could impact our ability to service and develop our products and/or serve to increase our overall costs, and therefore impact on our financial results.
We rely on sophisticated electronics for our products and we anticipate delay in the supply chain and increase in price. This may affect, among other things, our gross margins and ability to fulfill customer orders in a timely manner along with a resulting decline in revenues.
Services Business Outlook
In the 2020 FY the Services Segment revenues fell by 27.8% compared to FY 2019.
This is due to the impact of the coronavirus outbreak which has resulted in reduce demand for our services. In addition, our engineering projects require customers to attend our sites for Critical Design Reviews (“CDRs”). Due to the policy of many organizations to limit travel to “essential travel only”, many CDRs are postponed and this negatively impacts on the advancement of the engineering projects which will impact revenues. The Services Business is likely to continue to be impacted until the curtailments caused by the coronavirus are removed.
The Services Business is also impacted by the change in the US Administration. This will result in a delay in approving the budget and making the appropriations. In addition, there may be changes in the Government’s Defense Spending priorities which could affect the programs that use our products. This could be further compounded where the new Administration in the Senate is operating on a slim majority - which may result in further delays in the finalization of the Federal Defense Budget.
D. Political Landscape/Exporting to China
We sell our products globally and increasingly to Asia. The recent change in both the US and UK Governments attitude towards trade with China, directly affects the sale of our products to customers based in China. Our real time 3D sonars which are rated above 300 meters along with our inertial navigation and attitude measurement sensors (F280® series) are subject to export control for certain countries, including China.
Recently the US Government Department of Commerce (Bureau of Industry and Security) amended the Export administration Regulations (EAR) to add seventy seven (77) Chinese entities “determined ….to be acting contrary to the national security or foreign policy interests of the united States”. The amended EAR in general states that there is a “presumption of denial” of grant of export licenses to these entities and their affiliates.
The UK Government is generally in step lock with the US Government’s position and recently, refused to grant export licenses for several applications for end users in China for the first time in 25 years of our dealing with the UK Export Control Organization. The curtailment of access to this market due to refusal to issue export licenses is likely to significantly impact our revenues from Asia.
Furthermore, even though our sonars which are rated at 250m or less do not require export licenses for China, the UK Customs are now seizing these items which are destined for China.
In 2020 FY we were unable to meet demand for $1,300,000 of sales order for China, due to refusal by the UK Government to issue export licenses.
The removal of China as a trading partner is likely to have significant negative impact on our revenues and growth strategy. China has one of the largest planned investment programs for offshore renewables, the market which most of our technology is used for in China. After significant business development in China, we had started to see persistent and credible growth for our products in this market. Unless there is a change in this policy, we are likely to see a decline in growth and sales into the Chinese Market. It is estimated that around 50-75 multibeam sonars are sold to China Commercial Market each year (approximately $10 million). It is this market we had started to make significant inroads in to increase our global market share. Unless the Government’s current policy/stance changes and becomes favorable to resumption of trade with China, we are unlikely to realize this potential, imminently.
E. Price of Commodities and Supply Chain:
The price of commodities, in particular oil and gas (“O&G”) has a direct impact on the Products Business. The decline in O&G prices since 2014 with a partial recovery since 2016 has resulted in large scale reductions in capital and operational expenditures and seismic changes in the subsea market. This directly impacts on the Products Business by reducing the quantity of sales and rentals into O&G and related markets. O&G has remained very competitive and customers are increasingly seeking significant discounts to place orders. Around 5% of the Marine Technology Business revenues emanates from this sector. Historically, and prior to the price downturn, the vast majority of our revenues were generated from the O&G sector.
Our technology is based on electronics that are designed and manufactured to our specification exclusively for us. These electronic components are costly. Advancement in technology may make these specialized components or circuits obsolete. Reengineering these key components could result in significant capital expenditure and also may cripple the production of our products since quick replacements cannot be found.
F. Government Spending for Defense:
We are dependent on the timely allocation of funds to defense procurement by governments in the United States and the United Kingdom. A large part of our revenues in the Services Segment derives from government funding in the defense sector. In general, where there is a change of government, spending priorities may change from those priorities of the previous Administration. This may adversely impact on our revenues. Since the US Government is due to change in January 2021, this introduces a number of uncertainties including the new Government’s defense priorities and its ability to find consensus in the Senate on the Defense Budget. There is therefore a high probability that this will have an adverse impact on the order take of the Services Business in the 2021 calendar year.
G. Resourcing Levels
Due to the fact that in relative terms we are a small business, we are hindered in our ability to compete for certain specialized electronic engineering skills as our remuneration package is not as competitive as those offered by bigger companies. This is further compounded by the UK leaving the European Union which now restricts our ability to recruit outside of the UK. We are also currently suffering from acute shortage of software resources which could hamper our ability to support our products and therefore impact on revenues and growth plans.
H. Investments:
We lack the financial resources to advance our flagship technology at the commercially appropriate pace required to capture new markets and increase our sales which could facilitate new entrants to the market. For example, Teledyne Technologies Incorporated, a multi-billion company, has in recent years acquired a number of subsea companies that may speed up their entry into our market.
In relative terms, the Company has limited external sources of capital available, and as such is reliant upon its ability to sell its products and services to provide sufficient working capital for its operations and obligations. Notwithstanding, on or around November 27, 2019 the Company secured a $4 million Revolving Credit Line from HSBC NA, its current bankers which can be used for working capital purposes, including expansion activities as required.
I. Technological Advancement:
A significant part of our growth strategy is predicated on our flagship real time volumetric imaging sonar technology. The technology space is inherently uncertain due to the fast pace of innovations and therefore we can give no assurance that we can maintain our leading position in the real time volumetric imaging sonar market or that innovations in other areas may not surpass our unique capability that we currently supply to the subsea market. An example of new technology entering the subsea market is LIDAR technology. However, unlike our sonar technology, LIDAR technology cannot be employed in zero visibility conditions and cannot generate a volume pulse or image moving objects.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported values of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported levels of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
Below is a discussion of accounting policies that we consider critical to an understanding of our financial condition and operating results and that may require complex judgment in their application or require estimates about matters which are inherently uncertain. A discussion of our significant accounting policies, including further discussion of the accounting policies described below, can be found in Note 2, “Summary of Accounting Policies” of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
All of our revenues are earned under formal contracts with our customers and are derived from both sales and rental of underwater technologies and equipment for imaging, mapping, defense and survey applications and from the engineering services that we provide. Our contracts do not include the possibility for additional contingent consideration so that our determination of the contract price does not involve having to consider potential variable additional consideration. Our product sales do not include a right of return by the customer.
With regard to our Products Segment, all of our products are sold on a stand-alone basis and those market prices are evidence of the value of the products. To the extent that we also provide services (e.g., installation, training, etc.), those services are either included as part of the product or are subject to written contracts based on the stand-alone value of those services. Revenue from the sale of services is recognized when those services have been provided to the customer and evidence of the provision of those services exist.
For further discussion of our revenue recognition accounting policies, refer to Note 2, paragraph h - “Revenue Recognition” in these financial statements.
Stock based Compensation
We recognize the expense related to the fair value of stock based compensation awards within the consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income. The stock based fair value compensation is determined as of the date of the grant or the date at which the performance of the services is completed (measurement date) and is recognized over the periods in which the related services are rendered.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740, Income Taxes (ASC 740). Under ASC 740, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the income tax effects of differences between the bases of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and their bases for income tax reporting. The Company’s differences arise principally from the use of various accelerated and modified accelerated cost recovery system lives for income tax purposes versus straight line depreciation used for book purposes and from the utilization of net operating loss carry-forwards.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are the amounts by which the Company’s future income taxes are expected to be impacted by these differences as they reverse. Deferred tax assets are based on differences that are expected to decrease future income taxes as they reverse. Correspondingly, deferred tax liabilities are based on differences that are expected to increase future income taxes as they reverse. Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements discusses the amounts of deferred tax assets and liabilities, and also presents the impact of significant differences between financial reporting income and taxable income.
For income tax purposes, the Company uses the percentage of completion method of recognizing revenues on long-term contracts which is consistent with the Company’s financial reporting under U.S. GAAP.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill and intangible assets consist principally of the excess of cost over the fair value of net assets acquired (i.e. goodwill), customer relationships, non-compete agreements and licenses. Goodwill was allocated to our reporting units based on the original purchase price allocation. Goodwill is not amortized and is evaluated for impairment annually or more often if circumstances indicate impairment may exist. Customer relationships, non-compete agreements, patents and licenses are being amortized on a straight-line basis over periods of 2 to 15 years. The Company amortizes its limited lived goodwill and intangible assets using the straight-line method over their estimated period of benefit. We periodically evaluate the recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets and carefully consider events or circumstances that warrant revised estimates of useful lives or that indicate that impairment exists.
Step 1 of the goodwill impairment test used to identify potential impairment compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value, which is based on future cash flows, exceeds the carrying amount, goodwill is not considered impaired. If the carrying amount exceeds the fair value, the second step (Step 2) must be performed to measure the amount of the impairment loss, if any. The Company will early adopt Accounting Standards Codification 2017 - 04, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, which permits the Company to impair the difference between carrying amount in excess of the fair value of the reporting unit as the reduction in goodwill. ASC 2017-04 eliminates the requirement in previous GAAP to perform Step 2 of the goodwill impairment test.
At the end of each year, we evaluate goodwill on a separate reporting unit basis to assess recoverability, and impairments, if any, are recognized in earnings. An impairment loss would be recognized in an amount equal to the excess of the carrying amount of the reporting unit compared to the fair value of the reporting unit.
Fiscal Year 2020 Consolidated Results of Operations
For the purpose of this Form 10-K, 2020 FY means the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 FY means the fiscal year ended October 31,2019.
Our consolidated financial results in the 2020 FY were down compared to the 2019 FY. This is due to the ongoing impact of the Pandemic. This has resulted in material business interruptions extending to both our Products and Services operations. This has, amongst other things, resulted in increased project costs related to the cost of our Pandemic response, project delays, a substantial reduction in order in-take and demand for our products and services due to our customers largely being in the same situation.
During 2020 FY, the Marine Technology Business generated 56% of our consolidated revenues compared to 52% in the previous fiscal year and the Marine Engineering Business generated 44% compared to 48% in the previous fiscal year.
Overall, consolidated revenues in the 2020 FY were down over the 2019 FY by 20%; Gross Profit marginally fell from 65.5% to 63.5%; Total Operating Expenses were down by 2.5%; Income from Operations was down by 55.2%; Net Income before Taxes was down by 45.4%. There were no material exceptional costs. A new financial event which occurred in Fiscal Year 2020 is that in the UK, we had payroll grants from the UK Government under its Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme Program (“CJRS” of $257,844 as contribution to UK furloughed UK employees’ salary (as part of the support package for companies during the Pandemic). This is recorded in our accounts as a reduction of payroll (thus, SG&A expenses). In the 2020 FY our companies established in the USA received $648,871 as contribution to US employees’ salary during the Pandemic under the US Government Payroll Protection Program (“PPP”). This amount has now been forgiven under the Program and is recorded in our accounts as “Other Income”.
In the fiscal year 2020, R&D expenditures increased by 13.8% and SG&A expenditures were down 8.6%. We believe that we have realized a large part of our goals for the immediate development of our real time volumetric sonar technology and other products. As such, it is our expectation that the Marine Technology Business will start reducing its R&D expenditures and now focus on its growth strategy thus redirecting resources to marketing and business development.
Diver Augmented Visualization Display (“DAVD”) Progress
In 2018, pursuant to the terms of a Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (“CRADA”) we collaborated in the development of the first-generation prototype Heads Up Display (HUD) Unit for Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA) in conjunction with Naval Surface Warfare Center, Panama Division. The first-generation prototype DAVD was signed off under the CRADA at the end of the calendar year in 2019. This product was approved for sale to the market, including the US Navy and is on the US Approved Navy Use (ANU) list along with certain models of our real time 3D sonar series. We also received an exclusive-license to use the face-plate invention and sell this to the commercial market. We have now started to sell GEN 1 DAVD systems and, also in 2020 we continued the funded development of GEN 2.
Despite the business interruption caused by the Pandemic, we were able to make significant progress in developing the second generation of the DAVD. We have also started to sell DAVD systems to NAVSEA.
A key pillar of our strategy is to increase the sale of our products into the Defense programs which increases funding available for the development and sale of our products.
Comparison of fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 to fiscal year ended October 31, 2019
The information provided below pertains to the Company’s consolidated financial results. For information on the performance of each Segment including the disaggregation of revenues and geographical split, see Note 12 (“Segment Analysis”) of our audited Consolidated Financial Statements of October 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenue:
We realized a significant decrease in revenues in the 2020 FY compared to the 2019 FY. This is due to the impact of the Pandemic on our business which resulted in widespread and persistent business interruption causing downturn in the markets that we operate resulting in lower demand for our products and services. This in turn impacted on our revenue generation.
The Products Business revenues declined by 12.6% in the 2020 FY over the 2019 FY and the Services Business revenues declined by 27.8% over the said period. Notably, rental revenues generated by the Products Business suffered and declined by 49.4% in the 2020 FY compared to the 2019 FY, where rental revenues were $1,361,151 and $2,688,570, respectively.
A significant part of the revenues recognized in the 2020 FY by both the Products Business and Services Business comprise of orders received prior to the outbreak of the Pandemic. Our order book going into 2021 is significantly weaker than previous fiscal years.
Within our 2020 FY Revenues we have $560,000 recognized for the sale of DAVD systems and approximately $1,000,000 for GEN 2 DAVD R&D developments.
During the 2020 FY, the Company had one customer from whom it generated sales greater than 10% of net revenues. Revenue from this customer was $4,273,702 or 21% of net revenues during the 2020 FY. Total accounts receivable from this customer at October 31, 2020 was $214,747 or 11% of accounts receivable.
Gross Margin:
Gross Profit Margins reported in our financial results may vary according to several factors. These include:
● The percentage of consolidated sales attributed by Marine Technology Business. The Gross Profit Margin yielded by the Marine Technology Business is generally higher than that of the Services Business;
● The percentage of consolidated sales attributed by the Services Business. The Services Business yields a lower gross profit margin on generated sales which are largely based on time and materials contracts (except for its Thermite® products);
● The mix of sales within the Marine Technology Business including:
● Outright Sale versus Rentals;
● Hardware Sale versus Software;
● Mix of Services rendered in the period - Offshore Engineering Services versus Paid Customer Research and Development Projects;
The mix of engineering projects performed (Design prototyping versus manufacturing), may also affect Gross Profit Margins;
● Level of commissions we may give on products due to volume purchase by customer and commissions on sales (both the Services and Marine Technology Businesses work with sales agents).
In the 2020 FY Gross Profit Margins for the Products Operation were 80.0% compared to 80.5% in the 2019 FY. For the Services Operation these were 42.3% in the 2020 FY compared to 49.7% in the 2019 FY. Since there are more variable factors affecting Gross Profit Margins in the Products Business, a table showing a summary break-out of sales generated by the Products Business in the 2020 FY compared to the 2019 FY is set out below:
The significant reduction in our rental revenues is due to lower demand caused by the coronavirus Pandemic as customers are pursuing only essential projects. Most customers are still operating essential travel only policy (restricting therefore the number of projects that can be executed). Furthermore, the increase in outright sales means that there is an increase in commission payable which affects our margins. In the mix of our products sales for 2020 FY we have new products which are now being sold, namely, DAVD HUD and Echoscope® C500 companion systems which are sold to the US Navy. Margins on the DAVD HUD and C500 companion systems are less than our margins yielded on our other products since this pricing of the DAVD HUD takes account of volume versus margins. In the event that we are successful with this product (i.e. it is reliable and delivers the functionality required for diving operations), we believe this could be a volume sale product.
For more detailed information on the composition and disaggregation of our revenues, please refer to Note 12 of our audited Consolidated Financial Statements of October 31, 2020 and 2019 (“Segment Analysis” section).
Research and Development (R&D):
We continue to invest in research and development to further our business goals including maintaining our lead in volumetric imaging sonar sector (Products Segment) and becoming an embedded supplier of mission computers through re-engineering our Thermite® (now Thermite® Octal) via our Services Segment and launching derivatives of the newly designed Thermite® Octal. The key unique selling point for the Thermite® range is that we can customize these for specific customer requirements. Competing companies sell standard off the shelf mission computers and, in general, do not offer customize solutions. This is the business opportunity for our Thermite technology.
In the 2020 FY this category of expenditure increased by 13.8%. The increase was largely incurred in the Marine Engineering Business.
In 2020 FY the Products Business continued to develop the range of its product offerings including its volumetric real time imaging sonar series, the new inertial navigation and positioning system (its new® series), its new sonar software platform. The Products Business has now crystallized many of these developments and as such R&D expenditures in the Products Operations were down by 11.5% in 2020 FY compared to the 2019 FY.
The Services Operations continued to invest in Thermite® Octal with the goal of providing customizable Thermite® Octal solutions for embedding into a broader range of customer programs and solutions and as such R&D expenditures increased by 613.5% in the 2020 FY for this segment compared to 2019 FY.
Changes in this category by Segment are set out immediately below:
We believe that we are at the point where we can now manage down R&D expenditures as we have achieved a number of significant development milestones which have required significant expenditures. We will continue to innovate but we believe our 2021 focus, subject to the Pandemic being under control, will be in the area of developing the market for our newly innovated and launched products (such as our 5D/6D sonar series, our® and our new 4G USE® software), thus redirecting a significant part of our financial resources into sales and marketing.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (SG&A):
Overall, SG&A in the 2020 FY reduced by 8.6% over the 2019 FY due to certain government relief grants relating to the coronavirus Pandemic coupled with reduction in expenditures in this area. Further discussions on SG&A are set out immediately below:
Key Areas of SG&A Expenditure across the Group for the year ended October 31, 2020 compared to the year ended October 31, 2019
We incurred a material increase in the category of Wages and Salaries expenditures. In 2020 FY under the UK Government CJRS we had grants for UK employees retained during the Pandemic period of $257,844. Without this contribution under the CJRS this category of expenditures would be $3,451,905 thus representing an increase of 13.2% over the 2019 FY. Additionally, wages and salaries for employees increased to reflect material annual revisions (committed prior to the Pandemic), increase in costs of attracting new software development resources (for which we are experiencing severe competition); increase in Employers’ Pension Contribution (UK) and US 401K plan totaling $124,622 account for the increase in this category of expenditures.
In the 2020 FY expenditures relating to the category of “Rent” reduced by 34.84% compared to FY 2019 as most premises which we now use for our business operations are owned by the Company with the exception of premises used in Denmark and other small storage facilities that we use.
In 2020 FY expenditures relating to the category of “Marketing” reduced by 46.90% due to reduction in travel and trade show costs as a result of the coronavirus Pandemic which restricted movement. We also suffered losses resulting from non-cancellation fees of approximately $40,000, again due to events being cancelled.
In the 2020 FY we had expenses of $610,780 for stock based compensation (a non-cash item) as compared to $650,409 in the corresponding 2019 FY.
Operating Income:
Operating Income in the 2020 FY compared to the 2019 FY was significantly down due to the impact of the coronavirus on our operations which have been curtailed due to Government restrictions in the countries we operate, reduction in demand for our products resulting from this and increased expenditures relating to our Pandemic response and general increase in costs of our projects due the Pandemic.
Interest Expense:
The reduction in Interest Expense is a reflection of the reduction in the principal amount outstanding under our Senior Secured Debenture with HSBC NA.
Other Income:
In 2020 FY, we received $648,871 under the Paycheck Protection Program scheme (“PPP”) which the US Administration made available as part of the Pandemic response package for companies. All the PPP amounts received have been utilized in accordance with the purpose and objective of the program and these amounts have now been forgiven under the Program.
Additionally, the composition of this category includes UK Value Added Tax rebates from purchases made outside of the European Union by our UK operations and is subject to fluctuations based upon the amount of those purchases.
Net Income before Income taxes for the year ended October 31, 2020 compared to the year ended October 31, 2019
In the 2020 FY, Net Income before taxes was down by 45.5% due to the significant reduction in revenues (by 20% over the previous 2019 FY) which was compounded by “Total Operating Expense’s remaining broadly the same as 2019 FY (a slight reduction of 2.5% in 2020 FY). This resulted in a material decline in Net Income before taxes of 45.5% in the 2020 FY as compared to the 2019 FY.
Net Income after Income taxes for the year ended October 31, 2020 compared to the year ended October 31, 2019
In the 2020 FY Net Income after Income taxes declined by 36.0% due to the reasons explained in the preceding paragraphs.
Comprehensive Income for the year ended October 31, 2020 compared to the year ended October 31, 2019
We conduct a large part of our business in various foreign currencies, for example, the British pound, Danish Kroner, Euros and Australian Dollars.
This category is affected by foreign currency adjustments during the reporting period. In the 2020 FY we had a loss of $185,870 compared to a gain of $93,255 in the 2019 FY. There are generally significant foreign currency fluctuations, particularly between the US dollar (our reporting currency) and the British Pound. Since the UK decided to leave the European Union the British Pound has been falling significantly against the US dollar (see Note 2, paragraph n of Notes to the audited Consolidated Financial Statements for October 31, 2020 and 2019 for fuller information regarding our Foreign Currency Translation policy). See also Item 7 (Management Discussions and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations), where we discuss “Currency Risks”.
Segment Analysis
We are operating in two reportable segments, which are managed separately based upon fundamental differences in their operations. Segment operating income is total segment revenue reduced by operating expenses identifiable with the business segment. Overhead includes general corporate administrative costs.
The Company evaluates performance and allocates resources based upon operating income. The accounting policies of the reportable segments are the same as those described in the summary of accounting policies.
There are inter-segment sales in the table below which have been eliminated from our financial statements. However, for the purpose of segment reporting, these inter-segment sales are included in the table below only.
The following tables summarize certain balance sheet and statement of operations information by reportable segment for the financial years ending October 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Coda Octopus Martech and Coda Octopus Colmek (“Services Segment” or “Marine Engineering Business”) are providing engineering services as sub-contractors mainly to prime defense contractors and Coda Octopus Products operations are comprised primarily of product sales, technology solutions sales, rental of equipment and/or software and associated services (“Products Segment” or “Marine Technology Business”).
The Company’s reportable business segments sell their goods and services in four geographic locations:
● Americas
● Europe
● Australia/Asia
● Middle East/Africa
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At October 31, 2020, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $23,425,622, working capital of $24,301,375 and stockholders’ equity of $34,396,268. For the year then ended, the Company generated cash flow from operations of $4,434,406.
We believe that our current level of cash and cash generation will be sufficient to meet our short and medium-term liquidity needs. At October 31, 2020, we had cash on hand of approximately $15.1 million and both billed and unbilled receivables of approximately $2.9 million. Our current cash balance represents approximately 26 months of Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. The Company continues to critically evaluate the level of expenses that we incur and reduce those expenses as appropriate.
We also have access to a revolving line of credit of $4 million from HSBC NA. This line of credit is available to the Company for short-term working capital purpose. All amounts under the Revolving Line of Credit are payable at the end of each financial year. The facility was renewed for another year and extends to November 2021. To date, the Company has not borrowed any funds under this credit line.
Our main liquidity issues are forward buying components and inventory for our products which encompass specialized electronics, funding our research and development program (“R&D”) which requires significant expenditures in attracting engineering skills and incurring non-recoverable costs for researching, developing and prototyping products and managing our currency exposure.
Operating Activities
Net cash generated from operating activities for the year ended October 31, 2020 was $4,434,406. We recorded net income for the period of $3,343,585. Other items in uses and sources of funds from operations included non-cash charges related to depreciation and amortization, deferred tax asset and stock-based compensation, which collectively totaled $1,487,248. Funding from the Paycheck Protection Program was recognized as income and reduced cash from operating activities by $648,871. Changes in operating assets increased net cash from operating activities by $6,566 and changes in current liabilities increased net cash from operating activities by $245,878.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended October 31, 2020 was $998,335.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided in financing activities for the year ended October 31, 2020 was $162,405 as a result of paying down the debt of the Company and receiving funding from the Paycheck Protection Program.
Secured Promissory Note
On April 28, 2017, Coda Octopus Group, Inc. (the “Company”) together with its wholly owned US subsidiaries, Coda Octopus Products, Inc. and Coda Octopus Colmek, Inc. (together, the “Subsidiaries”), entered into a loan agreement with HSBC Bank NA (the “Lender”) for a loan in the principal amount of $8,000,000 (the “Loan”). The annual interest rate is fixed at 4.56%.
The obligations in connection with the repayment of the Loan are secured by all assets of the Company and its Subsidiaries. In addition, the repayment of the Loan is guaranteed by three of the Company’s overseas subsidiaries.
In March 2018, the Company repaid a significant portion of the outstanding HSBC Debenture. As of October 31, 2020, we had $573,108 outstanding under this Debenture. We anticipate that in accordance with our current repayment schedule the remaining balance will be repaid by the end of the Financial Year 2021.
Foreign Currency
The Company maintains its books in local currency: US Dollars for its US operations, British Pounds for its United Kingdom operations, Danish Kroner for its Danish operations and Australian Dollars for its Australian operations.
For the 2020 FY, 44% of the Company’s operations were conducted inside the United States and 56% outside the United States through its wholly owned subsidiaries. As a result, currency fluctuations may significantly affect the Company’s sales, profitability, balance sheet valuations and financial position when the foreign currencies of its international operations are translated into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes. In addition, we are also subject to currency fluctuation risks with respect to certain foreign currency denominated receivables and payables. Although the Company cannot predict the extent to which currency fluctuations may affect the Company’s business and financial position, there is a risk that such fluctuations will have an adverse impact on the Company’s sales, profits, balance sheet valuations and financial position. Because differing portions of our revenues and costs are denominated in foreign currency, movements in those currencies could impact our margins by, for example, decreasing our foreign revenues when the dollar strengthens and not correspondingly decreasing our expenses. The Company does not currently hedge its currency exposure. In the future, we may engage in hedging transactions to mitigate foreign exchange risk.
The translation of the Company’s UK operations’ British Pound denominated balance sheets and results of operations into US dollars was affected by changes in the average value of the US dollar against the British Pound. The average exchange rate during the 2020 FY was $1.2897 USD to the GBP against $1.275 USD to the GBP during the 2019 period - an increase of the value of the GBP against the USD of 1.2%.
The translation of the Company’s Australian operations’ Australian Dollar denominated balance sheets and results of operations into US dollars was affected by changes in the average value of the US dollar against the Australian Dollar. The average exchange rate during the 2020 FY was $0.6830 against $0.7007 USD to the AUD during the 2019 period - a decline of the value of the AUD against the USD of 2.5%.
The translation of the Company’s Danish operations’ Danish Kroner denominated balance sheets and results of operations into US dollars was affected by changes in the average value of the US dollar against the Danish Krone. The average exchange rate during the 2020 FY was $0.1517 against $0.1505 USD to the DKK during the 2019 period - an increase of the value of the DKK against the USD of 0.8%.
These are the values that have been used in the calculations below.
The impact of these currency fluctuations on the 2020 FY is shown below:
This table shows that the effect of constant exchange rates, versus the actual exchange rate fluctuations, increased net income for the year by $66,742 and increased net assets by $318,454. These amounts are material to our overall financial results.
Since the UK voted to leave the European Union membership in 2016 until recently, the UK’s future trade relationship with the European Union was uncertain. This uncertainty gave rise to significant volatility of the UK Pound against major currencies including the US Dollar causing us to suffer losses due to currency fluctuations. With the future relationship now determined, it is anticipated that the fluctuations between the British Pound and other major currencies including the US Dollar will not be as extreme and we anticipate that losses suffered due to this is likely to reduce.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Inflation
The effect of inflation on the Company’s operating results was not significant during the 2020 period.