Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of the Company should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements of the Company and the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a change in the Company’s fiscal year so that each fiscal year will end on December 31 of the applicable calendar year. This change was not considered a change in fiscal year under the rules of the SEC as the new fiscal year commenced within seven days of the prior fiscal year-end and the new fiscal year commenced with the end of the prior fiscal year. Previously, the Company’s fiscal year generally ended on the Sunday closest to December 31 of each year. The fiscal years discussed in this management’s discussion and analysis are the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 (“2020”) and December 29, 2019 (“2019”). Information concerning the fiscal year ended December 30, 2018 (“2018”) and a comparison of 2019 and 2018 may be found under “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for 2019, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2020.
The consolidated financial statements include the consolidated operations of the Company and its majority-owned subsidiaries, including Piedmont Coca-Cola Bottling Partnership (“Piedmont”), the Company’s only subsidiary that had a significant noncontrolling interest in 2020. The Company and The Coca-Cola Company formed Piedmont in 1993 to distribute and market nonalcoholic beverages primarily in portions of North Carolina and South Carolina. On December 9, 2020, an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of the Company purchased the remaining 22.7% general partnership interest in Piedmont from an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of The Coca-Cola Company, and Piedmont became an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. Piedmont was subsequently merged with and into CCBCC Operations, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, effective December 28, 2020.
The Company manages its business on the basis of three operating segments. Nonalcoholic Beverages represents the vast majority of the Company’s consolidated revenues and income from operations. The additional two operating segments do not meet the quantitative thresholds for separate reporting, either individually or in the aggregate, and therefore have been combined into “All Other.”
COVID-19 Impact on Consumer, Customer, Teammate and Community Safety
The Company continues to diligently monitor and manage through the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of its business, including the impact on its teammates and customers. Our industry and business have been designated by the United States Department of Homeland Security and state and local governments in the communities in which we operate as “essential,” as all our teammates support beverage manufacturing and distribution. The Company has taken the following actions to protect and promote the health and safety of its consumers, customers, teammates and communities, while it continues to manufacture and distribute products:
•We continue to execute our Infectious Disease Response Plan and Incident Management Crisis Response Protocols as the macro environment moves through the Response, Reopen, Recovery and Vaccine Administration and Deployment phases of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•We have established a cross-functional Health & Wellness Task Force to manage and monitor all risk mitigation and safety activities related to COVID-19. In addition, a subset of leaders from the Health & Wellness Task Force conducts case management activities that follow prescribed company and other accepted standards (e.g., Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) and local health authorities).
•We have established a process for the reporting of COVID-19 symptoms, exposures and positive test results of teammates and of incidents in customer accounts that our teammates have serviced. This reporting process enables the Company to follow appropriate quarantine protocols and to communicate to its workforce in a timely and appropriate manner.
•We have increased our communications with teammates through podcasts, meetings, videos, secure, online company app postings and emails about safety protocols, Personal Protective Equipment (“PPE”), such as disposable gloves and masks, state and local guidance and CDC requirements and recommendations.
•We have increased sanitation protocols to sanitize equipment and common areas multiple times per day in order to mitigate risk and exposure situations.
•We have promoted hygiene practices recommended by the CDC, including social distancing requiring six or more feet between teammates where possible, and staggered work start and stop times and lunch breaks.
•We have utilized daily health and wellness monitoring, PPE and other measures to promote workplace safety and remain in compliance with local or state regulatory requirements.
•We have restricted access to our facilities for non-essential visitors, vendors and contractors. For essential visitors, vendors and contractors, we require health and wellness certifications to be completed and the use of PPE as the Company determines appropriate.
•We have restricted business travel to “essential travel” to curtail exposure risk for all teammates.
•We have provided sanitation solution and supplies for our front-line teammates who interact with our products, customers and communities.
•We have implemented work-from-home routines for teammates whose work duties permit it and are utilizing virtual technology to replace many of our in-person meetings and gatherings.
•We have developed comprehensive return to office guidelines to manage a phased, measured approach and to prepare our higher density locations with safety modifications, signage, technology and process changes to promote a safe work environment.
•We have offered our teammates supplemental sick time in years 2020 and 2021 for non-exempt teammates to encourage our teammates to stay home if they or their family members are experiencing COVID-19 symptoms.
•We have modified our healthcare plans for COVID-19-related events to cover the costs of COVID-19 treatment to remove a barrier for our teammates to receive care if they are experiencing symptoms.
•We have worked with state and local elected officials in order to quickly implement newly enacted state and local government regulatory safety requirements and guidelines.
•As the U.S. COVID vaccine program continues to evolve through its phases, we will partner with government and healthcare organizations to provide aid in the awareness of the vaccines and protocols for our teammates, including timing of phase eligibility by states across our territories.
Expected COVID-19 Impact on the Company
COVID-19-related quarantines and other restrictions in 2020 caused a severe downturn in parts of our business, but they also resulted in a significant increase in demand for our products across our take-home channels. In response, our team worked diligently throughout 2020 to meet this elevated demand and optimize our commercial plan as well as our manufacturing and distribution network. Our full-year financial results reflect the strong benefit of price realization, manufacturing efficiencies and cost savings we achieved throughout the year. Some of these cost savings were achieved through lower marketing and sponsorship fees as sports and entertainment venues were closed, lower healthcare costs as teammates deferred elective procedures, reduced travel and entertainment expenses and lower labor costs due to less demand in certain channels of our business such as on-premise and convenience retail. The combination of these factors along with favorable input costs, drove our operating income up more than $100 million to $313 million for the full year.
We are optimistic about top line growth opportunities in 2021 as we execute a robust commercial plan with our brand partners. However, given the uncertainty related to the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its influence on our customers, suppliers, communities and consumers, the Company recognizes 2021 will be a challenging year to plan and operate. As impacted business channels reopen and consumer buying patterns begin to normalize, we expect our operating costs to increase as we adjust our business model to properly grow and service our full portfolio of customers. While we expect to achieve another solid year of financial performance in 2021, the combination of higher operating expenses and expected input cost inflation will likely result in 2021 income from operations below the performance we achieved in 2020.
We do not currently expect the COVID-19 pandemic to materially impact our liquidity position or access to capital. As of December 31, 2020, we had $54.8 million of cash and cash equivalents. In addition, our revolving credit facility matures in 2023 and has an aggregate maximum borrowing capacity of $500 million, which may be increased at the Company’s option to $750 million, subject to obtaining commitments from the lenders and satisfying other conditions specified in the credit agreement. We had no outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2020.
Our supply chain is dependent on aluminum as a key raw material in the production of aluminum cans, which are used to package many of our products. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, consumer demand shifted in 2020 from products sold for immediate consumption through smaller retail stores and on-premise locations to take-home products sold in grocery stores, mass merchandise stores and club stores, and consumers have favored the portability and storability of aluminum cans as they spend more time at home. Additionally, the alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverage industries continue to introduce many new canned product offerings, further increasing the demand for aluminum cans. These factors have impacted the domestic supply of aluminum cans. We have made changes to our typical sourcing model and product offerings to address constraints in the supply of aluminum cans, including sourcing aluminum cans from international manufacturers and limiting our canned product package offerings. We continue to monitor the supply of aluminum cans in the marketplace.
We have not experienced, and do not expect, any material impairments or adjustments to the fair values of our assets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Through the normal course of business, we have assessed the collectability of our receivables, including COVID-19-related collectability risk, and have recorded any expected losses. Further, there were no triggering events identified in 2020 that would indicate an impairment of our long-lived assets, goodwill or other intangible assets. We will continue to monitor the valuation of our assets and the collectability of our receivables and record any adjustments as necessary.
We have assessed COVID-19-related circumstances around work routines, including remote work arrangements, and the impact on our internal controls over financial reporting. We have not identified, and do not anticipate, any material impact to our control procedures that would materially affect our internal controls over financial reporting.
Areas of Emphasis
Key priorities for the Company include commercial execution, revenue management, supply chain optimization and cash flow generation.
Commercial Execution: Our success is dependent on our ability to execute our commercial strategy within our customers’ stores. Our ability to obtain shelf space within stores and remain in-stock across our portfolio of brands and packages in a profitable manner will have a significant impact on our results. We are focused on execution at every step in our supply chain, including raw material and finished products procurement, manufacturing conversion, transportation, warehousing and distribution, to ensure in-store execution can occur. We are investing in tools and technology to enable our teammates to operate more effectively and efficiently with our customers and drive value in our business for the long term.
Revenue Management: Our revenue management strategy focuses on pricing our brands and packages optimally within product categories and channels, creating effective working relationships with our customers and making disciplined fact-based decisions. Pricing decisions are made considering a variety of factors, including brand strength, competitive environment, input costs, the roles certain brands play in our product portfolio and other market conditions.
Supply Chain Optimization: In October 2017, we completed a multi-year series of transactions through which we acquired and exchanged distribution territories and manufacturing plants (the “System Transformation”). We are focused on optimizing our supply chain as we continue to integrate the acquired territories and facilities into our operations. We are in the process of integrating our Memphis, Tennessee manufacturing plant with our West Memphis, Arkansas operations, which is expected to greatly expand our West Memphis production capabilities and to reduce our overall production costs. Additionally, we are planning to open a new, automated distribution center in Whitestown, Indiana by the spring of 2021, which will allow us to consolidate our Anderson, Bloomington, Lafayette, Shelbyville and Speedway, Indiana warehousing and distribution operations into this one new facility. The increased capacity and automation in Whitestown will allow us to optimize our supply chain and to better serve our customers and consumers in Indiana and the surrounding areas. We will continue to look for opportunities to invest in our supply chain to optimize our costs.
Cash Flow Generation: We have several initiatives in place to optimize cash flow, improve profitability and prudently manage capital expenditures, as we continue to prioritize debt repayment and to focus on strengthening our balance sheet.
Results of Operations
The Company’s results of operations for 2020 and 2019 are highlighted in the table below and discussed in the following paragraphs.
Net Sales
Net sales increased $180.8 million, or 3.7%, to $5.01 billion in 2020, as compared to $4.83 billion in 2019. The increase in net sales was primarily attributable to the following (in millions):
Net sales by product category were as follows:
Product category sales volume of physical cases as a percentage of total bottle/can sales volume and the percentage change by product category were as follows:
As the Company introduces new products, it reassesses the category assigned to its products at the SKU level, therefore categorization could differ from previously presented results to conform with current period categorization. Any differences are not material.
The following table summarizes the percentage of the Company’s total bottle/can sales volume to its largest customers, as well as the percentage of the Company’s total net sales that such volume represents:
Cost of Sales
Inputs representing a substantial portion of the Company’s cost of sales include: (i) purchases of finished products, (ii) raw material costs, including aluminum cans, plastic bottles and sweetener, (iii) concentrate costs and (iv) manufacturing costs, including labor, overhead and warehouse costs. In addition, cost of sales includes shipping, handling and fuel costs related to the movement of finished products from manufacturing plants to distribution centers, amortization expense of distribution rights, distribution fees of certain products and marketing credits from brand companies. Raw material costs represent approximately 20% of total cost of sales on an annual basis.
Cost of sales increased $82.4 million, or 2.6%, to $3.24 billion in 2020, as compared to $3.16 billion in 2019. The increase in cost of sales was primarily attributable to the following (in millions):
The Company relies extensively on advertising and sales promotions in the marketing of its products. The Coca-Cola Company and other beverage companies that supply concentrates, syrups and finished products to the Company make substantial marketing and advertising expenditures to develop their brand identities and promote sales in the Company’s territories. Certain of the marketing expenditures by The Coca-Cola Company and other beverage companies are made pursuant to annual arrangements. The Company also benefits from national advertising programs conducted by The Coca-Cola Company and other beverage companies. Total marketing funding support from The Coca-Cola Company and other beverage companies, which includes both direct payments to the Company and payments to customers for marketing programs, was $126.2 million in 2020, as compared to $131.5 million in 2019.
Shipping and handling costs related to the movement of finished products from manufacturing plants to distribution centers are included in cost of sales. Shipping and handling costs related to the movement of finished products from distribution centers to customer locations, including distribution center warehousing costs, are included in SD&A expenses. As a result, the Company’s cost of sales may not be comparable to other peer companies, as some peer companies include all costs related to distribution networks in cost of sales.
SD&A Expenses
SD&A expenses include the following: sales management labor costs, distribution costs resulting from transporting finished products from distribution centers to customer locations, distribution center overhead including depreciation expense, distribution center warehousing costs, delivery vehicles and cold drink equipment, point-of-sale expenses, advertising expenses, cold drink equipment repair costs, amortization of intangible assets and administrative support labor and operating costs.
SD&A expenses decreased $34.2 million, or 2.3%, to $1.46 billion in 2020, as compared to $1.49 billion in 2019. SD&A expenses as a percentage of sales decreased to 29.1% in 2020 from 30.9% in 2019. The decrease in SD&A expenses was primarily attributable to the following (in millions):
Shipping and handling costs included in SD&A expenses were $622.1 million in 2020 and $623.4 million in 2019.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net decreased $9.3 million, or 20.1%, to $36.7 million in 2020, as compared to $46.0 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily a result of lower average debt balances and lower average interest rates.
Other Expense, Net
A summary of other expense, net is as follows:
Each reporting period, the Company adjusts its acquisition related contingent consideration liability related to the distribution territories subject to sub-bottling fees to fair value. The fair value is determined by discounting future expected sub-bottling payments required under the CBA, which extend through the life of the applicable distribution assets, using the Company’s estimated weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”), which is impacted by many factors, including long-term interest rates and future cash flow projections. The life of these distribution assets is generally 40 years. The Company is required to pay the current portion of the sub-bottling fee on a quarterly basis.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 29, 2019, discount rates of 7.5% and 7.1%, respectively, were utilized in the valuation of the Company’s acquisition related contingent consideration liability. The decrease in the fair value of the acquisition related contingent consideration liability in 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily driven by the increase in the discount rate used to calculate fair value and changes in future cash flow projections of the distribution territories subject to sub-bottling fees. The increase in the fair value of the acquisition related contingent consideration liability in 2019 was primarily driven by changes in future cash flow projections of the distribution territories subject to sub-bottling fees and a decrease in the discount rate used to calculate fair value.
Income Tax Expense
The Company’s effective income tax rate, calculated by dividing income tax expense by income before income taxes, was 24.5% for 2020 and 45.8% for 2019. The decrease in the effective income tax rate was primarily driven by improved financial results. The Company’s effective income tax rate, calculated by dividing income tax expense by income before income taxes minus net income attributable to noncontrolling interest, was 25.5% for 2020 and 57.9% for 2019.
Noncontrolling Interest
The Company recorded net income attributable to noncontrolling interest of $9.6 million in 2020 and $7.2 million in 2019 related to the portion of Piedmont owned by The Coca-Cola Company prior to the purchase by an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of the Company of the remaining 22.7% general partnership interest in Piedmont on December 9, 2020.
Other Comprehensive Loss, Net of Tax
The Company had other comprehensive loss, net of tax of $4.1 million in 2020 and $18.0 million in 2019. The improvement was primarily a result of a net decrease in actuarial losses on the Company’s pension and postretirement plans.
Segment Operating Results
The Company evaluates segment reporting in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification Topic 280, Segment Reporting, each reporting period, including evaluating the reporting package reviewed by the Chief Operating Decision Maker (the “CODM”). The Company has concluded the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief Operating Officer and the Chief Financial Officer, as a group, represent the CODM. Asset information is not provided to the CODM. The Company believes three operating segments exist. Nonalcoholic Beverages represents the vast majority of the Company’s consolidated net sales and income from operations. The additional two operating segments do not meet the quantitative thresholds for separate reporting, either individually or in the aggregate, and, therefore, have been combined into “All Other.”
The Company’s segment results are as follows:
(1)The entire net sales elimination represents net sales from the All Other segment to the Nonalcoholic Beverages segment. Sales between these segments are recognized at either fair market value or cost depending on the nature of the transaction.
Comparable and Adjusted Non-GAAP Results
The Company reports its financial results in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). However, management believes certain non-GAAP financial measures provide users of the financial statements with additional, meaningful financial information that should be considered when assessing the Company’s ongoing performance. Management also uses these non-GAAP financial measures in making financial, operating and planning decisions and in evaluating the Company’s performance.
Non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, the Company’s reported results prepared in accordance with GAAP. The Company’s non-GAAP financial information does not represent a comprehensive basis of accounting. The following tables reconcile reported results (GAAP) to comparable and adjusted results (non-GAAP):
Adjusted percentage change versus 2019 2.5 % 4.8 % (2.1) % 57.4 %
Following is an explanation of non-GAAP adjustments:
(1)This non-cash, fair value adjustment of acquisition related contingent consideration fluctuates based on factors such as long-term interest rates and future cash flow projections of the distribution territories subject to sub-bottling fees.
(2)The Company enters into commodity derivative instruments from time to time to hedge some or all of its projected purchases of aluminum, PET resin, diesel fuel and unleaded gasoline in order to mitigate commodity risk. The Company accounts for its commodity derivative instruments on a mark-to-market basis.
(3)Adjustment reflects expenses within the Nonalcoholic Beverages segment related to the impairment and accelerated depreciation of property, plant and equipment as the Company continues to optimize efficiency opportunities across its business.
(4)Adjustment reflects four extra days in 2020, as compared to 2019.
(5)Adjustment reflects additional expense for the prospective change of increasing the capitalization thresholds in 2019 on certain low-cost, short-lived assets.
(6)Adjustment reflects expenses incurred during the applicable period of 2019 related to the System Transformation, which primarily includes information technology system conversions.
Financial Condition
Total assets increased $95.5 million to $3.22 billion on December 31, 2020, as compared to $3.13 billion on December 29, 2019. Net working capital, defined as current assets less current liabilities, was $204.2 million on December 31, 2020, which was a decrease of $3.9 million from December 29, 2019.
Significant changes in net working capital on December 31, 2020 from December 29, 2019 were as follows:
•An increase in cash and cash equivalents of $45.2 million primarily as a result of our strong operating performance.
•A decrease in accounts receivable from The Coca-Cola Company of $13.2 million primarily as a result of the timing of cash receipts.
•An increase in accounts payable, trade of $30.1 million primarily as a result of the timing of cash payments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital Resources
The Company’s sources of capital include cash flows from operations, available credit facilities and the issuance of debt and equity securities. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $54.8 million of cash and cash equivalents. The Company has obtained its long-term debt from public markets, private placements and bank facilities. Management believes the Company has sufficient sources of capital available to refinance its maturing debt, finance its business plan, meet its working capital requirements and maintain an appropriate level of capital spending for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of the consolidated financial statements. At this time, the Company does not expect the COVID-19 pandemic to have a material impact on its liquidity or sources of capital.
The Company’s long-term debt as of December 31, 2020 and December 29, 2019 was as follows:
(1)The Company intends to refinance principal payments due in the next 12 months under the term loan facility, and has the capacity to do so under its revolving credit facility, which is classified as long-term debt, and the Company is not restricted by any subjective acceleration clause within the revolving credit agreement. As such, any amounts due in the next 12 months were classified as noncurrent.
(2)The senior bonds due in 2025 were issued at 99.975% of par.
The Company’s term loan facility matures on June 7, 2021. The original aggregate principal amount borrowed by the Company under the facility was $300 million and repayment of principal amounts outstanding began in 2018. The Company may request additional term loans under the term loan facility, provided the Company’s aggregate borrowings under the facility do not exceed $500 million.
In 2019, the Company entered into a $100 million fixed rate swap maturing June 7, 2021, to hedge a portion of the interest rate risk on the Company’s term loan facility. This interest rate swap is designated as a cash flow hedging instrument and changes in its fair value are not expected to be material to the consolidated balance sheets. Changes in the fair value of this interest rate swap were classified as accumulated other comprehensive loss on the consolidated balance sheets and included in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
As discussed below under “Cash Flows From Financing Activities,” in 2019, the Company sold $100 million aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured notes due in 2026 to MetLife Investment Advisors, LLC (“MetLife”) and certain of its affiliates. The Company may request that MetLife consider the purchase of additional senior unsecured notes of the Company under the agreement in an aggregate principal amount of up to $200 million.
The Company’s revolving credit facility matures on June 8, 2023 and has an aggregate maximum borrowing capacity of $500 million, which may be increased at the Company’s option to $750 million, subject to obtaining commitments from the lenders and satisfying other conditions specified in the credit agreement. The Company currently believes all banks participating in the revolving credit facility have the ability to and will meet any funding requests from the Company. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no borrowings outstanding under the revolving credit facility, and therefore had $500 million borrowing capacity available under the revolving credit facility.
The indenture under which the Company’s senior bonds were issued does not include financial covenants but does limit the incurrence of certain liens and encumbrances as well as indebtedness by the Company’s subsidiaries in excess of certain amounts. The agreements under which the Company’s nonpublic debt was issued include two financial covenants: a consolidated cash flow/fixed charges ratio and a consolidated funded indebtedness/cash flow ratio, each as defined in the respective agreement. The Company was in compliance with these covenants as of December 31, 2020. These covenants do not currently, and the Company does not anticipate they will, restrict its liquidity or capital resources.
All outstanding long-term debt has been issued by the Company and none has been issued by any of its subsidiaries. There are no guarantees of the Company’s debt.
The Company’s Board of Directors has declared, and the Company has paid, $0.25 in dividends on both the Common Stock and Class B Common Stock each quarter since 1994. The amount and frequency of future dividends will be determined by the Company’s Board of Directors in light of the earnings and financial condition of the Company at such time, and no assurance can be given that dividends will be declared or paid in the future.
The Company’s credit ratings are reviewed periodically by certain nationally recognized rating agencies. Changes in the Company’s operating results or financial position could result in changes in the Company’s credit ratings. Lower credit ratings could result in higher borrowing costs for the Company or reduced access to capital markets, which could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s operating results or financial position. During 2020, Standard & Poor’s reaffirmed the Company’s BBB rating and revised
the Company’s rating outlook to stable from negative. Moody’s rating outlook for the Company is stable. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s credit ratings were as follows:
The Company is subject to interest rate risk on its variable rate debt, including its revolving credit facility and term loan facility. Assuming no changes in the Company’s capital structure, if market interest rates average 1% more over the next 12 months than the interest rates as of December 31, 2020, interest expense for the next 12 months would increase by approximately $1.2 million. See “