ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report. In the following discussion, unless otherwise noted, references to increases or decreases in average balances in items of income and expense for a particular period and balances at a particular date refer to the comparison with corresponding amounts for the period or date for the previous year.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have established certain accounting policies in preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements that are in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Our significant accounting policies are presented in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report. Certain of these policies require the use of judgments, estimates and economic assumptions which may prove inaccurate or are subject to variation that may significantly affect our reported results of operations and financial position for the periods presented or in future periods. Management believes that the judgments, estimates and economic assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements are appropriate given the factual circumstances at the time. We consider the following policies to be most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Allowance for Credit Losses
In accordance with ASU 2016-13, the Company adopted ASC 326 on January 1, 2020. The allowance for credit losses under ASC 326 is an accounting estimate of expected losses over the contractual life of assets carried at amortized cost within the Company’s loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. The ASU requires a financial asset (or group of financial assets) measured at amortized cost to be presented at the net amount expected to be collected. The allowance for credit losses is a valuation account that is deducted from the amortized cost basis of the financial asset to present the net carrying value at the amount expected to be collected on the financial asset.
The quantitative allowance is calculated using a DCF approach with a probability of default methodology. The probability of default is an assumption derived from regression models which determine the relationship between historical defaults and certain economic variables. The Company determines a reasonable and supportable forecast and applies that forecast to the model to determine defaults over the forecast period. Following the forecast period, the economic variables used to calculate the probability of default revert to a historical average. Other assumptions relevant to the discounted cash flow model to derive the quantitative allowance include the loss given default, which is the estimate of loss for a defaulted loan, and the discount rate applied to future cash flows. The model calculates the net present value of each loan using both the contractual and expected cash flows, respectively. The ACL is determined at the end of each quarter and is based on all relevant information and expectations at that time in accordance with GAAP and the ACL guidance. Future changes to the estimate are likely as new information becomes available regarding economic conditions, loan composition and identifiable risk factors. While quantifiable estimates are generated, management judgements regarding credit risks and the inherent imprecision with the models utilized support the overall ACL.
In addition to the quantitative portion of the allowance for credit losses, the Company also considers the effects of the following qualitative factors in its calculation of expected losses in the loan portfolio:
•Economic and business conditions;
•Concentration of credit;
•Lending management and staff;
•Lending policies and procedures;
•Loss and recovery trends;
•Nature and volume of the portfolio;
•Trends in problem loans, loan delinquencies and nonaccrual loans;
•Quality of internal loan review; and
•Other external factors such as the effect of economic stimulus and loan modification programs.
These qualitative factors are based in quantitative factors but also include a high degree of subjectivity and changes in any of the factors could have a significant impact on our calculation of the allowance.
Loans for which repayment is expected to be provided substantially through the operation or sale of collateral are considered collateral-dependent. The allowance for credit losses for collateral-dependent loans is measured on the basis of the fair value of the collateral when foreclosure is probable.
Our allowance policy and the judgments, estimates and economic assumptions involved are described in greater detail in the “Allowance for Credit Losses and Unfunded Commitments and Letters of Credit” section of this discussion and in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report.
Business Combinations
The Company applies the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations. Under the acquisition method, the acquiring entity in a business combination recognizes the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their acquisition date fair values. Management utilizes prevailing valuation techniques appropriate for the asset or liability being measured in determining these fair values. Any excess of the purchase price over amounts allocated to assets acquired, including identifiable intangible assets, and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Where amounts allocated to assets acquired and liabilities assumed is greater than the purchase price, a bargain purchase gain is recognized. Acquisition-related costs are expensed as incurred.
Valuation and Recoverability of Goodwill
Goodwill represented $765.8 million of our $16.58 billion in total assets as of December 31, 2020. The Company has a single reporting unit. We review goodwill for impairment annually as of July 31st, and also test for impairment between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our reporting unit below its carrying amount. Such events and circumstances may include among others: a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the general business climate; significant decline in our stock price and market capitalization; unanticipated competition; the testing for recoverability of a significant asset group within the reporting unit; and an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. Any adverse change in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of goodwill and could have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Under the Intangibles-Goodwill and Other topic of the FASB ASC, goodwill is not amortized but rather is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level on at least an annual basis. ASU 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350) - Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, was issued in January 2017 and was effective January 1, 2020, reduced the cost and complexity of goodwill impairment testing. This ASU eliminated the second step of the goodwill impairment test. The test for impairment requires the Company to compare the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, the difference is the amount of impairment and goodwill is written down to the fair value of the reporting unit. Prior to the issuance of ASU 2017-04, the second step of the impairment process was to compare the implied fair value of goodwill with its carrying value. Prior to completing the impairment test, however, the Company may assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If such an assessment indicates the fair value of the reporting unit is more likely than not greater than its carrying value, then the impairment test need not be completed.
The accounting estimates related to our goodwill require us to make considerable assumptions about fair value. Our assumptions regarding fair value require significant judgment about economic and industry factors and the growth and earnings prospects of the Bank. Changes in these judgments, either individually or collectively, may have a significant effect on the estimated fair value.
Based on the results of the annual goodwill impairment test, we determined that no goodwill impairment charges were required as our single reporting unit’s fair value exceeded its carrying amount. As of December 31, 2020, we determined there were no events or circumstances which would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our reporting unit below its carrying amount.
Please refer to Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report for further discussion.
2020 Financial Summary
Income Statement
•Consolidated net income for 2020 was $154.2 million, or $2.17 per diluted common share, compared with net income of $194.5 million, or $2.68 per diluted common share in 2019.
◦Net interest income for 2020 increased 1% to $500.1 million compared to $493.4 million for 2019. Interest income was $517.8 million in 2020, compared to $530.0 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower income from loans due to the lower rate environment. Interest expense for 2020 decreased $18.8 million to $17.7 million compared to $36.5 million in 2019, due to lower rates on interest-bearing deposits and FHLB advances as well as lower average FHLB balances.
◦Provision for credit loss on loans under the CECL methodology was $77.7 million in 2020, compared to $3.5 million in 2019 under the previous ALLL methodology. The increase in provision expense for 2020 reflects negative economic trends during 2020 as a result of COVID-19.
◦Noninterest income was $104.5 million for 2020, an increase from $97.2 million for 2019. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to investment securities gains and loan revenue partially offset by decreases in other noninterest expense and deposit account and treasury management fees.
◦Noninterest expense for 2020 decreased $11.0 million to $334.5 million compared to $345.5 million in 2019. The decrease was due to lower legal and professional fees and compensation and employee benefits partially offset by an increase in other noninterest expenses.
Balance Sheet
•Total assets at December 31, 2020 were $16.58 billion, up 18%, or $2.51 billion from $14.08 billion at the end of 2019.
•The Company is well-capitalized with a total risk-based capital ratio of 14.45% at December 31, 2020.
◦Cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 were $653.8 million, up 164% from $247.7 million at December 31, 2019 due to an increase in interest-earnings deposits with banks.
◦Investment securities at December 31, 2020 were $5.21 billion, up 39% from $3.75 billion at December 31, 2019.
◦Loans were $9.43 billion, an increase of $684.2 million from $8.74 billion at the end of 2019.
◦The ACL increased to $149.1 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $84.0 million at December 31, 2019 due to negative economic trends during 2020 as a result of COVID-19. The Company’s allowance was 1.58% of total loans, compared with 0.96% at the end of 2019.
◦Nonperforming assets totaled $35.4 million at December 31, 2020, up from $33.6 million at December 31, 2019. Nonperforming assets to year end assets decreased to 0.21% at December 31, 2020 compared to 0.24% at December 31, 2019.
◦Deposits were $13.87 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $3.19 billion compared to $10.68 billion at December 31, 2019.
◦FHLB advances were $7.4 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $946.1 million compared to December 31, 2019.
COVID-19 Update
We continue to manage our response to the pandemic by adapting to the recommendations of healthcare officials in order to provide a safe environment for continued operations. Our multi-layered approach incorporates remote work arrangements where possible as well as social distancing, enhanced cleaning practices, face coverings and contact tracing of confirmed COVID-19 cases. Updates regarding new guidance from local and national healthcare officials, information on vaccines and information on access to free support resources available through our benefits program have been provided through regular communication with employees. The measures we have implemented have proved effective in mitigating the spread of the virus in our organization and have allowed for the continued safe operation of our branches and facilities.
Flexibility and adaptability have been key factors in supporting our employees throughout the pandemic. As cases in communities climbed during the fall and local governments responded with additional guidelines, we transitioned our workforce back to remote arrangements. We continue to employ the use of virtual collaboration tools, video conferencing and regular communication to facilitate work and support our Do RIGHT culture. A variety of flexible work options including shift changes, temporary remote work assignments and other accommodations allowed employees with school-aged children to better manage the challenges of distance learning. Opportunities for professional learning and development inside our organization have also transitioned to virtual environments, providing uninterrupted access to leadership training programs and ongoing development activities for employees working remotely as well as those working on location.
Support for small businesses and those impacted in our communities continues to grow through our Pass It On Project. Businesses in the program perform a service for a member of the community who has been impacted by the pandemic and Columbia Bank pays the bill. More than 350 businesses have participated in the program, putting more than $600,000 to work in our communities to serve those most in need of support. Services provided range from cataract surgery and free lunch kits for students to automotive repairs and veterinary services. Stories of the businesses involved in the project can be found online at passitonproject.com.
The COVID-19 pandemic created economic disruptions that slowed business activity, weakened consumer confidence and increased unemployment in our markets, resulting in financial difficulties for some of our borrowers, particularly who work or operate businesses in industries most affected by the pandemic, such as hotels and restaurants. In response, we have worked with borrowers through deferral programs and other relief actions, including our participation in the PPP. Before the SBA began accepting forgiveness applications for PPP loans, we had $970.8 million of PPP loans outstanding to 4,447 commercial businesses.
Businesses continued to submit applications for forgiveness of their first draw PPP loans throughout the fourth quarter. As of December 31, 2020, we had received 2,400 forgiveness applications and approved/submitted over 2,200 to the SBA for more than $400 million. Applications for new requests and processing of existing requests for loans at or below $150,000 was paused in anticipation of the SBA’s proposed streamlined forgiveness process. Processing of forgiveness applications in this category will resume when the new streamlined process goes into practice.
For additional information on the impact and potential impact of COVID-19 on our business, financial condition, liquidity, capital and results of operations, see Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this report.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Summary
A summary of the Company’s results of operations for each of the last three years ended December 31 follows:
__________
(1)Percentage changes greater than +/- 1000% are considered not meaningful and are presented as “N/M.”
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the difference between interest income and interest expense. Net interest income on a fully taxable-equivalent basis expressed as a percentage of average total interest-earning assets is referred to as the net interest margin, which represents the average net effective yield on interest-earning assets.
The following table sets forth the average balances of all major categories of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the total dollar amounts of interest income on interest-earning assets and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, the average yield earned on interest-earning assets and average cost of interest-bearing liabilities by category and in total, net interest income, net interest spread, net interest margin and the ratio of average interest-earning assets to interest-bearing liabilities:
Net Interest Income Summary
__________
(1)Nonaccrual loans have been included in the table as loans carrying a zero yield. Amortized net deferred loan fees and unearned net discounts on acquired loans were included in the interest income calculations. The amortization of net deferred loan fees was $21.6 million, $8.4 million and $9.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The incremental accretion of net unearned discounts on acquired loans was $6.2 million, $9.1 million and $12.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
(2)Yields are shown on a fully taxable equivalent basis. The tax equivalent yield adjustment to interest earned on loans was $4.9 million, $5.5 million and $4.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The tax equivalent yield adjustment to interest earned on tax exempt securities was $2.5 million, $2.9 million and $3.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Net interest income is impacted by the volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate), interest rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume) and the mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The following table shows changes in net interest income on a fully taxable-equivalent basis between 2020 and 2019, as well as between 2019 and 2018 broken down between volume and rate. Changes attributable to the combined effect of volume and interest rates have been allocated proportionately to the changes due to volume and the changes due to interest rates:
Changes in Net Interest Income
__________
(1) The change in interest not due solely to volume or rate has been allocated in proportion to the absolute dollar amount of the change in each.
Comparison of 2020 with 2019
Taxable-equivalent net interest income totaled $507.6 million in 2020, compared with $501.8 million for 2019. The increase in net interest income during 2020 resulted from the increase in the size of the loan and investment securities portfolios as well as an increase in the average balance of interest-earning deposits with banks. The loan portfolio benefited from the origination of PPP loans during the year as a result of COVID-19. Also contributing to the increase in net interest income was a decrease in interest expense on deposits and FHLB advances due to the lower rate environment and lower average FHLB advance balances. These increases in net interest income were partially offset by lower interest rates paid on loans, securities and interest-earning deposits with banks due to the lower rate environment.
The Company’s net interest margin (tax equivalent) decreased from 4.24% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 3.65% for the current year. The decrease in the net interest margin (tax equivalent) was driven by higher average interest-earning deposits with banks at an average rate of 13 basis points as well as lower rates on the loan and securities portfolios. In addition, lower rates on deposits and FHLB advances also partially offset the decrease to the net interest margin due to the lower rate environment. The Company’s operating net interest margin (tax equivalent) decreased from 4.23% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 3.64% for the current year for the same reasons for the decline in the net interest margin discussed above.
Comparison of 2019 with 2018
Taxable-equivalent net interest income totaled $501.8 million in 2019, compared with $486.7 million for 2018. The increase in net interest income during 2019 resulted from the increase in the size of the loan and securities portfolios as well as the increase in yield on the loan portfolio. The increase in net interest income was partially offset by higher interest rates paid on interest-bearing deposits combined with higher balances of interest-bearing liabilities.
The Company’s net interest margin (tax equivalent) decreased from 4.33% for the year ended December 31, 2018 to 4.24% for the year ended December 31, 2019 due primarily to higher rates paid on interest-bearing deposits and FHLB advances and $3.5 million less accretion income. The Company’s operating net interest margin (tax equivalent) decreased from 4.30% for the year ended December 31, 2018 to 4.23% for 2019 due to higher volumes and higher rates paid on deposits and FHLB advances.
For a discussion of the methodologies used by management in recording interest income on loans, please see Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report.
Provision for Credit Losses
Effective January 1, 2020, Columbia adopted ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments and all related amendments. The ACL under ASU 2016-13 utilizes the CECL methodology which estimates the expected loan losses over the contractual life of the loans in the loan portfolio of the Bank. Prior to January 1, 2020, the ALLL incurred loss methodology was used which estimated the amount of loan losses that had been incurred at the balance sheet date. The day 1 adoption of ASU 2016-13 and related amendments resulted in an increase of $1.6 million in our ACL, an increase of $1.6 million to our allowance for unfunded loan commitments and letters of credit and a net-of-tax cumulative-effect adjustment of $2.5 million to decrease the beginning balance of retained earnings.
The Company accounts for the credit risk associated with lending activities through its ACL and Provision for credit losses. The provision is the expense recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Income to adjust the allowance to the level deemed appropriate by management, as determined through its application of the Company’s allowance methodology procedures. For discussion of the methodology used by management in determining the adequacy of the ACL, see the “Allowance for Credit Losses and Unfunded Commitments and Letters of Credit” and “Critical Accounting Policies” sections of this discussion.
The Company recorded provision expense of $77.7 million for credit losses during 2020 under the CECL methodology, compared to provision expense of $3.5 million and $14.8 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively, under the previous ALLL methodology. The increase in provision expense for 2020 was principally the result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the downturn in national and global economies as well as increased unemployment rates. In addition, the provision recorded in 2020 included management’s ongoing assessment of the credit quality of the Company’s loan portfolio. Factors affecting the provision include net charge-offs, credit quality migration and size and composition of the loan portfolio and changes in the economic environment during the period. See “Allowance for Credit Losses and Unfunded Commitments and Letters of Credit” section of this discussion for further information on factors considered by the Company in assessing the credit quality of the loan portfolio and establishing the ACL.
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, net loan charge-offs amounted to $14.2 million, $2.9 million, and $7.0 million, respectively.
Noninterest Income
The following table presents the significant components of noninterest income and the related dollar and percentage change from period to period:
__________
(1)Percentage changes greater than +/- 1000% are considered not meaningful and are presented as “N/M.”
Comparison of 2020 with 2019
The $7.3 million increase in noninterest income was due to increases in investment securities gains and loan revenue partially offset by decreases in other noninterest income and deposit account and treasury management fees. The increase in investment securities gains was due to the sale of 17,360 shares of Visa Class B restricted stock during the year resulting in a gain of $3.0 million, which resulted in an observable market price. As a result, the Company wrote up its remaining 77,683 Visa Class B restricted shares to fair value resulting in a gain of $13.4 million, for a total gain of $16.4 million. Based on the existing transfer restriction and uncertainty of Visa’s litigation, the shares were previously carried at a zero-cost basis. The increase in loan revenue was due to an increase of $7.6 million of realized gains from the sale of mortgage loans into the secondary market as a result of higher loan volume. In addition, the increase in the fair value of the mortgage loan pipeline of $1.1 million was the result of us beginning to sell a portion of our mortgage loans into the secondary market utilizing the mandatory delivery method during 2020. Also contributing to the rise in loan revenue was $2.0 million of additional income from interest rate swap activity. These increases in noninterest income were partially offset by an $8.8 million decrease in other noninterest income due to the gains realized from the sale of three real estate parcels and BOLI benefits both recognized in 2019. Deposit account and treasury management fees decreased $8.7 million due to lower rates on reciprocal money market deposit accounts and lower overdraft fee income from a decline in the number of transactions amidst the pandemic as well as clients generally carrying higher cash balances in their deposit accounts.
Comparison of 2019 with 2018
The $8.9 million increase in noninterest income was due to an increase in other noninterest income and higher investment securities gains, partially offset by a decline in card revenue. The increase in other noninterest income was due to gains of $6.6 million recorded in 2019 as a result of the sale of three real estate parcels as well as $3.1 million in BOLI benefits. There were no similar benefits realized in 2018. The decrease in card revenue was due to the Company being subject to the interchange fee cap imposed under the Dodd-Frank Act beginning on July 1, 2018.
Noninterest Expense
The following table presents the significant components of noninterest expense and the related dollar and percentage changes from period to period:
The following table shows the impact of the acquisition-related expenses for the periods indicated to the various components of noninterest expense:
__________
(1)The Company completed the Pacific Continental acquisition on November 1, 2017.
Comparison of 2020 with 2019
Noninterest expense was $334.5 million in 2020, a decrease of $11.0 million over 2019. The decrease in noninterest expense was due to lower legal and professional service fees and compensation and employee benefits expense partially offset by an increase in other noninterest expense. The decrease in legal and professional fees was due to lower digital project expenses and lower reciprocal money market fees as a result of lower contractual rates compared to 2019. The decrease in compensation and employee benefits expense was principally due to labor costs related to the origination of PPP loans in 2020. These labor costs are capitalized and amortized as a reduction to interest income over the life of the loan. This decrease in compensation and employee benefits expense was partially offset by increases in salaries and incentives and commissions expense. The increase in other noninterest expense was due to a higher provision for unfunded loan commitments partially offset by a decrease in travel and entertainment expenses both as a result of COVID-19.
Comparison of 2019 with 2018
Noninterest expense was $345.5 million in 2019, an increase of $5.0 million over 2018. Included in noninterest expense were $8.7 million of acquisition-related expenses in 2018. After removing the effect of acquisition-related expenses, noninterest expense increased $13.7 million due to higher compensation and employee benefits and legal and professional service fees. These increases were partially offset by decreases in other noninterest and OREO expenses as well as decreases in regulatory premiums and amortization of intangibles. The increases in compensation and employee benefits were driven by increases in salaries, group insurance and other compensation and incentive expenses. The increase in legal and professional service fees was due to an increase in professional fees related to our digital initiative strategy. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in OREO expenses which was driven by a gain on the sale of OREO in 2019 compared to a loss on the sale of OREO in 2018. Other noninterest expenses decreased due to a recapture of the provision for unfunded loan commitments recognized in 2019 compared to a provision for unfunded loan commitments reported in 2018. The reduction in regulatory premiums was due to the utilization of a portion of our FDIC Small Bank Assessment Credit during the last half of 2019 and the decrease in the amortization of intangibles was a result of the amortization of our CDI asset.
The provision (recapture) for unfunded loan commitments for the periods indicated are as follows:
Income Tax
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recorded income tax provisions of $38.1 million, $47.2 million and $39.0 million, respectively. The effective tax rate was 20% in 2020 and 2019 and 18% in 2018. Our effective tax rates were less than the 21% federal statutory rates primarily due to tax-exempt municipal investment securities income, tax-exempt earnings from BOLI and income from loans with favorable tax attributes. For additional information, see Note 23 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report.
Financial Condition
Our total assets increased 18% to $16.58 billion at December 31, 2020 from $14.08 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase in total assets was driven by increases in debt securities available for sale, loans and cash and cash equivalents. Our available for sale debt securities portfolio increased $1.46 billion as a result of purchases of securities throughout the year to utilize our excess liquidity. The loan portfolio, net of the allowance for credit losses, increased $619.0 million as new loan production, principally due to PPP loans, outpaced loan payoffs. The allowance for credit losses increased $65.2 million, or 78% due to the negative economic trends during the year as a result of COVID-19. Cash and cash equivalents increased $406.1 million due to an increase in interest-earning deposits with banks.
Liabilities increased $2.32 billion, or 19% to $14.24 billion due to increases in total deposits partially offset by decreases in FHLB advances. Total deposits increased $3.19 billion primarily as a result of COVID-19 related events such as the PPP loan recipients depositing their funds into their deposit accounts at the Bank, stimulus funds being distributed by the federal government and reduced expenditures by consumers and business clients. Partially offsetting the increase in deposits was a decrease of $946.1 million in FHLB advances to $7.4 million. The increase in liquidity from the rise in deposits was used to pay down our FHLB advances. Total shareholders’ equity increased $187.6 million to $2.35 billion. This increase was a combination of increases in net income less cash dividends paid to common shareholders and unrealized gains on debt securities available for sale partially offset by treasury shares purchased during the year.
Investment Portfolio
We invest in securities to generate revenue for the Company, to manage liquidity while minimizing interest rate risk and to provide collateral for certain public deposits and short-term borrowings. The amortized cost amounts represent the Company’s original cost for the investments, adjusted for accumulated amortization or accretion of any yield adjustments related to the security. The estimated fair values are the amounts we believe the securities could be sold for as of the dates indicated. At December 31, 2020, gross unrealized losses in our securities portfolio were $7.3 million related to 116 separate available for sale securities. Based on past experience with these types of securities and our own financial performance, we do not currently intend to sell any securities in a loss position nor does available evidence suggest it is more likely than not that management will be required to sell any securities currently in a loss position before the recovery of the amortized cost basis. We review these investments for credit losses on an ongoing basis.
Our investment portfolio increased $1.46 billion from the prior year due to purchases of $2.12 billion and $169.6 million in net unrealized gains partially offset by maturities, repayments and sales of $797.5 million and premium amortization of $26.7 million.
At December 31, 2020, U.S. government agency and government-sponsored enterprise mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations comprised 73% of our investment portfolio, other asset-backed securities were 7%, state and municipal securities were 14% and government agency and government-sponsored enterprise securities were 6%. Our entire investment portfolio is categorized as available for sale and carried on our balance sheet at fair value. The average duration of our investment portfolio was approximately 4 years and 9 months at December 31, 2020. This duration takes into account calls, where appropriate, and consensus prepayment speeds.
The following table presents the contractual maturities and weighted average yield of our investment portfolio:
__________
(1)The maturities reported for mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, other asset-backed securities and government agency and government-sponsored enterprise securities are based on contractual maturities and principal amortization.
(2)Yields on fully taxable equivalent basis.
For further information on our investment portfolio, see Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report.
FHLB Stock
The FHLB stock is composed of two sub-classes: membership stock and activity based stock. Membership stock is stock we are required to purchase and hold as a condition of membership in the FHLB. The Company’s membership stock purchase requirement is measured as a percentage of our year end assets, subject to a $10 million cap. Activity based stock is stock we are required to purchase and hold in order to obtain an advance or participate in FHLB mortgage programs. The Company’s activity based stock purchase requirement is measured as a percentage of our advance proceeds. At December 31, 2020, the Company held $10.3 million of FHLB Class B stock, $10.0 million of which was membership stock and the remaining $280 thousand of which was activity based. The FHLB stock is issued, transferred, redeemed, and repurchased at a par value of $100.
Loan Portfolio
The Bank is a full service commercial bank, which originates a wide variety of loans, and focuses its lending efforts on originating commercial business and commercial real estate loans. The following table sets forth our loan portfolio by type of loan for the dates indicated:
At December 31, 2020, total loans, gross of the ACL, were $9.43 billion compared with $8.74 billion in the prior year, an increase of $684.2 million, or 7.8% from the previous year. Total loans, net of the ACL, represented 56% and 62% of total assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This increase in total loans includes $651.6 million of PPP loans, net of $9.9 million in net deferred loan fees at December 31, 2020. The PPP loans were originated to provide financial support to small- and medium-size businesses to cover payroll and certain other expenses during the COVID-19 pandemic. To further assist our borrowers, the Company also offered loan deferrals to support borrowers during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table provides additional detail related to the Company’s COVID-19 deferrals for the six-months ended December 31, 2020:
__________
1) Ended includes re-deferrals that have ended.
2) Balance of deferrals are gross of unearned income.
Commercial Real Estate Loans: Commercial real estate loans are secured by properties located within our primary market areas and typically, have loan-to-value ratios of 80% or lower at origination. Our underwriting standards for commercial and multifamily residential loans generally require that the loan-to-value ratio for these loans not exceed 75% of appraised value, cost, or discounted cash flow value, as appropriate, and that commercial properties maintain debt coverage ratios (net operating income divided by annual debt servicing) of 1.2 or better. However, underwriting standards can be influenced by competition and other factors. We endeavor to maintain the highest practical underwriting standards while balancing the need to remain competitive in our lending practices.
Commercial Business Loans: We are committed to providing competitive commercial lending in our primary market area. Management expects a continued focus within its commercial lending products and an emphasis, in particular, on relationship banking with businesses and business owners.
Agriculture Loans: Agricultural lending includes agricultural real estate and production loans and lines of credit within our primary market area. We are committed to our Pacific Northwest communities, offering seasonal and longer-term loans and operating lines of credit by lending officers with expertise in the agricultural communities we serve. Typical loan-to-value ratios on term loans can range from 55% to 80% depending upon the type of loan. Operating lines of credit require the borrower to provide a 20% to 25% equity investment. The debt coverage ratio is generally 1.25:1 or better on all term loans.
Construction Loans: We originate a variety of real estate construction loans. Underwriting guidelines for these loans vary by loan type but include loan-to-value limits, term limits and loan advance limits, as applicable. Our underwriting guidelines for commercial and multifamily residential real estate construction loans generally require that the loan-to-value ratio not exceed 75% and stabilized debt coverage ratios (net operating income divided by annual debt service) of 1.2 or better. As noted above, underwriting standards can be influenced by competition and other factors. However, we endeavor to maintain the highest practical underwriting standards while balancing the need to remain competitive in our lending practices.
One-to-four Family Residential Real Estate Loans: One-to-four family residential loans, including home equity loans and lines of credit, are secured by properties located within our primary market areas and, typically, have loan-to-value ratios of 80% or lower at origination.
Other Consumer Loans: Consumer loans include automobile loans, boat and recreational vehicle financing, and other miscellaneous personal loans.
Foreign Loans: The Company has no material foreign activities. Substantially all of the Company’s loans and unfunded commitments are geographically concentrated in its service areas within the states of Washington, Oregon and Idaho.
Net unearned income: The following table provides additional details related to the net discount of acquired and purchased loans, by acquisition for the periods indicated:
For additional information on our loan portfolio, including amounts pledged as collateral on borrowings, see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report.
Maturities and Sensitivities of Loans to Changes in Interest Rates
The following table presents the maturity distribution of our commercial and real estate construction loan portfolios and the sensitivity of these loans due after one year to changes in interest rates as of December 31, 2020:
Credit Quality Indicators
The extension of credit in the form of loans or other credit products to consumer and commercial clients is one of our principal business activities. Our policies and applicable laws and regulations require risk analysis as well as ongoing portfolio and credit management. We manage our credit risk through lending limit constraints, credit review, approval policies and extensive, ongoing internal monitoring. We also manage credit risk through diversification of the loan portfolio by type of loan, type of industry and type of borrower and by limiting the aggregation of debt to a single borrower.
We evaluate the credit quality of our loan portfolio using regulatory risk ratings, which are based on relevant information about the borrower’s financial condition, including current financial condition, historical payment experience, credit documentation and current economic trends. Risk ratings are reviewed and updated whenever appropriate, with more periodic reviews as the risk and dollar value of the loss on the loan increases. All loans risk rated special mention or worse with amortized costs exceeding $100,000 are reviewed at least quarterly with more frequent review for specific loans.
Pass rated loans are generally considered to have sufficient sources of repayment in order to repay the loan in full in accordance with all terms and conditions. Special mention rated loans have potential weaknesses that, if left uncorrected, may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects for the asset or in the Company’s credit position at some future date. Loans with a risk rating of substandard or worse are reviewed to assess the ability of our borrowers to service all interest and principal obligations and, as a result, the risk rating or accrual status may be adjusted accordingly. Loans risk rated as substandard reflect loans where a loss is possible if loan weaknesses are not corrected. Doubtful rated loans have a high probability of loss; however, the amount of loss has not yet been determined. Loss rated loans are considered uncollectible and when identified, are charged-off.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets consist of: (i) nonaccrual loans, which generally are loans placed on a nonaccrual basis when the loan becomes past due 90 days or when there are otherwise serious doubts about the collectability of principal or interest within the existing terms of the loan, (ii) OREO, and (iii) OPPO, if applicable. Nonperforming assets totaled $35.4 million, or 0.21% of year end assets at December 31, 2020, compared to $33.6 million, or 0.24% of year end assets at December 31, 2019.
The following table sets forth information with respect to our nonaccrual loans, total nonperforming assets, accruing loans past-due 90 days or more and potential problem loans:
At December 31, 2020, nonperforming loans decreased to 0.37% of year end loans, down from 0.38% of year end loans at December 31, 2019. The largest decrease in nonperforming loans was in commercial business loans, which decreased from $20.9 million, or 63% of nonperforming loans at December 31, 2019 to $13.2 million, or 38% of nonperforming loans at year end 2020.
The following table summarizes activity in nonperforming loans for the periods indicated:
When a loan secured by real estate migrates to nonperforming and it does not have a market valuation less than one year old, the Company secures an updated market valuation by a third-party appraiser that is reviewed by the Company’s on-staff appraiser. Subsequently, the asset will be appraised annually by a third-party appraiser or the Company’s on-staff appraiser. The evaluation may occur more frequently if management determines that there has been increased market deterioration within a specific geographical location. Upon receipt and verification of the market valuation, the Company will record the loan at the lower of cost or market (less costs to sell) by recording a charge-off to the ACL or by designating a specific reserve in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.
For additional information on our nonperforming loans, see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report.
Other Real Estate and Other Personal Property Owned: As of December 31, 2020, there was $553 thousand in OREO and OPPO, which was primarily comprised of property from foreclosed real estate loans, compared to $552 thousand at December 31, 2019. Properties acquired by foreclosure or deed in lieu of foreclosure are transferred to OREO and are recorded at fair value less estimated costs to sell, at the date of transfer of the property. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value at the time of the transfer, the difference is charged to the ACL. The fair value of the OREO property is based upon current appraisal. Subsequent losses that result from the ongoing periodic valuation of these properties are charged to the net cost of operation of OREO expense in the period in which they are identified. In general, improvements to the OREO are capitalized and holding costs are charged to the net cost of operation of OREO as incurred.
Potential Problem Loans: Potential problem loans are loans which are currently performing and are not on nonaccrual status or restructured, but about which there are significant doubts as to the borrower’s future ability to comply with repayment terms and which may later be included in nonaccrual, past due or restructured loans. Potential problem loans totaled $71.0 million at year end 2020, compared to $72.5 million at year end 2019.
Allowance for Credit Losses and Allowance for Unfunded Commitments and Letters of Credit
The ACL is an accounting estimate of expected credit losses in our loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. The provision for credit losses is the expense recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Income to adjust the ACL to the levels deemed appropriate by management, as measured by the Company’s credit loss estimation methodologies. The allowance for unfunded commitments and letters of credit is maintained at a level believed by management to be sufficient to absorb estimated expected losses related to these unfunded credit facilities at the balance sheet date.
Analysis of the ACL
The following table provides an analysis of our loan loss experience by loan type for the last five years:
Changes in Allowance for Credit Losses and Allowance for
Unfunded Commitments and Letters of Credit
__________
(1)Excludes loans held for sale.
At December 31, 2020, our ACL was $149.1 million, or 1.58% of total loans (excluding loans held for sale). This compares with an allowance of $84.0 million, or 0.96% of total loans (excluding loans held for sale) at December 31, 2019.
Allocation of the ACL
The table below sets forth the allocation of the ACL by loan category:
__________
(1)Represents the total of all outstanding loans in each category as a percent of total loans outstanding.
For additional information on our allowance for credit losses and allowance for unfunded commitments and letters of credit, see Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report.
Deposits
The following table sets forth the composition of the Company’s deposits by significant category:
Deposits totaled $13.87 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to $10.68 billion at December 31, 2019. Noninterest-bearing deposits, interest-bearing deposits, and reciprocal money market accounts provide a stable source of low cost funding.
At December 31, 2020, brokered deposits, other wholesale deposits and reciprocal money market accounts (excluding public funds) totaled $605.9 million or 4.4% of total deposits compared to $329.5 million or 3.1% of total deposits, at year end 2019. The reciprocal money market account program is similar to the CDARS® program. CDARS® is a network that allows participating banks to offer extended FDIC deposit insurance coverage on time deposits. These extended deposit insurance programs are generally available only to existing customers and are not used as a means of generating additional liquidity.
At December 31, 2020, public funds held by the Company totaled $926.8 million compared to $529.4 million at December 31, 2019. Uninsured public funds balances increased from $468.3 million at December 31, 2019 to $862.3 million at December 31, 2020. The Company is required to collateralize 50% of Washington state and 40% of Oregon state uninsured public funds. For additional information regarding the collateral for these deposits, see Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report.
The following table sets forth the amount outstanding of time certificates of deposit and other time deposits in amounts of $100,000 or more (which represent CDARS® accounts) by time remaining until maturity and percentage of total deposits:
The following table sets forth the average amount of and the average rate paid on each significant deposit category:
Borrowings
Borrowed funds provide an additional source of funding for loan growth. Our borrowed funds consist primarily of FHLB advances, FRB borrowings, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, subordinated debentures and a revolving line of credit. FHLB advances and FRB borrowings are secured by our loan portfolio and investment securities. Securities sold under agreements to repurchase are secured by investment securities. Subordinated debentures are unsecured and the revolving line of credit is available, if necessary, and requires the Company to comply with certain covenants including those related to asset quality and capital levels. For additional information on our borrowings, see Notes 11, 12, 13, and 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, the Company is a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit. These instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to the financial instrument for commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit is represented by the contractual notional amount of those instruments. The Company uses the same credit policies in making commitments and conditional obligations as it does for on-balance sheet instruments. The Company evaluates each client’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a client as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since a portion of the commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements.
The Company had off-balance sheet loan commitments aggregating $2.80 billion and $2.67 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Standby letters of credit were $29.9 million at December 31, 2020, an increase from $25.7 million at December 31, 2019.
Contractual Obligations
We are party to many contractual financial obligations, including repayments of deposits and borrowings and payments for operating leases. The table below presents certain future financial obligations of the Company:
__________
(1) In the banking industry, interest-bearing obligations are principally used to fund interest-earning assets. As such, interest charges on contractual obligations were excluded from reported amounts, as the potential cash outflows would have corresponding cash inflows from interest-earning assets.
For additional information regarding our contractual obligations, see Notes 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report.
Liquidity and Sources of Funds
In general, our primary sources of funds are net income, loan repayments, maturities and principal payments on investment securities, customer deposits, advances from the FHLB, borrowings from the FRB, securities repurchase agreements, subordinated debentures and a revolving line of credit available, if necessary. These funds are used to make loans, purchase investments, meet deposit withdrawals and maturing liabilities and cover operational expenses. Scheduled loan repayments and client deposits have proven to be a relatively stable source of funds while other deposit inflows and unscheduled loan prepayments are influenced by interest rate levels, competition and general economic conditions. We manage liquidity through monitoring sources and uses of funds on a daily basis and had unused credit lines with the FHLB and the FRB of $2.09 billion and $234.4 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020, that are available to us as a supplemental funding source. The holding company’s sources of funds are dividends from its banking subsidiary which are used to fund dividends to shareholders, purchase treasury shares and cover operating expenses.
In addition, we have a shelf registration statement on file with the SEC registering an unspecified amount of any combination of debt or equity securities, depositary shares, purchase contracts, units and warrants in one or more offerings. Specific information regarding the terms of and the securities being offered will be provided at the time of any offering. Proceeds from any future offerings are expected to be used for general corporate purposes, including, but not limited to, the repayment of debt, repurchasing or redeeming outstanding securities, working capital, funding future acquisitions or other purposes identified at the time of any offering.
Capital
Our shareholders’ equity increased to $2.35 billion at December 31, 2020, from $2.16 billion at December 31, 2019. Shareholders’ equity was 14.16% and 15.34% of total assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Dividends per common share were $1.34 and $1.40, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Regulatory Capital. In July 2013, the federal bank regulators approved the Capital Rules (as discussed in “Item 1. Business-Supervision and Regulation-Regulatory Capital Requirements”), which implement the Basel III capital framework and various provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, which were fully phased in as of January 1, 2019.
Basel III also introduced a new capital conservation buffer, composed entirely of CET1, on top of the minimum risk- weighted asset ratios. The capital conservation buffer is designed to absorb losses during periods of economic stress. Banking institutions with a ratio of CET1 to risk-weighted assets, Tier 1 to risk-weighted assets or total capital to risk-weighted assets above the minimum but below the capital conservation buffer will face constraints on dividends, equity repurchases and compensation based on the amount of the shortfall. The Company and the Bank are required to maintain such additional capital conservation buffer of 2.5% of CET1, effectively resulting in minimum ratios of (i) CET1 to risk-weighted assets of at least 7%, (ii) Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets of at least 8.5%, and (iii) total capital to risk-weighted assets of at least 10.5%. The Company and the Bank met all such capital requirements as of December 31, 2020.
In addition, FDIC regulations set forth the qualifications necessary for a bank to be classified as “well-capitalized” (as discussed in “Item 1. Business-Supervision and Regulation-Prompt Corrective Action Framework”), primarily for assignment of FDIC insurance premium rates. Failure to qualify as “well-capitalized” can negatively impact a bank’s ability to expand and to engage in certain activities. The Company and the Bank qualified as “well-capitalized” at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
As part of its response to the impact of COVID-19, the U.S. federal regulatory agencies issued an interim final rule that provided the option to temporarily delay certain effects of CECL on regulatory capital for two years, followed by a three year transition period. The interim final rule allows bank holding companies and banks to delay for two years 100% of the day one impact of adopting CECL and 25% of the cumulative change in the reported allowance for credit losses since adopting CECL. The Company elected to adopt the interim final rule. As a result, capital ratios and amounts as of December 31, 2020 exclude the impact of the increased allowance for credit losses related to the adoption of CECL.
The following table sets forth the Company’s and the Bank’s capital ratios at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Stock Repurchase Program
As described in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, our board of directors approved a stock repurchase program to repurchase up to 2.9 million shares, up to a maximum aggregate purchase prices of $100.0 million. The share repurchase authorization expired in May of 2020. Prior to expiration, the Company repurchased 731 thousand shares of common stock totaling $20.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 under this plan. On October 28, 2020, our board of directors approved a stock repurchase program to purchase up to 3.5 million shares, up to a maximum aggregate purchase price of $100.0 million. The Company intends to purchase the shares from time to time in the open market, in private transactions, by direct or derivative purchases or other transactions under conditions which allow such repurchases to be accretive to EPS while maintaining capital ratios that exceed the guidelines for a well-capitalized financial institution. There were no share repurchases under this plan in 2020.
Dividends
The following table sets forth the dividends paid per common share and the dividend payout ratio (dividends paid per common share divided by diluted EPS):
______________
(1) Dividends paid per common share as a percentage of earnings per diluted common share
Subsequent to year end, on January 28, 2021, the Company declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.28 per share payable on February 24, 2021, to shareholders of record at the close of business on February 10, 2021.
Applicable federal and Washington state regulations restrict capital distributions, including dividends, by the Company’s banking subsidiary. Such restrictions are tied to the institution’s capital levels after giving effect to distributions. Our ability to pay cash dividends is substantially dependent upon receipt of dividends from the Bank. In addition, the payment of cash dividends is subject to Federal regulatory requirements for capital levels and other restrictions. In this regard, current guidance from the Federal Reserve provides, among other things, that dividends per share on the Company’s common stock generally should not exceed EPS, measured over the previous four fiscal quarters. Federal Reserve policy also provides that a bank holding company should inform the Federal Reserve reasonably in advance of declaring or paying a dividend that exceeds earnings for the period for which the dividend is being paid or that could result in a material adverse change to the bank holding company’s capital structure.
Reference “Item 6. Selected Financial Data” of this report for our return on average assets, return on average equity and average common equity to average assets ratios for all reported periods.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to capital ratios defined by banking regulators, the Company considers various measures when evaluating capital utilization and adequacy, including:
•Tangible common equity to tangible assets, and
•Tangible common equity to risk-weighted assets.
The Company believes these measures are useful because they reflect the level of capital available to withstand unexpected market conditions. Additionally, presentation of these measures allows readers to compare certain aspects of the Company’s capitalization to other organizations. These ratios differ from capital measures defined by banking regulators principally in that the numerator excludes shareholders’ equity associated with preferred securities, the nature and extent of which varies across organizations. Additionally, these measures present capital adequacy inclusive and exclusive of accumulated other comprehensive income. These calculations are intended to complement the capital ratios defined by banking regulators for both absolute and comparative purposes.
Because GAAP in the United States of America does not include capital ratio measures, the Company believes there are no comparable GAAP financial measures to these tangible common equity ratios. The following table reconciles the Company’s calculation of these measures to amounts reported under GAAP.
Despite the importance of these measures to the Company, there are no standardized definitions for them and, as a result, the Company’s calculations may not be comparable with other organizations. The Company encourages readers to consider its Consolidated Financial Statements in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure.
The Company also considers operating net interest margin (tax equivalent) to be a useful measurement as it closely reflects the ongoing operating performance of the Company. Additionally, presentation of the operating net interest margin allows readers to compare certain aspects of the Company’s net interest margin to other organizations that may not have had significant acquisitions. Despite the usefulness of the operating net interest margin to the Company, there is no standardized definition for it and, as a result, the Company’s calculations may not be comparable with other organizations. The Company encourages readers to consider its Consolidated Financial Statements in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure.
The following table reconciles the Company’s calculation of the operating net interest margin (tax equivalent) to the net interest margin (tax equivalent) for the periods indicated:
__________
(1) Tax-exempt interest income has been adjusted to a tax equivalent basis. The amount of such adjustment was an addition to net interest income of $7.5 million, $8.4 million and $7.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(2) Beginning January 2020, incremental accretion income on PCI loans is no longer presented separate from incremental accretion income on other acquired loans. Prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with current period presentation.