ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. This comparison should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under "Risk Factors" included in Part I, Item 1A or in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018, see Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in the 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 20, 2020.
OVERVIEW
We are a global provider of infrastructure solutions for communication and entertainment networks. Our solutions for wired and wireless networks enable service providers including cable, telephone and digital broadcast satellite operators and media programmers to deliver media, voice, IP data services and Wi-Fi to their subscribers and allow enterprises to experience constant wireless and wired connectivity across complex and varied networking environments. Our solutions are complemented by a broad array of services including technical support, systems design and integration. We are a leader in digital video and Internet Protocol Television distribution systems, broadband access infrastructure platforms, and associated data and voice customer premises equipment. Our global leadership position is built upon innovative technology, broad solution offerings, high-quality and cost-effective customer solutions, and global manufacturing and distribution scale.
On April 4, 2019, we completed the acquisition of ARRIS International plc (ARRIS) (the Acquisition) in an all-cash transaction with a total purchase price of approximately $7.7 billion, including debt assumed. The operations of the ARRIS business are included in our consolidated operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020; however, for the comparative year ended December 31, 2019, the operations of the ARRIS business are included only from the date of the Acquisition. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $24.9 million and $195.3 million, respectively, of transaction and integration costs and $88.4 million and $87.7 million, respectively, of restructuring costs mostly related to the Acquisition and integration activities. We will continue to incur integration and restructuring costs and such costs may be material.
As of January 1, 2020, we reorganized our internal management and reporting structure as part of the integration of the Acquisition. The reorganization changed the information regularly reviewed by our chief operating decision maker for purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance. As a result, we are reporting financial performance based on four new operating segments: Broadband Networks (Broadband), Home Networks (Home), Outdoor Wireless Networks (OWN) and Venue and Campus Networks (VCN). These four segments represent non-aggregated reportable operating segments. Prior to this change, we operated and reported five operating segments: Connectivity Solutions, Mobility Solutions, Customer Premises Equipment, Network and Cloud (N&C) and Ruckus Networks. Our change in segments as of January 1, 2020 resulted in a realignment of our existing reporting units. Although the reporting units were realigned, our reporting units remained the same except for where two reporting units have been combined into a new reporting unit. In this case, goodwill was simply combined in the new reporting units. Since the composition of the reporting units and the assignment of goodwill to the reporting units were unaffected, an interim goodwill impairment test was not performed due to our change in segments during the first quarter of 2020.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the new strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) a pandemic and the United States (U.S.) declared a national emergency with respect to COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted regional and global economies, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. Many jurisdictions, including those where we have operations, have reacted by instituting quarantines, restrictions on travel, “shelter in place” rules, social distancing protocols and restrictions on types of business that may continue to operate. While we have been deemed an “essential” (or equivalent) business in most jurisdictions, and therefore, we have been permitted to continue most of our operations in those jurisdictions, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance has included temporary closures of our facilities and the facilities of certain of our customers, suppliers and other vendors in our supply chain, as well as disruptions and restrictions on our employees’ ability to travel. We have taken measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, including implementing new and increased cleaning procedures, health screenings, safety protocols and social distancing requirements where appropriate, working with our customers and vendors to minimize potential disruptions and supporting our community in addressing the challenges posed by this global pandemic.
The COVID-19 outbreak negatively impacted our financial performance during the year ended December 31, 2020, as discussed more below, particularly in our VCN, OWN and Home segments. While the impacts in the first quarter of 2020 were primarily related to supply constraints due to the shutdown of our factories in Suzhou, China, the impacts on the second, third and fourth quarters reflected a combination of changes in demand, business continuity costs and supply constraints. Currently, most CommScope factories are fully operational, but we have experienced periodic, temporary factory closures in certain jurisdictions due to health concerns. From a demand standpoint, the impact has been mixed with network strain driving increased demand for our Broadband products, while VCN has been negatively impacted due to social distancing measures and the general economic slowdown. We have taken a number of actions to reduce our operating costs and manage our balance sheet in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, including headcount reductions, improved working capital management, lower capital spending and suspension of certain discretionary spending.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic, the effectiveness of vaccines and related actions taken by domestic and international jurisdictions to maintain and prevent disease spread, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. We have considered the impact of the economic slowdown on our evaluation of our significant estimates, including goodwill impairment indicators and credit losses, as of December 31, 2020. Although no indicators of goodwill impairment or significant changes in credit risk were identified as of December 31, 2020, it is possible that impairments and/or credit losses could emerge as the long-term impact of the crisis becomes clearer and those losses could be material. See the discussion below under “Critical Accounting Policies” for more information regarding the interim goodwill impairment test performed during the second quarter of 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) in the U.S. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. These estimates and their underlying assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other objective sources. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and revises its estimates, as appropriate, when changes in events or circumstances indicate that revisions may be necessary.
The following critical accounting policies and estimates reflected in our financial statements are based on management’s knowledge of and experience with past and current events and on management’s assumptions about future events. While we have generally not experienced significant deviations from our critical estimates in the past, it is reasonably possible that these estimates may ultimately differ materially from actual results. See Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of all our significant accounting policies.
Asset Impairment Reviews
Impairment Reviews of Goodwill
We test goodwill at the reporting unit level for impairment annually as of October 1 and on an interim basis when events occur or circumstances exist that indicate the carrying value may no longer be recoverable. We compare the fair value of our reporting units with the carrying amount, including goodwill. We recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value.
We estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using a discounted cash flow (DCF) method or, as appropriate, a combination of the DCF method and a market approach known as the guideline public company method. Under the DCF method, we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. The significant assumptions in the DCF model primarily include, but are not limited to, forecasts of annual revenue growth rates, annual operating income margin, the terminal growth rate and the discount rate used to determine the present value of the cash flow projections. When determining these assumptions and preparing these estimates, we consider historical performance trends, industry data, insight derived from customers, relevant changes in the reporting unit’s underlying business and other market trends that may affect the reporting unit. The discount rate is based on the estimated weighted average cost of capital as of the test date of market participants in the industry in which the reporting unit operates and is commensurate with the risk and uncertainty inherent in each reporting unit and in internally developed forecasts. Under the guideline public company method, we estimate the fair value based upon market multiples of revenue and earnings derived from publicly traded companies with similar operating and investment characteristics as the reporting unit. The weighting of the fair value derived from the market approach may vary depending on the level of comparability of these publicly-traded companies to the reporting unit. When comparable public companies are not meaningful or not available, we may estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using only the DCF method.
Estimating the fair value of a reporting unit involves uncertainties because it requires management to develop numerous assumptions, including assumptions about the future growth and potential volatility in revenues and costs, capital expenditures, industry economic factors and future business strategy. Changes in projected revenue growth rates, projected operating income margins or estimated discount rates due to uncertain market conditions, loss of one or more key customers, changes in our strategy, changes in technology or other factors could negatively affect the fair value in one or more of our reporting units and result in a material impairment charge in the future.
To assess the reasonableness of the calculated fair values of our reporting units, we also compare the sum of the reporting units’ fair values to our market capitalization and calculate an implied control premium (the excess of the sum of the reporting units’ fair values over the market capitalization). If the implied control premium is not reasonable, we will reevaluate the fair value estimates of the reporting unit by adjusting the discount rates and/or other assumptions.
2020 Interim Goodwill Analysis
During the second quarter of 2020, we determined that indicators of impairment existed for our Home Networks reporting unit due to lower projected operating results, primarily driven by the accelerated decline in demand for video devices. This trend was projected to continue as consumers adopt the use of other streaming applications and was further impacted negatively by the macro-economic effects of COVID-19. Accordingly, we assessed the fair value of our Home Networks reporting unit as of May 31, 2020 and recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $206.7 million in the Home segment. This reflects a full impairment of the remaining goodwill in the Home segment, and as such, the Home segment has no remaining goodwill balance as of December 31, 2020.
To determine the fair value of our Home Networks reporting unit and test for goodwill impairment, we developed a revised forecast for 2020 and updated the annual financial forecasts for the years beyond 2020. We used an income approach (DCF method) because we believe this is the most direct approach to incorporate the specific economic attributes and risk profile of the reporting unit into our valuation model. Consistent with our 2019 annual impairment test, we used a 9.0% discount rate for the interim goodwill impairment test for the Home Networks reporting unit. We determined that the utilization of a market approach for the interim goodwill impairment test would not impact the conclusion.
2020 Annual Goodwill Analysis
The annual test of goodwill impairment was performed for each of the reporting units with goodwill balances as of October 1, 2020. There were no goodwill impairments identified as a result of the annual impairment test performed in the fourth quarter of 2020. For the 2020 annual goodwill test, we determined the fair value of each reporting unit using a DCF model and a guideline public company approach, with 75% of the value determined using the DCF model and 25% of the value determined using the market approach. The range of discount rates used in our annual tests were 9.0% to 10.5% for 2020 and 9.0% to 11.0% for 2019.
The following table provides summary information regarding our reporting units with the lowest level of headroom, including key assumptions used in our annual goodwill analysis, along with sensitivity analysis showing the effect of a change in certain key assumptions, assuming all other assumptions remain constant, to the resulting fair value using an income approach. Accordingly, if performance is worse than anticipated for these reporting units, future impairment tests could result in impairment charges that could be material to our results of operations. The Enterprise reporting unit is in our VCN segment and the N&C reporting unit is in our Broadband segment.
Definite-Lived Intangible Assets and Other Long-Lived Assets
Management reviews definite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying values may not be fully recoverable. This analysis differs from our goodwill impairment analysis in that an intangible or other long-lived asset impairment is only deemed to have occurred if the sum of the forecasted undiscounted future net cash flows related to the assets being evaluated is less than the carrying value of the assets. If the forecasted net cash flows are less than the carrying value, then the asset is written down to its estimated fair value. Other than certain assets impaired as a result of restructuring actions, we did not identify any impairments of definite-lived intangible assets or other long-lived assets in 2020. Changes in the estimates of forecasted net cash flows may result in future asset impairments that could be material to our results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue based on the satisfaction of distinct obligations to transfer goods and services to customers. Our revenue is generated primarily from product or equipment sales. We also generate revenue from custom design and installation services as well as bundled sales arrangements that include product, software and services. Revenue is recognized when performance obligations in a contract are satisfied through the transfer of control of the good or service at the amount of consideration expected to be received. The following are required before revenue is recognized:
•
Identify the contract with the customer. A variety of arrangements are considered contracts; however, contracts typically take the form of a master purchase agreement or customer purchase orders.
•
Identify the performance obligations in the contract. Performance obligations are identified as promised goods or services that are distinct within an arrangement.
•
Determine the transaction price. The transaction price is the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services. The consideration may include fixed or variable amounts or both.
•
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations. The transaction price is allocated to the performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis.
•
Recognize revenue as the performance obligations are satisfied. Revenue is recognized when transfer of control of the promised goods or services has occurred. This is either at a point in time or over time.
Product sales represent over 90% of our revenue. For these sales, revenue is recognized when control of the product has transferred to the customer, which is generally at the point in time when products have been shipped, right to payment has been obtained and risk of loss has been transferred. Certain of our product performance obligations include proprietary operating system software, which typically is not considered separately identifiable. Therefore, sales of these products and the related software are considered one performance obligation.
License contracts include revenue recognized for the licensing of intellectual property, including software, sold separately without products. Functional intellectual property licenses do not meet the criteria for revenue to be recognized over time and revenue is most commonly recognized upon delivery of the license/software to the customer.
Certain customer transactions may be project based and include multiple performance obligations based on the bundling of equipment, software and services. When a multiple performance obligation arrangement exists, the transaction price is allocated to the performance obligations based on the relative standalone selling price, and revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of each deliverable. To determine the standalone selling price, we first look to establish the standalone selling price through an observable price when the good or service is sold separately in similar circumstances. If the standalone selling price cannot be established through an observable price, we will make an estimate based on market conditions, customer specific factors and customer class. We may use a combination of approaches to estimate the standalone selling price.
For performance obligations recognized over time, judgment is required to evaluate assumptions, including the total estimated costs to determine progress towards completion of the performance obligation and to calculate the corresponding amount of revenue to recognize. If estimated total costs on any contract are greater than the net contract revenues, the entire estimated costs are recorded in the period in which the revisions to estimates are identified and the amounts can be reasonably estimated.
Other customer contract types include a variety of post-contract support services offerings, including:
•
Maintenance and support services provided under annual service-level agreements with our customers. These services represent stand-ready obligations that are recognized over time (on a straight-line basis over the contract period) because the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the services as the services are performed.
•
Professional services and other similar services consist primarily of “Day 2” services to help customers maximize their utilization of deployed systems. The services are recognized over time because the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the service as the services are performed.
•
Installation services relate to the routine installation of equipment ordered by the customer at the customer’s site and are distinct performance obligations from delivery of the related hardware. The associated revenues are recognized over time as the services are provided.
Revenue is measured based on the consideration to which we expect to be entitled based on customer contracts. For sales to distributors, system integrators and value-added resellers, revenue is adjusted for variable consideration amounts, including but not limited to estimated discounts, returns, rebates and distributor price protection programs. These estimates are determined based upon historical experience, contract terms, inventory levels in the distributor channel and other related factors. Adjustments to variable consideration estimates are recorded when circumstances indicate revisions may be necessary.
A contract liability for deferred revenue is recorded when consideration is received or is unconditionally due from a customer prior to transferring control of goods or services to the customer under the terms of a contract. Deferred revenue balances typically result from advance payments received from customers for product contracts or from billings in excess of revenue recognized on project or services arrangements.
Unbilled receivables are recorded when revenues are recognized in advance of invoice issuance. A contract asset is any portion of unbilled receivables for which the right to consideration is conditional on a factor other than the passage of time, which is common for certain project contract performance obligations. These assets are presented on a combined basis with accounts receivable and are converted to accounts receivable once our right to the consideration becomes unconditional, which varies by contract but is generally based on achieving certain acceptance milestones. We recognize the incremental costs of obtaining a contract as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of the asset would be one year or less.
We include shipping and handling costs billed to customers in net sales and include the costs incurred to transport product to customers as well as certain internal handling costs, which relate to activities to prepare goods for shipment, as cost of sales. Shipping and handling costs incurred after control is transferred to the customer are accounted for as fulfillment costs and are not accounted for as separate revenue obligations.
Leases
We determine if a contract is a lease or contains a lease at inception. Right of use assets related to operating type leases are reported in other noncurrent assets and the present value of remaining lease obligations is reported in accrued and other liabilities and other noncurrent liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We do not currently have any financing type leases.
Operating lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at commencement date. The majority of our leases do not provide an implicit rate; therefore, we use the incremental borrowing rates applicable to the economic environment and the duration of the lease, based on the information available at commencement date, in determining the present value of future payments. The right of use asset for operating leases is measured using the lease liability adjusted for the impact of lease payments made prior to commencement, lease incentives received, initial direct costs incurred and any asset impairments. Lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that the option will be exercised. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
We remeasure and reallocate the consideration in a lease when there is a modification of the lease that is not accounted for as a separate contract. The lease liability is remeasured when there is a change in the lease term or a change in the assessment of whether we will exercise a lease option. We assess right of use assets for impairment in accordance with our long-lived asset impairment policy.
We account for lease agreements with contractually required lease and non-lease components on a combined basis. Lease payments made for cancellable leases, variable amounts that are not based on an observable index and lease agreements with an original duration of less than twelve months are recorded directly to lease expense.
Inventory Reserves
We maintain reserves to reduce the value of inventory based on the lower of cost or net realizable value, including allowances for excess and obsolete inventory. These reserves are based on management’s assumptions about and analysis of relevant factors including current levels of orders and backlog, forecasted demand, market conditions and new products or innovations that diminish the value of existing inventories. If actual market conditions deteriorate from those anticipated by management, additional allowances for excess and obsolete inventory could be required and may be material to earnings.
Product Warranty Reserves
We recognize a liability for the estimated claims that may be paid under our customer assurance-type warranty agreements to remedy potential deficiencies of quality or performance of our products. The product warranties extend over various periods, depending upon the product subject to the warranty and the terms of the individual agreements. We record a provision for estimated future warranty claims based upon the historical relationship of warranty claims to sales and specifically identified warranty issues. We base our estimates on historical experience and on assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and revise our estimates, as appropriate, when events or changes in circumstances indicate that revisions may be necessary. Although these estimates are based on management’s knowledge of and experience with past and current events and on management’s assumptions about future events, it is reasonably possible that they may ultimately differ materially from actual results, including in the case of a significant product failure.
Tax Valuation Allowances and Liabilities for Unrecognized Tax Benefits
We establish an income tax valuation allowance when available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider the amounts, character, source and timing of expected future deductions or carryforwards as well as sources of taxable income and tax planning strategies that may enable utilization. We maintain an existing valuation allowance until sufficient positive evidence exists to support its reversal. Changes in the amount or timing of expected future deductions or taxable income may have a material impact on the level of income tax valuation allowances. If we determine that we will not be able to realize all or part of a deferred tax asset in the future, an increase to an income tax valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination was made.
We recognize income tax benefits related to particular tax positions only when it is considered more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained if examined on its technical merits by tax authorities. The amount of benefit recognized is the largest amount of tax benefit that is evaluated to be greater than 50% likely to be realized. Considerable judgment is required to evaluate the technical merits of various positions and to evaluate the likely amount of benefit to be realized. Lapses in statutes of limitations, developments in tax laws, regulations and interpretations, and changes in assessments of the likely outcome of uncertain tax positions could have a material impact on the overall tax provision.
We establish deferred tax liabilities for the estimated tax cost associated with foreign earnings that we do not consider permanently reinvested (primarily foreign withholding and state income taxes). These liabilities are subject to adjustment if there is a change in the assertion of whether the foreign earnings are considered to be permanently reinvested.
We also establish allowances related to value-added and similar recoverable taxes when it is considered probable that those assets are not recoverable. Changes in the probability of recovery or in the estimates of the amount recoverable are recognized in the period such determination is made and may be material to earnings.
Business Combinations
We use the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations which requires the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed to be recorded at their respective fair market value as of the acquisition date. Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the net assets acquired. The fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are determined based upon management’s valuation and involves making significant estimates and assumptions based on facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date. We use a measurement period following the acquisition date to gather information that existed as of the acquisition date that is needed to determine the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The measurement period ends once all information is obtained, but no later than one year from the acquisition date.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 with the year ended December 31, 2019
(1)
See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures" in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, below.
Net sales
Net sales in 2020 increased compared to the prior year by $531.9 million in our Broadband segment, primarily related to the addition of the ARRIS business for the full year of 2020 compared to only a partial year in 2019, but also due to increased demand for our Network Cable and Connectivity (NCC) and N&C products. These increases were partially offset by decreases in net sales of $231.3 million in our OWN segment, $179.0 million in our Home segment and $30.8 million in our VCN segment. The decreases in the OWN and Home segments were driven primarily by a slowdown in sales to both U.S. and international service provider customers as demand for video products and wireless network equipment decreased. The decline in the VCN segment was driven by decreases in sales of Enterprise products. Both the Home and VCN segments declined in 2020 despite the inclusion of the ARRIS business for a full year in 2020 compared to a partial year in 2019. For further details by segment, see the section titled “Segment Results” below.
From a regional perspective, net sales increased in 2020 in the U.S. by $262.0 million primarily due to the Acquisition. Net sales decreased in the Asia Pacific (APAC) region by $122.5 million, the Caribbean and Latin America (CALA) region by $40.4 million and the Europe, Middle East and Africa (EMEA) region by $13.4 million and increased in Canada by $5.1 million. Net sales to customers located outside of the U.S. comprised 38.5% of total net sales for 2020 compared to 41.0% for 2019.
We believe lower demand caused by COVID-19 reduced our net sales during 2020. While it is difficult to quantify the demand impacts, we believe the most significant reductions in demand related to COVID-19 for 2020 were in our VCN segment. We do not believe that supply chain disruptions related to COVID-19 materially impacted net sales during the second half of 2020, but we estimate that supply chain disruptions reduced revenue by approximately $90 million during the first half of 2020. Management currently expects the decline in net sales caused by the economic slowdown to continue into 2021.
Gross profit, SG&A expense and R&D expense
Gross profit (net sales less cost of sales)
Gross profit increased for 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to the addition of the ARRIS business for the full year in 2020 compared to a partial year in 2019. Gross profit in 2019 was negatively impacted by ARRIS acquisition accounting adjustments of $264.2 million primarily related to the markup of inventory to its estimated fair value. Excluding the acquisition accounting adjustments recorded in 2019, CommScope’s gross profit was $2,668.3 million and gross profit as a percentage of sales was 32.0%. We estimate that a combination of supply chain disruptions and business continuity costs related to COVID-19 reduced gross profit by approximately $70 million for 2020.
Selling, general and administrative expense
For 2020, selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense decreased compared to the prior year due to a reduction of $170.4 million in transaction and integration costs related to the Acquisition. Excluding transaction and integration costs, SG&A expense for 2020 increased primarily due to the inclusion of the ARRIS business for a full year in 2020 compared to a partial year in 2019 as well as higher variable incentive compensation. These increases were partially offset by the benefits in 2020 of acquisition synergies and other cost savings initiatives.
Research and development expense
Research and development (R&D) expense for 2020 increased primarily due to the inclusion of the ARRIS business for a full year in 2020 compared to a partial year in 2019 but also due to our continuing investment in certain VCN segment products and higher variable incentive costs. R&D activities generally relate to ensuring that our products are capable of meeting the evolving technological needs of our customers, bringing new products to market and modifying existing products to better serve our customers.
Amortization of purchased intangible assets, Restructuring costs, net and Asset impairments
Amortization of purchased intangible assets
The amortization of purchased intangible assets was higher in 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to the inclusion of the ARRIS business for a full year in 2020 compared to a partial year in 2019. Excluding this comparability impact, amortization decreased for 2020 compared to the prior year because certain of our intangible assets became fully amortized.
Restructuring costs, net
The restructuring costs recorded in 2020 and 2019 were primarily related to integrating and preparing to integrate the ARRIS business. From a cash perspective, we paid $76.7 million to settle restructuring liabilities during 2020 and expect to pay an additional $26.0 million between 2021 and 2022 related to restructuring actions that have been initiated. Additional restructuring actions related to the Acquisition are expected to be identified and the resulting charges and cash requirements are expected to be material. In 2020, we also recorded certain asset impairment charges of $11.6 million identified as restructuring costs because they resulted from restructuring initiatives.
Asset impairments
In 2020, we recorded goodwill impairment charges of $206.7 million related to our Home Networks reporting unit within our Home segment. See the discussion above under “Critical Accounting Policies” for more information regarding the interim and annual goodwill impairment tests performed during 2020. In 2019, we recorded goodwill impairment charges of $142.1 million, $192.8 million and $41.2 million related to our Broadband, Home and VCN segments, respectively, as a result of our annual goodwill impairment test.
Other expense, net
Foreign currency loss
Foreign currency loss includes the net foreign currency gains and losses resulting from the settlement of receivables and payables, foreign currency contracts and short-term intercompany advances in a currency other than the subsidiary’s functional currency. The increase in foreign currency loss for 2020 compared to the prior year was primarily driven by certain unhedged currencies.
Other income (expense), net
We paid redemption premiums of $17.9 million that were included in other income (expense), net during 2020 in connection with the refinancing of the 5.00% senior notes due 2021 (the 2021 Notes) and the 5.50% senior notes due 2024 (the 2024 Notes) and the redemptions of $200.0 million of the 6.00% senior notes due 2025 (the 2025 Notes), as further described in Note 8 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We did not pay any similar redemption premiums during 2019.
Interest expense, Interest income and Income taxes
Interest expense and interest income
Interest expense for 2020 was relatively unchanged compared to the prior year period. Interest expense increased in 2020 due to the financing of the Acquisition that occurred in February 2019 but this increase was offset by lower variable interest rates and lower debt balances due to voluntary repayments in 2019 and 2020.
In March 2019, we entered into pay-fixed, receive-variable interest rate swap derivatives and designated them as cash flow hedges of interest rate risk. These swaps effectively fixed the interest rate on a portion of the senior secured term loan due 2026 (the 2026 Term Loan). The total notional amount of the interest rate swap derivatives as of December 31, 2020 was $600 million with outstanding maturities of up to thirty-nine months.
Our weighted average effective interest rate on outstanding borrowings, including the impact of the interest rate swap and the amortization of debt issuance costs and original issue discount, was 5.86% at December 31, 2020 and 6.13% at December 31, 2019.
Interest income decreased during 2020 primarily due to $10.9 million of interest earned on the proceeds of the acquisition-related debt that were held in an interest-bearing escrow account in the prior year until the Acquisition date.
Income tax benefit
For 2020, our effective tax rate was 12.4% and we recognized a tax benefit of $81.1 million on a pretax loss of $654.5 million. Our tax benefit was less than the statutory rate of 21.0% in 2020 primarily due to a goodwill impairment charge of $206.7 million, for which minimal tax benefits were recorded. Our tax rate was also impacted unfavorably by excess tax costs of $14.0 million related to equity compensation awards as well as U.S. anti-deferral provisions and foreign withholding taxes. These unfavorable impacts were offset partially by favorable impacts related to federal tax credits and foreign tax rate changes. See Note 13 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more discussion of our income tax benefit.
For 2019, our effective tax rate was 13.5% and we recognized a tax benefit of $144.5 million on a pretax loss of $1,074.0 million. Our tax benefit was less than the statutory rate primarily due to a goodwill impairment charge of $376.1 million, for which minimal tax benefits were recorded. The rate was also unfavorably impacted by U.S. anti-deferral provisions and foreign withholding taxes but these were partially offset by the favorable impact of federal tax credits and the expiration of statutes of limitations on various uncertain tax positions.
Segment Results
(1)
See “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures” within this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, below.
Broadband Networks Segment
Broadband segment net sales were higher in 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to the inclusion of the N&C business for a full year in 2020 compared to a partial year in 2019, but also due to higher sales of both our NCC and N&C products. From a regional perspective, for 2020, Broadband segment net sales increased across all major regions, driven by increases of $431.7 million in the U.S., $48.9 million in the EMEA region, $31.8 million in the APAC region and $21.1 million in the CALA region. Supply constraints related to the COVID-19 pandemic negatively affected Broadband segment net sales during the first half of 2020; however, we believe the segment also benefitted from increased demand for certain of its products. The negative impacts of COVID-19 were not significant to the Broadband segment in the second half of 2020 and we do not expect significant negative impacts in 2021.
For 2020, Broadband segment operating income and adjusted EBITDA increased due to higher net sales, the impact of cost savings initiatives and lower material costs. Broadband segment operating income was also favorably impacted by reductions in goodwill impairment charges of $142.1 million, reductions in acquisition accounting adjustments of $124.4 million primarily related to the mark-up of inventory to its estimated fair value, reductions in transaction and integration costs of $112.3 million and reductions in restructuring costs of $19.1 million. Asset impairment charges, transaction and integration costs, acquisition accounting adjustments and restructuring costs are not reflected in adjusted EBITDA. See “Reconciliation of Segment adjusted EBITDA” within this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, below.
Home Networks Segment
Net sales for the Home segment decreased in 2020, despite the inclusion of the ARRIS business for a full year in 2020 compared to a partial year in 2019, due to lower sales volumes of video products to service provider customers. From a regional perspective, for 2020, the decrease in Home segment net sales was driven by decreases of $96.0 million in the APAC region, $86.7 million in the U.S. and $39.9 million in the CALA region, but these were partially offset by an increase in net sales in the EMEA region of $46.1 million. For 2020, we believe the impacts from COVID-19 were a combination of supply chain disruptions and lower demand for video products. We anticipate ongoing softness in the Home segment continuing into 2021, partially due to the impacts of COVID-19 but also due to the continuing declines in demand for video products.
For 2020, the Home segment operating loss increased and adjusted EBITDA decreased compared to the prior year primarily due to lower sales volumes. Home segment operating loss was favorably impacted by a $25.9 million reduction in acquisition accounting adjustments primarily related to the mark-up of inventory to its estimated fair value, and the release of a $23.6 million accrual related to a patent royalty matter that was settled for less than anticipated. These favorable impacts to operating loss were offset by higher goodwill impairment charges of $13.8 million, higher transaction and integration costs of $8.5 million and higher restructuring costs of $6.8 million. Asset impairments, acquisition accounting adjustments, transaction and integration costs, restructuring costs and a portion of the patent and litigation settlement described above are not reflected in adjusted EBITDA. Of the $23.6 million patent royalty accrual release, $15.1 million related to pre-acquisition sales and was excluded from the calculation of adjusted EBITDA; the remaining $8.5 million release provided a benefit to Home segment adjusted EBITDA in 2020. See “Reconciliation of Segment adjusted EBITDA” within this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, below.
Outdoor Wireless Networks Segment
OWN segment net sales decreased during 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to a slowdown in sales of wireless network equipment to both U.S. and international service provider customers. From a regional perspective, for 2020, OWN segment net sales were lower across all major regions and were primarily driven by decreases in the U.S. of $156.5 million, the EMEA region of $56.8 million and the APAC region of $28.1 million. U.S. net sales of OWN segment products in 2019 benefitted from the build out of next generation 4G networks to support commercial and public safety markets, and that spending did not recur at the same level in 2020. In addition, we believe a portion of the decline in OWN segment net sales for 2020 was caused by lower demand as a result of the macroeconomic slowdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. We currently believe the impact from COVID-19 could continue to negatively affect the OWN segment into 2021.
For 2020, OWN segment operating income decreased compared to the prior year due to lower net sales in the current year partially offset by the impact of a patent litigation claim settled during the prior year period for $55.0 million. Adjusted EBITDA decreased for 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to the decrease in net sales. Patent litigation settlements are not reflected in adjusted EBITDA. See “Reconciliation of Segment adjusted EBITDA” within this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, below.
Venue and Campus Networks Segment
VCN segment net sales were lower in 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily due to lower sales of Enterprise products primarily driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, despite the incremental sales of the acquired Ruckus business in 2020 compared to 2019. From a regional perspective, for 2020, VCN segment net sales increased $73.4 million in the U.S. but decreased across all other major regions, driven by decreases of $51.6 million in the EMEA region, $30.2 million in the APAC region and $15.4 million in the CALA region. Management currently expects the impact of COVID-19 to continue to negatively affect the VCN segment into 2021.
For 2020, VCN segment operating loss decreased due to a $93.3 million reduction in acquisition accounting adjustments primarily related to the mark-up of inventory to its estimated fair value as well as reductions in transaction and integration costs of $51.6 million. These favorable impacts were offset partially by a $13.7 million increase in patent litigation costs and a $4.2 million increase in restructuring costs. For 2020, VCN segment operating loss and adjusted EBITDA were negatively impacted by lower sales and unfavorable product mix, offset partially by the impacts of cost savings initiatives. Acquisition accounting adjustments, restructuring costs, patent litigation costs and transaction and integration costs are not reflected in adjusted EBITDA. See “Reconciliation of Segment adjusted EBITDA” within this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, below.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes certain key measures of our liquidity and capital resources:
(1)
Working capital consists of current assets of $3,354.5 million less current liabilities of $1,953.4 million as of December 31, 2020 and current assets of $3,511.8 million less current liabilities of $2,042.0 million as of December 31, 2019.
(2)
Total capitalization includes long-term debt, including the current portion, Series A convertible preferred stock (the Convertible Preferred Stock) and stockholders’ equity.
Our principal sources of liquidity on a short-term basis are cash and cash equivalents, cash flows provided by operations and availability under our credit facilities. In April 2020, we borrowed $250.0 million under our senior secured revolving credit facility (the Revolving Credit Facility) as a precautionary measure to reinforce our cash position and preserve financial flexibility in light of the uncertainty in the global economy at that time resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. We subsequently repaid the full amount in July 2020 because we did not believe the proceeds were needed for future liquidity as our cash flow generation has continued to improve and the broader financial markets have continued to stabilize. On a long-term basis, our potential sources of liquidity also include raising capital through the issuance of additional equity and/or debt.
The primary uses of liquidity include debt service requirements (including voluntary debt repayments or redemptions), funding working capital requirements, paying acquisition integration costs, paying transaction costs, capital expenditures, paying restructuring costs, paying dividends related to the Convertible Preferred Stock if we elect to pay such dividends in cash, paying litigation settlements and income tax payments. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and cash flows from operations, combined with availability under the Revolving Credit Facility, will be sufficient to meet our presently anticipated future cash needs. We may experience volatility in cash flows between periods due to, among other reasons, variability in the timing of vendor payments and customer receipts. We may, from time to time, borrow additional amounts under the Revolving Credit Facility or issue securities, if market conditions are favorable, to meet future cash needs or to reduce our borrowing costs.
Although there are no financial maintenance covenants under the terms of our senior notes, there is a limitation, among other limitations, on certain future borrowings based on an adjusted leverage ratio or a fixed charge coverage ratio. These ratios are based on financial measures similar to non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA as presented in the “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures” section below, but also give pro forma effect to certain events, including acquisitions, synergies and savings from cost reduction initiatives such as facility closures and headcount reductions. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our non-GAAP pro forma adjusted EBITDA, as measured pursuant to the indentures governing our notes, was $1,289.9 million, which included annualized synergies expected to be realized in the next two years ($32.6 million) and annualized savings expected from announced cost reduction initiatives ($42.1 million) so that the impact of the cost reduction initiatives is fully reflected in the twelve-month period used in the calculation of the ratios. In addition to limitations under these indentures, our senior secured credit facilities contain customary negative covenants based on similar financial measures. We believe we are in compliance with the covenants under our indentures and senior secured credit facilities at December 31, 2020.
Cash and cash equivalents decreased during 2020 primarily due to debt redemptions of $1.0 billion, partially offset by the issuance of $700.0 million of 7.125% senior unsecured notes due in 2028 (the 2028 Notes). We also invested $121.2 million in capital expenditures. These uses of cash were offset partially by cash generated by operating activities of $436.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 46% of our cash and cash equivalents were held outside the U.S.
Working capital, excluding cash and cash equivalents and the current portion of long-term debt, increased slightly during 2020 due to higher inventory and lower accounts payable balances mostly offset by lower accounts receivable balances primarily due to lower fourth quarter sales in the current year. The net reduction in total capitalization during 2020 reflected the net loss for the period and the $332.0 million net reduction in gross debt.
Cash Flow Overview
NM - Not meaningful
Operating Activities
During 2020, operating cash flows decreased compared to the prior year due to $109.0 million paid in the current year related to patent claims and litigation and $55.7 million in additional interest paid in the current year as a result of Acquisition-related debt.
Investing Activities
During 2020, our investment in property, plant and equipment was higher due to the incremental time the ARRIS business was owned in the current year compared to the prior year. Our investments in property, plant and equipment were primarily related to supporting improvements in manufacturing operations, including expanding production capacity and investing in information technology, including software developed for internal use. During 2020 and 2019, we sold property and equipment that was no longer being utilized for $5.0 million and $1.6 million, respectively. During 2020 and 2019, we paid $3.5 million and $11.0 million, respectively, related to our 2017 acquisition of Cable Exchange. The payment in 2020 was the final payment related to the Cable Exchange acquisition. During 2019, we paid $5.1 billion, net of cash acquired, using a combination of cash on hand, proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt and proceeds from the issuance of the Convertible Preferred Stock to fund the Acquisition.
Financing Activities
In 2020, we redeemed $100.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes. We then issued $700.0 million of the 2028 Notes and used the net proceeds from the offering to redeem and retire the remaining $700.0 million outstanding under the 2021 Notes and the 2024 Notes. We incurred $11.7 million of debt issuance costs in connection with the issuance of the 2028 Notes. Also during 2020, we borrowed and repaid $250.0 million under the Revolving Credit Facility. In addition, we redeemed $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2025 Notes and paid four quarterly scheduled amortization payments totaling $32.0 million on the 2026 Term Loan. We paid redemption premiums of $11.9 million to retire the 2024 Notes and $6.0 million to partially redeem the 2025 Notes. We may continue to look for favorable opportunities to refinance portions of our existing debt to lower borrowing costs, extend the term or adjust the total amount of fixed or floating-rate debt.
During 2019, we received net proceeds from the Acquisition-related debt of approximately $6.9 billion to fund the Acquisition. We repaid $225.0 million of the senior secured term loan due 2022 in the first quarter of 2019 and we repaid the remaining balance of $261.3 million using proceeds from the 2026 Term Loan. In addition, we redeemed $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 2021 Notes during 2019. We also paid an $8.0 million scheduled payment during December 2019 related to the 2026 Term Loan. As part of funding the Acquisition, we repaid ARRIS’ outstanding debt of $2.1 billion under its senior secured credit facilities. We also borrowed and repaid $15.0 million under the Revolving Credit Facility in 2019. In connection with the Acquisition-related debt, we paid $120.8 million of debt issuance costs during 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility and the remaining availability was $735.1 million, reflecting a borrowing base of $766.9 million reduced by $31.8 million of letters of credit issued under the Revolving Credit Facility.
In 2019, in addition to the new debt, we funded the Acquisition by issuing the Convertible Preferred Stock to Carlyle for an aggregate investment of $1.0 billion. We paid $3.0 million in transaction fees on Carlyle’s behalf related to the Convertible Preferred Stock and we treated that as a deemed dividend during 2019. During 2020 and 2019, we paid $14.3 million and $40.7 million, respectively, in cash dividends for the Convertible Preferred Stock. In 2020, we also paid $41.8 million of dividends in kind for the Convertible Preferred Stock but this was not impactful to our cash flows.
During 2020, we received proceeds of $9.0 million related to the exercise of stock options. Also during 2020, employees surrendered 1.8 million shares of our common stock to satisfy their tax withholding requirements on vested restricted stock units and performance share units, which reduced cash flows by $16.9 million. During 2019, we received proceeds of $4.6 million related to the exercise of stock options and employees surrendered 0.7 million shares of our common stock to satisfy their tax withholding requirements on vested restricted stock units and performance share units, which reduced cash flows by $13.2 million.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures
We believe that presenting certain non-GAAP financial measures enhances an investor’s understanding of our financial performance. We further believe that these financial measures are useful in assessing our operating performance from period to period by excluding certain items that we believe are not representative of our core business. We also use certain of these financial measures for business planning purposes and in measuring our performance relative to that of our competitors.
We believe these financial measures are commonly used by investors to evaluate our performance and that of our competitors. However, our use of the term non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA may vary from that of others in our industry. This financial measure should not be considered as an alternative to operating income (loss), net income (loss) or any other performance measures derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP as measures of operating performance, operating cash flows or liquidity.
Although there are no financial maintenance covenants under the terms of our senior notes, there is a limitation, among other limitations, on certain future borrowings based on an adjusted leverage ratio or a fixed charge coverage ratio. These ratios are based on financial measures similar to non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA as presented in this section, but also give pro forma effect to certain events, including acquisitions and savings from cost reduction initiatives such as facility closures and headcount reductions.
Consolidated
(1)
In 2020 and 2019, primarily reflects transaction and integration costs related to the Acquisition. In 2018, primarily reflects integration costs related to the acquisition of the BNS business and transaction costs related to other potential and consummated acquisitions.
(2)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, reflects acquisition accounting adjustments related to reducing deferred revenue to its estimated fair value. For the year ended December 31, 2019, reflects acquisition accounting adjustments of $218.8 million related to the mark up of inventory to its estimated fair value and acquisition accounting adjustments of $45.4 million related to reducing deferred revenue to its estimated fair value.
Reconciliation of Segment Adjusted EBITDA
Segment adjusted EBITDA is provided as a performance measure in Note 17 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Below we reconcile segment adjusted EBITDA for each segment individually to operating income (loss) for that segment to supplement the reconciliation of the total segment adjusted EBITDA to consolidated operating income (loss) in that footnote.
Broadband Networks Segment
Home Networks Segment
Outdoor Wireless Networks Segment
Venue and Campus Networks Segment
Note: Components may not sum to total due to rounding
Contractual Obligations
During 2020, the Company redeemed $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes, $650.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes and $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2025 Notes. Also during 2020, the Company issued $700.0 million of the 2028 Notes. This table does not include the obligations related to our Series A convertible preferred stock discussed in Note 14 in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(a)
No prepayment or redemption of any of our long-term debt balances has been assumed. Refer to Note 8 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding the terms of our long-term debt agreements.
(b)
Interest on long-term debt excludes the amortization of debt issuance costs and original issue discount. Interest on variable rate debt is estimated based upon rates in effect as of December 31, 2020.
(c)
Purchase obligations and other supplier agreements include $322.3 million related to obligations, primarily to our contract manufacturers, with non-cancelable terms to purchase goods or services and payments of $4.5 million due in 2021 for minimum amounts owed under take-or-pay or requirements contracts. Generally, amounts covered by open purchase orders, other than the portion that is noncancelable as disclosed above, are excluded as there is no contractual obligation until goods or services are received.
(d)
Amounts reflect expected contributions related to payments under the postretirement benefit plans through 2030 and expected pension contributions of $7.5 million in 2021 (see Note 12 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
(e)
Future restructuring payments exclude payments due under lease arrangements which are included in operating leases above.
(f)
Due to the uncertainty in predicting the timing of tax payments related to our unrecognized tax benefits, $153.8 million has been excluded from the presentation. We anticipate a reduction of up to $8.5 million of unrecognized tax benefits during the next twelve months (see Note 13 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We were not a party to any significant off-balance sheet arrangements during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Effects of Inflation and Changing Prices
We continually attempt to minimize the effect of inflation on earnings by controlling our operating costs and adjusting our selling prices. The principal raw materials and components purchased by us (memory and chip capacitors, copper, aluminum, steel, optical fiber, plastics and other polymers) are subject to changes in market price as they are influenced by commodity markets and other factors. Prices for these items have, at times, been volatile. As a result, we have adjusted our prices for certain products and may have to adjust prices again in the future. To the extent that we are unable to pass on cost increases to customers without a significant decrease in sales volume or must implement price reductions in response to a rapid decline in raw material costs, these cost changes could have a material adverse impact on the results of our operations.