ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
We have no assets, minor liabilities and administrative expenses.
WE INTEND TO PURSUE THE ACQUISITION OF AN OPERATING BUSINESS
Our sole strategy is to acquire an operating business. Successful implementation of this strategy depends on our ability to identify a suitable acquisition candidate, acquire such company on acceptable terms and integrate its operations. In pursuing acquisition opportunities, we compete with other companies with similar strategies. Competition for acquisition targets may result in increased prices of acquisition targets and a diminished pool of companies available for acquisition. Acquisitions involve multiple other risks, including risks of acquiring undisclosed or undesired liabilities, acquired in-process technology, stock compensation expense, diversion of management attention, potential disputes with the seller of one or more acquired entities and possible failure to retain key acquired personnel. Any acquired entity or assets may not perform relative to our expectations. Our ability to meet these challenges has not been established.
SCARCITY OF, AND COMPETITION FOR, BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES AND COMBINATIONS
We believe we are an insignificant participant among the firms which engage in the acquisition of business opportunities. There are many established venture capital and financial concerns that have significantly greater financial and personnel resources and technical expertise than we have. Nearly all such entities have significantly greater financial resources, technical expertise and managerial capabilities than us and, consequently, we will be at a competitive disadvantage in identifying possible business opportunities and successfully completing a business combination. Moreover, we will also compete in seeking merger or acquisition candidates with numerous other small public companies. In view of our limited financial resources and limited management availability, we will continue to be at a significant competitive disadvantage compared to our competitors.
WE HAVE NOT EXECUTED ANY FORMAL AGREEMENT FOR A BUSINESS COMBINATION OR OTHER TRANSACTION AND HAVE ESTABLISHED NO STANDARDS FOR BUSINESS COMBINATIONS
We have not executed any formal arrangement, agreement or understanding with respect to engaging in a merger with, joint venture with or acquisition of a private or public entity. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in identifying and evaluating suitable business opportunities or in concluding a business combination. We have not identified any particular industry or specific business within an industry for evaluation. There is no assurance we will be able to negotiate a business combination on terms favorable, if at all. We have not established a specific length of operating history or specified level of earnings, assets, net worth or other criteria which we will require a target business opportunity to have achieved, and without which we would not consider a business combination. Accordingly, we may enter into a business combination with a business opportunity having no significant operating history, losses, limited or no potential for earnings, limited assets, negative net worth or other negative characteristics.
WE MAY BE NEGATIVELY AFFECTED BY ADVERSE GENERAL ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
Current conditions in domestic and global economies are extremely uncertain. Adverse changes may occur as a result of softening global economies, wavering consumer confidence caused by the threat of terrorism and war, and other factors capable of affecting economic conditions. Such changes could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
BECAUSE OUR PRINCIPAL SHAREHOLDER CONTROLS OUR ACTIVITIES, HE MAY CAUSE US TO ACT IN A MANNER THAT IS MOST BENEFICIAL TO HIMSELF AND NOT TO OTHER SHAREHOLDERS WHICH COULD CAUSE US NOT TO TAKE ACTIONS THAT OUTSIDE INVESTORS MIGHT VIEW FAVORABLY
Our principal shareholder owns approximately 95% of our outstanding common stock. As a result, he effectively controls all matters requiring stockholder approval, including the election of directors, the approval of significant corporate transactions, such as mergers and related party transaction. These insiders also have the ability to delay or perhaps even block, by their ownership of our stock, an unsolicited tender offer. This concentration of ownership could have the effect of delaying, deterring or preventing a change in control of our company that you might view favorably.
OUR DIRECTORS MAY HAVE CONFLICTS OF INTEREST WHICH MAY NOT BE RESOLVED FAVORABLY TO US.
Certain conflicts of interest may exist between our sole director and us. Our sole Director has other business interests to which he devotes his attention and may be expected to continue to do so although management time should be devoted to our business. As a result, conflicts of interest may arise that can be resolved only through exercise of such judgment as is consistent with fiduciary duties to us. See "Directors and Executive Officers" and "Conflicts of Interest." below.
WE MAY DEPEND UPON OUTSIDE ADVISORS, WHO MAY NOT BE AVAILABLE ON REASONABLE TERMS AND AS NEEDED.
To supplement the business experience of our officers and directors, we may be required to employ accountants, technical experts, appraisers, attorneys, or other consultants or advisors. Our Board without any input from stockholders will make the selection of any such advisors. Furthermore, it is anticipated that such persons may be engaged on an "as needed" basis without a continuing fiduciary or other obligation to us. In the event we consider it necessary to hire outside advisors, we may elect to hire persons who are affiliates, if they are able to provide the required services.
REDUCTION OF PERCENTAGE SHARE OWNERSHIP FOLLOWING BUSINESS COMBINATION AND DILUTION TO STOCKHOLDERS
Our primary plan of operation is based upon a business combination with a private concern which, in all likelihood, would result in us issuing securities to stockholders of such private company. The issuance of previously authorized and unissued shares of our common stock would result in reduction in percentage of shares owned by present and prospective stockholders and may result in a change in control or management. In addition, any merger or acquisition can be expected to have a significant dilutive effect on the percentage of the shares held our stockholders.
THE REGULATION OF PENNY STOCKS BY SEC AND FINRA MAY HAVE AN EFFECT ON THE TRADABILITY OF OUR SECURITIES.
Our securities are currently listed on the Pink Sheets and we are currently seeking to have them listed on the over the counter bulletin board. Our shares are subject to a Securities and Exchange Commission rule that imposes special sales practice requirements upon broker-dealers who sell such securities to persons other than established customers or accredited investors. For purposes of the rule, the phrase "accredited investors" means, in general terms, institutions with assets in excess of $5,000,000, or individuals having a net worth in excess of $1,000,000 or having an annual income that exceeds $200,000 (or that, when combined with a spouse's income, exceeds $300,000).
For transactions covered by the rule, the broker-dealer must make a special suitability determination for the purchaser and receive the purchaser's written agreement to the transaction prior to the sale. Consequently, the rule may affect the ability of broker-dealers to sell our securities and the ability of purchasers in this offering to sell their securities in any market that might develop.
In addition, the Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted multiple rules to regulate "penny stocks." Such rules include Rules 3a51-1, 15g-1, 15g-2, 15g-3, 15g-4, 15g-5, 15g-6, 15g-7, and 15g-9 under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Because our securities constitute "penny stocks" within the meaning of the rules, the rules would apply to us and to our securities. The rules may further affect the ability of owners of Shares to sell our securities in any market that might develop for them.
Shareholders should be aware that, according to Securities and Exchange Commission, the market for penny stocks has suffered in recent years from patterns of fraud and abuse. Such patterns include (i) control of the market for the security by one or a few broker-dealers that are often related to the promoter or issuer; (ii) manipulation of prices through prearranged matching of purchases and sales and false and misleading press releases; (iii) "boiler room" practices involving high-pressure sales tactics and unrealistic price projections by inexperienced sales persons; (iv) excessive and undisclosed bid-ask differentials and markups by selling broker-dealers; and (v) the wholesale dumping of the same securities by promoters and broker-dealers after prices have been manipulated to a desired consequent investor losses. Our management is aware of the abuses that have occurred historically in the penny stock market. Although we do not expect to be in a position to dictate the behavior of the market or of broker-dealers who participate in the market, management will strive within the confines of practical limitations to prevent the described patterns from being established with respect to our securities.
The shares of our common stock may be thinly-traded on the Pink Sheets, meaning that the number of persons interested in purchasing our shares of common stock at or near ask prices at any given time may be relatively small or non-existent. This situation is attributable to a number of factors, including the fact that we are a small company which is relatively unknown to stock analysts, stock brokers, institutional investors and others in the investment community that generate or influence sales volume, and that even if we came to the attention of such persons, they tend to be risk-averse and would be reluctant to follow an unproven, early stage company such as ours or purchase or recommend the purchase of our shares of common stock until such time as we became more seasoned and viable. As a consequence, there may be periods of several days or more when trading activity in our shares of common stock is minimal or non-existent, as compared to a seasoned issuer which has a large and steady volume of trading activity that will generally support continuous sales without an adverse effect on Securities price.
OUR STOCK WILL IN ALL LIKELIHOOD BE THINLY TRADED AND AS A RESULT YOU MAY BE UNABLE TO SELL AT OR NEAR ASK PRICES OR AT ALL IF YOU NEED TO LIQUIDATE YOUR SHARES.
We cannot give you any assurance that a broader or more active public trading market for our shares of Common Stock will develop or be sustained, or that any trading levels will be sustained. Due to these conditions, we can give investors no assurance that they will be able to sell their shares of common stock at or near ask prices or at all if you need money or otherwise desire to liquidate your shares of common stock of our Company.
THE COMPANY IS A SHELL COMPANY AND AS SUCH SHAREHOLDERS CANNOT RELY ON THE PROVISIONS OF RULE 144 FOR RESALE OF THEIR SHARES UNTIL CERTAIN CONDITIONS ARE MET.
The Company is a shell company as defined under Rule 405 of the Securities Act of 1933 as a registrant that has no or nominal operations and either no or nominal assets, or assets consisting only of cash or cash equivalents and/or other nominal assets. As securities issued by a shell company, the securities issued by the Company can only be resold by filing a registration statement for those shares or utilizing the provisions of Rule 144 once certain conditions are met, to wit: (i) the Company has ceased to be a shell company (ii) the Company is subject to the reporting requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, (iii) the Company has filed all required reports under the Exchange Act of the preceding 12 months and (iv) one year has elapsed since the Company filed "Form 10" information.
Thus, a shareholder of the Company will not be able to sell its shares until such time as a registration statement for those shares is filed or the Company has ceased to be a shell company either by effecting a business combination or by developmental growth, the Company has remained current on its Exchange Act filings for 12 months and the Company has filed the information as would be required by a "Form 10" filing (e.g. audited financial statements, management information and compensation, shareholder information, etc.)
THE PRICE OF OUR COMMON STOCK COULD BE HIGHLY VOLATILE
Our intention is for our shares of common stock to continue to be listed on the OTC Markets. There is a limited market for our stock. It may be subject to volatility, low volumes of trades and large spreads in bid and ask prices quoted by market makers. Due to the low volume of shares traded on any trading day, persons buying or selling in relatively small quantities may easily influence prices of our common stock. This low volume of trades could also cause the price of our stock to fluctuate greatly, with large percentage changes in price occurring in any trading day session. Holders of our common stock may also not be able to readily liquidate their investment or may be forced to sell at depressed prices due to low volume trading. If high spreads between the bid and ask prices of our common stock exist at the time of a purchase, the stock would have to appreciate substantially on a relative percentage basis for an investor to recoup their investment. Broad market fluctuations and general economic and political conditions may also adversely affect the market price of our common stock. No assurance can be given that an active market in our common stock will develop or be sustained. If an active market does not develop, holders of our common stock may be unable to readily sell the shares they hold or may not be able to sell their shares at all.
LOSS OF CONTROL BY OUR PRESENT MANAGEMENT AND STOCKHOLDERS MAY OCCUR UPON ISSUANCE OF ADDITIONAL SHARES.
We may issue further Shares as consideration for the cash or assets or services out of our authorized but unissued Common Stock that would, upon issuance, represent a majority of our voting power and equity. The result of such an issuance would be those new stockholders and management would control us, and persons unknown could replace our management at this time. Such an occurrence would result in a greatly reduced percentage of ownership of us by our current Shareholders.
WE DO NOT ANTICIPATE PAYING CASH DIVIDENDS ON OUR COMMON STOCK
We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future.
WE MAY BE UNSUCCESSFUL IN FINDING A MERGER THAT CAN BE ACCOMPLISHED WITH POSITIVE LONG-TERM RESULTS
The business of selecting and entering into a merger is fraught with all kinds of issues. For instance, the business may need capital that is never achieved, the management is not capable of carrying the business forward successfully, the business plan is ill conceived, and not executed, or competitive factors cause business failure.