Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References in this report (the “Annual Report”) to “we,” “us” or the “Company” refer to CONX Corp. References to our “management” or our “management team” refer to our officers and directors, and references to the “Sponsor” refer to nXgen Opportunities, LLC. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are an early-stage blank check company incorporated in the State of Nevada on August 26, 2020, whose business purpose is to effect a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or assets. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination utilizing cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants (as defined below), our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt. Although we are not limited to a particular industry or sector for purposes of consummating an initial business combination, we intend to focus our search on identifying a prospective target that can benefit from our operational expertise in the technology, media and telecommunications (“TMT”) industry, including the wireless communications industry. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our registration statement for our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on October 29, 2020. On November 3, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 75,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $750.0 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 11,333,333 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $17 million.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $750.0 million was placed in the Trust Account (as defined below) and we had $1.7 million of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $42.3 million in transaction costs, including $15 million of underwriting fees, $26.3 million of deferred underwriting fees and $1 million of other costs.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of private placement units, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating an initial business combination.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or November 3, 2022 (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Nevada law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from August 26, 2020 (inception) through November 3, 2020 were organizational activities, and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below. Subsequent to our Initial Public Offering, we have been focused on identifying a target company for our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $(158,161), which was primarily related to formation costs and general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from Charles W. Ergen in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, and a promissory note (the “Note”) issued by Mr. Ergen. We repaid the Note on November 3, 2020.
On November 3, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 75,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per unit generating gross proceeds of $750.0 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 11,333,333 private placement warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $17 million.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $750.0 million was placed in the trust account (the “Trust Account”) and we had $1.7 million of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $42.3 million in transaction costs, including $15 million of underwriting fees, $26.3 million of deferred underwriting fees and $1 million of other costs in connection with our initial public offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $(115,223). Net loss of $(158,161) was offset by interest earned on marketable securities of $5,343. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $47,159 of cash from operating activities.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $751,217,180.
We intend to utilize substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our initial business combination. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we withdrew no interest earned on the Trust Account to pay income taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete our initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with our initial business combination, the initial stockholders or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from the Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating and consummating our initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
Registration Rights
The holders of founder shares, Private Placement Warrants, and securities that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if any, will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and stockholder rights agreement dated as of October 29, 2020. These holders are entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $15 million in the aggregate, upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $26.3 million in the aggregate, will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete our initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Recent accounting standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our audited financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the audited financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the unaudited condensed financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.