Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the information contained in our consolidated financial statements, including the notes thereto. The following discussion contains, in addition to the historical information, forward-looking statements that include risks and uncertainties (see discussion of “Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those factors set forth under Item 1A. Risk Factors and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All dollar amounts presented herein are in millions, except per share data and other key metrics, unless otherwise noted.
Basis of Presentation
The below presentation discusses the results of the operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For a discussion of results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to Part II, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview
We are a leading servicer and originator of residential mortgage loans, and a provider of real estate services through our Xome subsidiary. Our purpose is to keep the dream of homeownership alive, and we do this as a servicer by helping mortgage borrowers manage what is typically their largest financial asset, and by helping our investors maximize the returns from their portfolios of residential mortgages. We have a track record of significant growth, having expanded our servicing portfolio from $10 billion in 2009 to $626 billion as of December 31, 2020. We believe this track record reflects our strong operating capabilities, which include a proprietary low-cost servicing platform, strong loss mitigation skills, a commitment to compliance, a customer-centric culture, a demonstrated ability to retain customers, growing origination capabilities, and significant investment in technology.
Our strategy to position the Company for continued, sustainable long-term growth includes initiatives to improve profitability and generate a return on tangible equity of 12% or higher. Key strategic initiatives include the following:
•Strengthen our balance sheet by building capital and liquidity, and managing interest rate and other forms of risk;
•Improve efficiency by driving continuous improvement in unit costs for Servicing and Originations segments, as well as by taking corporate actions to eliminate costs throughout the organization;
•Grow our servicing portfolio and customer base by acquiring new customers and retaining existing customers;
•Reinvent the customer experience by acting as the customer’s advocate and by harnessing technology to deliver user-friendly digital solutions;
•Sustain the talent of our people and the culture of our organization; and
•Maintain strong relationships with agencies, investors, regulators, and other counterparties and a strong reputation for compliance and customer service.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K 34
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic introduces unprecedented uncertainty in the economy, including the risk of a significant employment shock and recessionary conditions, with implications for the health and safety of our employees, borrower delinquency rates, servicing advances, origination volumes, the availability of financing, and our overall profitability and liquidity. We have taken aggressive steps to address these risks, including moving in excess of 95% of our staff to work-from-home status as well as implementing other practices for mitigating the risk of the pandemic, including restrictions on non-essential travel and face-to-face meetings and enhanced sanitization of our facilities. We have also implemented the provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act), which makes available forbearance plans for up to one year for borrowers under government and government agency mortgage programs, which we have extended to borrowers in our private label mortgage servicing portfolio. As of February 18th, 2021, approximately 5.5% of our customers were on a forbearance plan, down from a peak of 7.2%. More customers are now exiting forbearance than are entering. We include loans in forbearance related to the CARES Act, whereby no payments have been received from borrowers for greater than 90 days, in loans subject to repurchase right from Ginnie Mae in other assets and payables and other liabilities on a gross basis. The balance was $5,879 loans as of December 31, 2020. See liquidity discussion related to the COVID-19 pandemic in Liquidity and Capital Resources section in MD&A.
Anticipated Trends
Our Servicing segment continued to experience portfolio run-off from elevated prepayment speeds in the low interest rate environment, which was more than replenished by record correspondent volume. We expect to see continued growth in the first quarter of 2021, primarily from correspondent and flow originations as well as UPB growth from a new subservicing relationship. Additionally, we benefited from early-buyout gains in the fourth quarter of 2020 as we helped customers exit forbearance. We expect a similar level of contributions from early-buyout volumes in the first quarter of 2021.
Our Originations segment has experienced volume growth and higher margins as a result of the lower interest rate environment, which more than offset the decline in our Servicing segment. As the pandemic began to impact the mortgage capital markets, our Originations segment took several steps to rapidly de-risk the pipeline. During the second quarter of 2020, we slowed down correspondent production as we evaluated the environment. However, since then, we ramped our correspondent production and had record correspondent volume during the fourth quarter of 2020. We expect a similar level of funded volumes for the first quarter of 2021.
Our Xome segment revenue from the Title division has benefited from the lower interest rate environment and increase in origination volume. Xome’s revenue from the Exchange division has been, and is expected to continue to be, negatively impacted, as the foreclosure process is currently on hold, with moratoriums in place at the national level and in some local markets. As the foreclosure moratoriums have been extended through June 2021, we expect continued negative impact in the first quarter of 2021. Once the moratoriums are lifted, we expect Exchange to ramp up and Xome to contribute meaningfully to our consolidated results.
35 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Results of Operations
Table 1. Consolidated Operations
(1)Revenues - operational consists of total revenues, excluding mark-to-market.
NM = Not meaningful
The increase in net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by higher revenues from our Originations segment, offset by an increase in negative mark-to-market adjustments primarily due to lower interest rates, and an increase in total other expenses, net. The increase in total other expenses, net was impacted by lower interest income driven by lower interest rates and the loss on redemption of unsecured senior notes. For more information on our segment results, see below.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had an income tax expense of $92 and income tax benefit of $273, respectively. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 23.0%. The change in the effective tax rate in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to the release of the valuation allowance associated with the pre-Merger net operating loss carryforwards in 2019, the relative tax impacts of state adjustments, and permanent differences such as nondeductible executive compensation and nondeductible penalties.
Segment Results
Our operations are conducted through three segments: Servicing, Originations, and Xome.
•The Servicing segment performs operational activities on behalf of investors or owners of the underlying mortgages, including collecting and disbursing borrower payments, investor reporting, customer service, modifying loans where appropriate to help borrowers stay current, and, when necessary, performing collections, foreclosures, and the sale of REO.
•The Originations segment originates residential mortgage loans through our direct-to-consumer channel, which provides refinance options for our existing customers, and through our correspondent channel, which purchases or originates loans from mortgage bankers and brokers. Our wholesale channel was shut down during the three months ended June 30, 2020 and subsequently ceased originating loans and funded out the remaining pipeline.
•The Xome segment provides a variety of real estate services to mortgage originators, mortgage and real estate investors, and mortgage servicers, including title, valuation, and field services, and operates an exchange which facilitates the sale of foreclosed properties.
Refer to Note 20, Segment Information, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of segment results.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K 36
Servicing Segment
The Servicing segment’s strategy is to generate income by growing the portfolio and maximizing the servicing margin. We believe several competitive strengths have been critical to our long-term growth as a servicer, including our low-cost platform, our skill in mitigating losses for investors, our commitment to strong customer service and regulatory compliance, our history of successfully boarding new loans, and the ability to retain existing customers by offering attractive refinance options. We believe that our operational capabilities are reflected in strong servicer ratings.
Table 2. Servicer Ratings
(1)Fitch Rating Scale of 1 (Highest Performance) to 5 (Low/No Proficiency)
(2)Moody’s Rating Scale of SQ1 (Strong Ability/Stability) to SQ5 (Weak Ability/Stability)
(3)S&P Rating Scale of Strong to Weak
37 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
The following table sets forth the results of operations for the Servicing segment:
Table 3. Servicing Segment Results of Operations
(1)Calculated basis points (“bps”) are as follows: Annual dollar amount/Total average UPB X 10000.
NM = Not meaningful
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K 38
Table 4. Servicing - Revenues
(1)Calculated basis points (“bps”) are as follows: Annual dollar amount/Total average UPB X 10000.
(2)Certain ancillary and other non-base fees related to subservicing operations are separately presented as other subservicing revenues.
(3)The amount of MSR MTM includes the impact of negative modeled cash flows which have been transferred to reserves on advances and other receivables. The negative modeled cash flows relate to advances and other receivables associated with inactive and liquidated loans that are no longer part of the MSR portfolio. The impact of negative modeled cash flows was $28 and $62 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
NM = Not meaningful
Servicing Segment Revenues
The following provides the changes in revenues for the Servicing segment:
Forward - Due to the decrease of the forward MSR portfolio’s UPB, base servicing fee revenue decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. Late payment fees and incentive fees decreased due to loan forbearance related to the CARES Act. Other ancillary revenues increased primarily due to the $80 gain on sale associated with loans bought out of a GNMA securitization, modified and redelivered following GNMA guidelines.
Forward MSR amortization increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to higher prepayments driven by the lower interest rate environment.
Total negative MTM adjustments increased in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to the low interest rate environment during 2020.
Subservicing - Subservicing fees increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, due to a higher average subservicing portfolio UPB and higher fees earned on delinquent loans.
39 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Servicing Segment Expenses
Total expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by the change in foreclosure and other liquidation (recoveries) expenses, net. The change in foreclosure and other liquidation (recoveries) expenses, net was primarily due to operational improvements of the reverse portfolio with respect to assignments and adherence to HUD curtailment guidelines, in addition to $46 on loss recoveries related to a settlement with a government agency and improved performance of $15 on loss recoveries related to settlement with a prior servicer. Salaries, wages and benefits decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to operational efficiencies driven by cost saving initiatives, which included consolidation of one of our servicing centers. The decrease in corporate and other general and administrative expenses in 2020 was primarily driven by lower temporary labor costs and occupancy expenses due to cost saving initiatives.
Servicing Segment Other Income (Expenses), net
During the year ended December 31, 2020 we had total other expenses, net of $205 compared to total other income, net of $35 in 2019. The change was primarily due to a lower income earned on reverse mortgage interests due to decline in the reverse mortgage interests balance and the amortization of a net asset premium into income. Other interest income decreased due to lower interest income earned on custodial balances due to lower LIBOR rates. Interest expense decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to a decrease in reverse mortgage interests expense primarily driven by the decline in the reverse mortgage interests portfolio, partially offset by an increase in other interest expense primarily driven by higher compensating interest expense and bank fees.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K 40
Table 5. Servicing Portfolio - Unpaid Principal Balances
(1)Subservicing and other includes (i) loans we service for others, (ii) residential mortgage loans originated but have yet to be sold, and (iii) agency REO balances for which we own the mortgage servicing rights.
(2)The encumbered forward MSRs consist of residential mortgage loans included within our excess spread financing transactions and MSR financing liability.
As of December 31, 2020, when measuring the fair value of the portfolio as a basis point of the unpaid principal balance, our total forward MSRs decreased in value compared to 2019 primarily due to higher forecasted prepayment speeds as a result of the declining interest rate environment in 2020.
41 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
The following table provides a rollforward of our forward MSR and subservicing and other portfolio UPB:
Table 6. Forward Servicing and Subservicing and Other Portfolio UPB Rollforward
(1)Includes transfers to/from Subservicing and Other.
(2)Voluntary reductions are related to loan payoffs by customers.
(3)Involuntary reductions refer to loan chargeoffs.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our ending forward MSR UPB decreased primarily due to increased voluntary reductions in a low interest rate environment, partially offset by increased origination volumes. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our subservicing and other portfolio ending UPB increased primarily due to portfolio growth, partially offset by higher voluntary reductions in the low interest rate environment.
The table below summarizes the overall performance of the forward servicing and subservicing portfolio:
Table 7. Key Performance Metrics - Forward Servicing and Subservicing Portfolio(1)
(1)Characteristics and key performance metrics of our servicing portfolio exclude UPB and loan counts acquired but not yet boarded and currently serviced by others.
(2)As of December 31, 2020, loan count includes 199,118 loans in forbearance related to the CARES Act.
(3)Average loan amount is presented in whole dollar amounts.
(4)The weighted average coupon amounts are only reflective of our owned forward MSR portfolio that is reported at fair value.
(5)Loan delinquency is based on the current contractual due date of the loan. In the case of a completed loan modification, delinquency is based on the modified due date of the loan. Loan delinquency includes loans in forbearance.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K 42
Delinquency is an assumption in determining the mark-to-market adjustment and is a key indicator of MSR portfolio performance. Delinquent loans contribute to lower MSR values due to higher costs to service and increased carrying costs of advances. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and implementation of the CARES Act, loans greater than 60 days, 90 days and 120 days delinquent have increased as of December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
Table 8. Forward Loan Modifications and Workout Units
(1)Modifications adjust the terms of the loan.
(2)Workouts are other loss mitigation options which do not adjust the terms of the loan. For the year ended December 31, 2020, workouts exclude loans which did not miss a contractual payment during forbearance related to the CARES Act.
Total modifications and workouts during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased compared to 2019 primarily due to an increase in workouts related to loans impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic which successfully exited their forbearance plans.
Servicing Portfolio and Liabilities
The following table sets forth the activities of forwards MSRs:
Table 9. Forward MSRs - Fair Value Rollforward
(1)Amounts primarily represent negative fair values reclassified from the MSR asset to reserves as underlying loans are removed from the MSR and other reclassification adjustments.
43 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
See Note 3, Mortgage Servicing Rights and Related Liabilities and Note 17, Fair Value Measurements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for additional information regarding the range of assumptions and sensitivities related to the fair value measurement of forward MSRs as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Excess Spread Financing
As further disclosed in Note 3, Mortgage Servicing Rights and Related Liabilities, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, we have entered into sale and assignment agreements treated as financing arrangements whereby the acquirer has the right to receive a specified percentage of the excess cash flow generated from an MSR.
The servicing fees associated with an MSR can be segregated into (i) a base servicing fee and (ii) an excess servicing fee. The base servicing fee, along with ancillary income and other revenues, is designed to cover costs incurred to service the specified pool plus a reasonable margin. The remaining servicing fee is considered excess. We sell a percentage of the excess fee, as a method for efficiently financing acquired MSRs and the purchase of loans. We do not currently utilize these transactions as a primary source of financing due to the availability of lower cost sources of funding.
Excess spread financings are recorded at fair value, and the impact of fair value adjustments on future revenues and capital resources varies primarily due to (i) prepayment speeds and (ii) our ability to recapture prepayments through the origination platform. See Note 3, Mortgage Servicing Rights and Related Liabilities and Note 17, Fair Value Measurements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for additional information regarding the range of assumptions and sensitivities related to the fair value measurement of the excess spread financing liability as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following table sets forth the change in the excess spread financing:
Table 10. Excess Spread Financing - Rollforward
Reverse - MSRs, MSLs and Participating Interests in Reverse Mortgages - Amortized Cost
The table below provides detail of the characteristics and key performance metrics of the reverse servicing portfolio, which is included in reverse MSRs, MSLs and participating interests in reverse mortgages. Such assets are recorded at amortized cost.
Table 11. Reverse Mortgage Portfolio Characteristics
(1)Average loan amount is presented in whole dollar amounts.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K 44
Historically, we acquired servicing rights and participating interests in reverse mortgage portfolios; however, the portfolio is no longer regarded as a core business and is currently in run-off. Reverse mortgage loans, most commonly HECMs, provide seniors 62 and older with a loan upon which draws can be made periodically. The draws are secured by the equity in the borrower’s home. For acquired servicing rights, an MSR or MSL is established on the acquisition date at fair value, as applicable, based on the expected discounted cash flow from servicing the reverse portfolio.
Each quarter, we accrete the MSL of the respective portfolios run-off to revenues - service related, net. The MSL is assessed for increased obligation based on its fair value, using a variety of assumptions, with the key assumptions being discount rates, prepayment speeds and the borrower life expectancy. The MSLs are stratified based on predominant risk characteristics of the underlying serviced loans. Impairment, if any, represents the excess of amortized cost of an individual stratum over its estimated fair value and is recognized through an increase in the valuation allowance.
Based on our assessment, no impairment or increased obligation was required to be recorded for reverse MSRs and MSLs, respectively, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Originations Segment
The strategy of our Originations segment is to originate or acquire new loans for the servicing portfolio at a more attractive cost than purchasing MSRs in bulk transactions and to retain our existing customers by providing them with attractive refinance options. The Originations segment plays a strategically important role because its profitability is typically counter cyclical to that of the Servicing segment. Furthermore, by originating or acquiring loans at a more attractive cost than would be the case in bulk MSR acquisitions, the Originations segment improves our overall profitability and cash flow. Growing the Originations segment has been a strategic focus for us for several years. The Originations segment includes two channels: Our direct-to-consumer (“DTC”) and correspondent lending channel. See Part I, Item 1, Business, for description of our channels.
45 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
The following table sets forth the results of operations for the Originations segment:
Table 12. Originations Segment Results of Operations
(1)Service related revenues, net - Originations refers to fees collected from customers for originated loans and from other lenders for loans purchased through the correspondent channel, and includes loan application, underwriting, and other similar fees.
(2)Net gain on loans originated and sold represents the gains and losses from the origination, purchase, and sale of loans and related derivative instruments. Gains from the origination and sale of loans are affected by the volume and margin of our originations activity and are impacted by fluctuations in interest rates.
(3)Capitalized servicing rights represents the fair value attributed to mortgage servicing rights at the time in which they are retained in connection with the sale of loans during the period.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K 46
Table 13. Originations - Key Metrics
(1)Pull through adjusted volume represents the expected funding from locks taken during the period.
(2)Recapture percentage includes new loan originations for both purchase and refinance transactions where borrower retention and/or property retention occurs as a result of a loan payoff from our servicing portfolio. Excludes loans we are contractually unable to solicit.
(3)Refinance recapture percentage includes new loan originations for refinance transactions where borrower retention and property retention occurs as a result of a loan payoff from our servicing portfolio. Excludes loans we are contractually unable to solicit.
(4)Calculated on pull-through adjusted lock volume as revenue is recognized at the time of loan lock.
(5)Expenses include total expense and total other income (expenses), net.
(6)Calculated on funded volume as expenses are incurred based on closing of the loan.
47 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Income before income tax increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to an increase in revenues driven by origination volume growth, predominately in the DTC channel. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily slowed operations in the correspondent channel in order to prioritize cash build and de-risk the pipeline. As the market stabilized, we returned to normal correspondent activity in the third quarter of 2020. The growth in the origination volume was due to declining interest rates. The Originations Margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased as compared to 2019 primarily due to higher revenue as a percentage of pull through adjusted lock volume driven by an increase in volume from the DTC channel, along with a lower expenses ratio as a percentage of funded volume primarily due to operational efficiencies.
Originations Segment Revenues
Total revenues increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily driven by the higher originations volumes in a declining interest rate environment, primarily from the DTC channel. Total revenue increased $1,150 or 110% over the prior year as consumer direct pull through adjusted volume increased 109% during the same period. There were no material changes to repurchase reserves.
Originations Segment Expenses
Total expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased when compared to 2019 primarily due to growth in origination volumes, which was driven by the low interest rate environment. The origination volume growth contributed to the increase in salaries, wages and benefits due to increased compensation and headcount related costs, and loan origination expenses.
Originations Segment Other Income (Expenses), Net
Interest income relates primarily to mortgage loans held for sale. Interest expense is associated with the warehouse facilities utilized to finance newly originated loans.
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased when compared to 2019 primarily driven by a lower cost of funds. The decrease in interest expense was partially offset by a decrease in other income, net. Other income, net was higher in 2019 due to recognition of incentives we received related to our financing of certain loans satisfying certain customer relief characteristics under to a master repurchase agreement that expired during 2019.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K 48
Xome Segment
Xome is a real estate data and services Company that provides services for mortgage originators and servicers, including Mr. Cooper, as well as mortgage and real estate investors. Xome generates fee income that complements our servicing and origination businesses without requiring a significant amount of capital or exposing us to the same level of interest rate or credit risk. Xome is organized into three divisions: Exchange, Title, and Solutions. See Item 1, Business, for description of our divisions.
The following table sets forth the results of operations for the Xome segment:
Table 14. Xome Segment Results of Operations
Income before income tax expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to an increase in total revenues and a decrease in total expenses, partially offset by a decrease in total other income (expenses), net. The increase in total revenues was primarily driven by shift in Title product mix with higher Title origination orders, partially offset by a decrease in Exchange revenues due to the decrease in defaults and foreclosures nationwide related to the CARES Act and decrease in Solutions revenues primarily driven by third party origination and default appraisals. The decrease in total expenses was primarily due to a decrease in salaries, wages and benefits driven by operational efficiencies. The decrease in total other income (expenses), net was due to the change in fair value of contingent consideration of $15 recorded in 2019 in connection with the acquisition of Assurant Mortgage Solutions.
49 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Corporate/Other
Corporate/Other represents unallocated overhead expenses, including the costs of executive management and other corporate functions that are not directly attributable to our operating segments, and interest expense on our unsecured senior notes.
The following tables set forth the selected financial results for Corporate/Other:
Table 15. Corporate/Other Selected Financial Results
NM = Not meaningful
Total expenses decreased in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to higher salaries, wages and benefits, and general and administrative expense in 2019 driven by the acquisition and integration expenses related to the Pacific Union Financial, LLC (“Pacific Union”) acquisition and the Seterus acquisition in February 2019. The decrease in total expenses was partially offset by a $15 loss on impairment of assets in connection with technology write-offs and an ancillary business in 2020.
Interest expense decreased in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to a decrease in interest expense on unsecured senior notes as a result of repayment and redemption in 2020 of the unsecured senior notes due 2021, 2022, 2023 and 2026. The decrease in total interest expense was partially offset by the issuance in 2020 of the unsecured senior notes due 2027, 2028 and 2030. For further discussion, refer to Note 12, Indebtedness, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The change in total other expenses, net, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to the $138 loss on redemption of the unsecured senior notes due 2023 and 2026.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We measure liquidity by unrestricted cash and availability of borrowings on our MSR and other facilities. Our cash and cash equivalents on hand increased to $695 as of December 31, 2020 from $329 as of December 31, 2019. We benefited from strong operating cash flow and repaid $175 of incremental draws from our MSR facilities that were incurred at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, we repaid and redeemed $2,508 of unsecured senior notes through cash on hand and proceeds received from issuance of new unsecured senior notes, which extended the maturity of our unsecured senior notes to 2027. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we bought back 2.6 million shares of our outstanding common stock as part of the $100 stock repurchase program.
We have sufficient borrowing capacity to support our operations. As of December 31, 2020, total available borrowing capacity was $13,690, of which we could borrow an additional $6,916. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1,217 collateral pledged against the MSR facilities, of which we could borrow an additional $390.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K 50
The economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in an increase in servicing advances and liquidity demands related to the utilization of forbearance programs offered by the CARES Act. We had an increase in forbearance plans during the second quarter of 2020, but the forbearance rate subsequently declined. Based on current modeling of expected forbearance rates within our portfolio, we believe that we are well-positioned to manage further increases in advances. In April 2020, we expanded our committed advance facility capacity by $850, including an expansion of capacity for private label advances for $200. In addition, in August 2020, we entered into a new financing facility for GNMA MSRs and advances with a capacity of $900, of which $640 was allocated to advances as of December 31, 2020. With this addition, we expanded our total advance facility capacity to $2,040 and total unused advance capacity to $1,371 as of December 31, 2020. For more information on our MSR and advance facilities, see Note 12, Indebtedness, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For non-agency servicing, we are reimbursed for advances relatively quickly, which should limit growth in balances with even higher forbearance rates.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Our primary sources of funds for liquidity include: (i) servicing fees and ancillary revenues; (ii) payments received from sale or securitization of loans; (iii) payments from the liquidation or securitization of our outstanding participating interests in reverse mortgage loans; (iv) advance and warehouse facilities, other secured borrowings and the unsecured senior notes; and (v) payments received in connection with the sale of advance receivables and excess spread.
Our primary uses of funds for liquidity include: (i) funding of servicing advances; (ii) originations of loans; (iii) payment of interest expenses; (iv) payment of operating expenses; (v) repayment of borrowings and repurchases or redemptions of outstanding indebtedness; (vi) payments for acquisitions of MSRs; (vii) scheduled and unscheduled draws on our serviced reverse residential mortgage loans; and (viii) payment of our technology expenses.
We believe that our cash flows from operating activities, as well as capacity with existing facilities, provide adequate resources to fund our anticipated ongoing cash requirements. We rely on these facilities to fund operating activities. As the facilities mature, we anticipate renewal of these facilities will be achieved. Future debt maturities will be funded with cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operating activities and, if necessary, future access to capital markets. We continue to optimize the use of balance sheet cash to avoid unnecessary interest carrying costs.
In addition, derivative instruments are used as part of the overall strategy to manage exposure to market risks primarily associated with fluctuations in interest rates related to originations. See Note 11, Derivative Financial Instruments, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, which is incorporated herein for a summary of our derivative transactions.
In the normal course of business, we enter into various types of on- and off-balance sheet transactions with special purpose entities (“SPEs”) determined to be variable interest entities (“VIEs”), which primarily consist of securitization trusts established for a limited purpose. Generally, these SPEs are formed for the purpose of securitization transactions in which we transfer assets to an SPE, which then issues to investors various forms of debt obligations supported by those assets. In these securitization transactions, we typically receive cash and/or other interests in the SPE as proceeds for the transferred assets. See Note 13, Securitizations and Financings, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, which is incorporated herein for a summary of our transactions with VIEs and unconsolidated balances, and details of their impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Cash Flows
The table below presents cash flows information:
Table 16. Cash Flows
51 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Operating activities
Our operating activities generated cash of $331 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $702 in 2019. The change in 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in working capital of $1,395, primarily due to less collections on reverse mortgage interests driven by normal portfolio run-off, partially offset by a decrease of $1,004 in cash used from originations net sales activities.
Investing activities
Our investing activities used cash of $134 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $338 in 2019. The decrease in cash used in investing activities was primarily due to a decrease of $417 in cash used for the purchase of forward mortgage servicing rights incurred, partially offset by a decrease in cash generated of $290 from proceeds on sale of forward mortgage servicing rights. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $85 cash in connection with the Pacific Union and Seterus acquisitions.
Financing activities
Our financing activities generated cash of $104 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to cash used of $313 in 2019. Contributing to the cash generated was $2,100 related to the issuance in 2020 of the unsecured senior notes due 2027, 2028, and 2030, partially offset by an increase of $2,114 cash used in the redemption and repayment of unsecured senior notes and notes payable, primarily related to the redemption and repayment of unsecured senior debt due 2021, 2022, 2023, and 2026. Additionally, contributing to cash generated was a $258 change in advance and warehouse facilities due to a net increased borrowing of $1,776 in advance and warehouse facilities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1,518 in 2019.
The cash generated from the issuance of excess spread financing decreased $518 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, as we did not enter into any new excess spread financing deals in 2020. In addition, cash used in participating interest financing decreased $676 in 2020 primarily due to a lower repayment of participating interest financing compared to 2019.
Capital Resources
Capital Structure and Debt
We require access to external financing resources from time to time depending on our cash requirements, assessments of current and anticipated market conditions and after-tax cost of capital. If needed, we believe additional capital could be raised through a combination of issuances of equity, corporate indebtedness, asset-backed acquisition financing and/or cash from operations. Our access to capital markets can be impacted by factors outside our control, including economic conditions.
Financial Covenants
Our credit facilities contain various financial covenants which primarily relate to required tangible net worth amounts, liquidity reserves, leverage requirements, and profitability requirements, which are measured at our operating subsidiary, Nationstar Mortgage, LLC. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with our required financial covenants.
Seller/Servicer Financial Requirements
We are also subject to net worth, liquidity and capital ratio requirements established by the Federal Housing Finance Agency (“FHFA”) for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Seller/Servicers, and Ginnie Mae for single family issuers, as summarized below. These requirements apply to our operating subsidiary, Nationstar Mortgage, LLC.
Minimum Net Worth
•FHFA - a net worth base of $2.5 plus 25 basis points of outstanding UPB for total loans serviced.
•Ginnie Mae - a net worth equal to the sum of (i) base of $2.5 plus 35 basis points of the issuer’s total single-family effective outstanding obligations, and (ii) base of $5 plus 1% of the total effective outstanding HMBS obligations.
Minimum Liquidity
•FHFA - 3.5 basis points of total Agency Mortgage Servicing UPB plus incremental 200 basis points of total nonperforming Agency, measured at 90+ delinquencies, servicing in excess of 6% total Agency servicing UPB; and
•Ginnie Mae - the greater of $1 or 10 basis points of our outstanding single-family MBS and at least 20% of our net worth requirement for HECM MBS.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K 52
Minimum Capital Ratio
•FHFA and Ginnie Mae - a ratio of Tangible Net Worth to Total Assets (excluding HMBS securitizations) greater than 6%.
Secured Debt to Gross Tangible Asset Ratio
•Ginnie Mae - a secured debt to gross tangible asset ratios no greater than 60%.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with our seller/servicer financial requirements for FHFA and Ginnie Mae.
Since we have a Ginnie Mae single-family servicing portfolio that exceeds $75 billion in UPB, we are also required to obtain an external primary servicer rating and issuer credit ratings from two different rating agencies and receive a minimum rating of a B or its equivalent. We are permitted to satisfy minimum liquidity requirements using a combination of AAA rated government securities that are marked to market in addition to cash and certain cash equivalents.
In addition, Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac may require capital ratios in excess of stated requirements. Refer to Note 18, Capital Requirements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Table 17. Debt
Advance Facilities
As part of our normal course of business, we borrow money to fund servicing advances. Our servicing agreements require that we advance our own funds to meet contractual principal and interest payments for certain investors, and to pay taxes, insurance, foreclosure costs and various other items that are required to preserve the assets being serviced. Delinquency rates and prepayment speeds affect the size of servicing advance balances, and we exercise our ability to stop advancing principal and interest where the pooling and servicing agreements permit, where the advance is deemed to be non-recoverable from future proceeds. These servicing requirements affect our liquidity. We rely upon several counterparties to provide us with financing facilities to fund a portion of our servicing advances. As of December 31, 2020, we had a total borrowing capacity of $2,040, of which we could borrow an additional $1,371. The maturity dates of our advance facilities range from October 2021 to August 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we had $192 of borrowings outstanding under facilities maturing within less than one year and $477 of borrowings outstanding under facilities maturing within the next three years.
Warehouse and MSR Facilities
Loan origination activities generally require short-term liquidity in excess of amounts generated by our operations. The loans we originate are financed through several warehouse lines on a short-term basis. We typically hold the loans for approximately 30 days and then sell or place the loans in government securitizations in order to repay the borrowings under the warehouse lines. Our ability to fund current operations depends upon our ability to secure these types of short-term financings on acceptable terms and to renew or replace the financings as they expire. As of December 31, 2020, we had a total borrowing capacity of $10,990 and $660 for warehouse and MSR facilities, of which we could borrow an additional $5,155 and $390, respectively. The maturity dates for our warehouse facilities range from March 2021 to September 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we had $4,078 of borrowings outstanding under warehouse facilities maturing within less than one year and $1,757 of borrowings outstanding under warehouse facilities maturing within the next three years. The maturity dates for our MSR facilities range from August 2021 to November 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we had $270 of borrowing outstanding under MSR facilities maturing within the next three years.
As servicer for reverse mortgage loans, among other things, we are required to fund borrower draws on the loans. We typically pool borrower draws for approximately 30 days before including them in a HMBS securitization. As of December 31, 2020, unsecuritized borrower draws totaled $72, and our maximum unfunded advance obligation related to these reverse mortgage loans was $2,202.
53 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Unsecured Senior Notes
In 2020, we completed offerings of unsecured senior notes with maturity dates ranging from 2027 to 2030. We pay interest semi-annually to the holders of these notes at interest rates ranging from 5.125% to 6.000%. We are scheduled to pay a total of $949 of interest payments from these notes over the next ten years, of which $116 is due within less than one year.
As of December 31, 2020, the expected maturities of our unsecured senior notes based on contractual maturities are presented below:
Table 18. Contractual Maturities - Unsecured Senior Notes
Other contractual obligations
In addition to the above contractual obligations, we have also been involved with several securitizations, which were structured as secured borrowings. These structures resulted in us carrying the securitized loans as mortgages on our consolidated balance sheets and recognizing the asset-backed certificates acquired by third parties as nonrecourse debt. The timing of the principal payments on this nonrecourse debt is dependent on the payments received on the underlying mortgage loans and liquidation of REO. For more information regarding our indebtedness, see Note 12, Indebtedness, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Our operating lease obligations were primarily incurred for office space and equipment. The average lease terms are generally for 1 to 8 years. As of December 31, 2020, the total future minimum lease payments for our operating lease obligations was $123, of which $33 is due within less than a year. For more information regarding lease obligations, see Note 8, Leases, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K 54
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Various elements of our accounting policies, by their nature, are inherently subject to estimation techniques, valuation assumptions and other subjective assessments. In particular, we have identified the following policies that, due to the judgment, estimates and assumptions inherent in those policies, are critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements. These policies relate to fair value measurements, particularly those determined to be Level 3 as discussed in Note 17, Fair Value Measurements, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, goodwill, and valuation and realization of deferred tax assets. We believe that the judgment, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are appropriate given the factual circumstances at the time. However, given the sensitivity of our consolidated financial statements to these critical accounting policies, the use of other judgments, estimates and assumptions could result in material differences in our results of operations or financial condition. Fair value measurements considered to be Level 3 representing estimated values based on significant unobservable inputs include (i) the valuation of MSRs, (ii) the valuation of excess spread financing and (iii) the valuation of interest rate lock commitments (“IRLCs”).
MSRs at Fair Value
We generally retain the servicing rights for existing forward residential mortgage loans transferred to a third party. We recognize MSRs in such transfers that meet the requirements for sale accounting. Additionally, we may acquire the rights to service forward residential mortgage loans from third parties. We apply fair value accounting to this class of MSRs, with all changes in fair value recorded within revenues - service related, net in the consolidated statements of operations. We estimate the fair value of these MSRs using a discounted cash flow model, which incorporates prepayment speeds, delinquencies, discount rate, ancillary revenues, float earnings and other assumptions (including costs to service and forbearance rates) that management believes are consistent with the assumptions that other similar market participants use in valuing the MSRs. The key assumptions to determine fair value include prepayment speed, discount rate and cost to service. However, the discounted cash flow model is complex and uses asset-specific collateral data and market inputs for interest and discount rates. In addition, the modeling requirements of MSRs are complex because of the high number of variables that drive cash flows associated with MSRs. For the impact of changes in estimates on MSRs at fair value, see