ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition and is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to financial statements, risk factors and other disclosures included in this Form 10-K. Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”).
We make statements in this section that are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. For a complete discussion of such forward-looking statements and the potential risks and uncertainties that may affect their accuracy, see “Forward-Looking Statements” included in “Risk Factors” in this Form 10-K and the “Overview” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” sections of this MD&A.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage company engaged in the discovery and development of drugs that treat severe metabolic, oncologic and psychiatric disorders by modulating the effects of the hormone cortisol. Since 2012, we have marketed Korlym® (mifepristone) for the treatment of patients who suffer from Cushing’s syndrome. Our portfolio of proprietary selective cortisol modulators consists of four structurally distinct series totaling more than 1,000 compounds, including relacorilant, exicorilant and miricorilant.
Cushing’s Syndrome
Korlym. We sell Korlym in the United States, using experienced sales representatives to call on physicians caring for patients with endogenous Cushing’s syndrome (hypercortisolism). Because many people who suffer from Cushing’s syndrome are undiagnosed or inadequately treated, we have developed and continue to refine and expand programs to educate physicians and patients about screening for hypercortisolism and the role Korlym can play in treating the disorder. We also have a field-based force of medical science liaisons.
We use one specialty pharmacy and one specialty distributor to distribute Korlym and provide logistical support to physicians and patients. Our policy is that no patient with Cushing’s syndrome will be denied access to Korlym for financial reasons. To help us achieve that goal, we fund our own patient support programs and donate money to independent charitable foundations that help patients pay for all aspects of their Cushing’s syndrome care, whether or not that care includes taking Korlym.
Relacorilant. We are conducting two Phase 3 trials of our proprietary, selective cortisol modulator, relacorilant, as a treatment for patients with Cushing’s Syndrome.
Our Phase 3 GRACE trial is expected to enroll 130 patients at sites in the United States, Canada, Europe and Israel. Each patient in GRACE will receive relacorilant for 22 weeks. Patients who exhibit pre-specified improvements in hypertension or glucose metabolism enter a 12-week, double-blind, “randomized withdrawal” phase in which half of the patients continue receiving relacorilant and the rest receive placebo. If successful, we expect GRACE to provide the basis for a new drug application to treat patients with all etiologies of Cushing’s syndrome.
Our Phase 3 GRADIENT trial is expected to enroll 130 patients whose Cushing’s syndrome is caused by an adrenal tumor. Half of patients will receive relacorilant for 26 weeks and half will receive placebo. Many of the clinical sites in GRACE are participating in GRADIENT.
The United States Food and Drug Association (“FDA”) and the European Commission (“EC”) have designated relacorilant as an orphan drug for the treatment of Cushing’s syndrome. In the United States, relacorilant’s orphan designation confers tax credits, reduced regulatory fees and, provided we obtain approval, seven years of exclusive marketing rights for the treatment of patients with Cushing’s syndrome. Benefits of orphan drug designation by the EC are similar, but also, include protocol assistance from the European Medicines Agency (“EMA”), access to the centralized marketing authorization procedure in the European Union (“EU”) and, if we obtain approval, ten years of exclusive marketing rights in the EU for the treatment of patients with Cushing’s syndrome.
Oncology
Relacorilant in Patients with Solid Tumors. In July 2020, we completed enrollment in a 178-patient, controlled Phase 2 trial of relacorilant in combination with nab-paclitaxel in patients with advanced, high-grade serous ovarian tumors, which we
are conducting at sites in the United States and Europe. We expect top-line data from this trial to be available in the first half of 2021.
In addition, our Phase 3 RELIANT trial of relacorilant plus nab-paclitaxel in patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer is expected to enroll 80 patients, all of whom will receive relacorilant plus nab-paclitaxel. We expect to complete an interim analysis of data from the first 43 patients in the first half of 2021.
We are also conducting an open-label, Phase 1b trial of relacorilant plus the PD-1 checkpoint inhibitor pembrolizumab in 20 patients with advanced adrenocortical cancer with cortisol excess.
Cortisol Modulators in Patients with CRPC. We are conducting an open label, dose-finding trial of our proprietary, selective cortisol modulator exicorilant in combination with Xtandi in patients with metastatic CRPC. Investigators at the University of Chicago are conducting a dose-finding trial of relacorilant combined with Xtandi in the same patient population. We are providing relacorilant.
Metabolic Diseases
Antipsychotic-Induced Weight Gain (“AIWG”). We are studying our selective cortisol modulator miricorilant as a potential treatment for AIWG. In 2020, we completed a double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 1b trial, in which 96 healthy subjects received daily doses of the antipsychotic medication olanzapine (10 mg) and either miricorilant (600 mg or 900 mg) or placebo for 14 days. Study participants who received miricorilant gained less weight than subjects receiving placebo. In addition, markers of liver damage that rise temporarily at the start of olanzapine therapy increased less sharply in subjects receiving miricorilant.
Our double-blind, placebo-controlled, Phase 2 GRATITUDE trial is studying the ability of miricorilant to reverse recent AIWG, with a planned enrollment of 100 patients with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder at 30 sites in the United States. Study participants receive their established antipsychotic medication plus either miricorilant or placebo for 12 weeks. Our double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 2 GRATITUDE II trial is studying the ability of miricorilant to reverse long-standing AIWG in 120 patients with schizophrenia at 35 centers in the United States.
Liver Disease. We are conducting a double-blind, placebo-controlled, Phase 2 trial of miricorilant as a potential treatment for NASH. The trial has a planned enrollment of 150 patients at 15 sites in the United States. Patients will receive a daily dose of miricorilant (600 mg or 900 mg) or placebo for 12 weeks.
Continued Discovery and Development
Our selective cortisol modulator CORT113176, which has shown promise in animal models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (or “ALS”), has completed its Phase 1 trial. We plan to advance it to Phase 2 as a potential treatment for that disease. In addition, we continue to identify selective cortisol modulators and plan to advance the most promising of them towards the clinic.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Much of the world is subject to pandemic-related public health restrictions, including in California, where we are headquartered, and in the states where we sell Korlym and where our clinical trial sites are located. Most of our third-party manufacturers, distributors (including the specialty pharmacy that dispenses Korlym), information technology service providers, law and accounting firms, clinical research organizations and others are also subject to pandemic-related restrictions.
These restrictions, as well as measures voluntarily undertaken by patients, physicians, hospitals and medical clinics to reduce the risk of coronavirus infection have reduced our revenue and make it difficult to grow our Korlym business. The pandemic’s impact on the pace of our clinical development programs has been variable. Enrollment has slowed significantly in trials of indications not considered immediately life-threatening, such as Cushing’s syndrome, CRPC, AIWG and NASH. In addition, some clinical sites have stopped enrolling new patients or have reduced the frequency with which physicians see study participants. Some sites have suspended or halted the initiation of new clinical trials. These changes lengthen the time it takes us to complete our development programs, although trials in patients with immediately life-threatening diseases, such as advanced pancreatic and ovarian cancer, have experienced many fewer disruptions and delays.
Please see "COVID-19 Pandemic" under Item 1 of this Annual Report and the risk factor under Item 1A of this Annual Report, “The COVID-19 pandemic or other public health emergencies, natural disasters, terrorism or other catastrophes could disrupt our activities and render our own or our vendors’ facilities and equipment inoperable or inaccessible and require us to curtail or cease operations.”
Results of Operations
Net Product Revenue - Net product revenue is gross product revenue from sales to our customers less deductions for estimated government rebates and chargebacks.
Net product revenue was $353.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $306.5 million and $251.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, higher sales volumes accounted for 31.9 percent, 58.4 percent and 85.7 percent of the increases in net revenue, respectively, as we shipped Korlym to more patients. Increases in the average price of Korlym tablets accounted for the remainder of the increases. The increase in Korlym’s price for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to a relative decrease in the number of patients covered by Medicaid (which reimburses Korlym at a lower rate), a statutorily-mandated increase in the price paid by other government programs, one price increase that took effect on August 1, 2019 and another on January 1, 2020.
Cost of sales - Cost of sales includes the cost of API, tableting, packaging, personnel, overhead, stability testing and distribution.
Cost of sales was $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $5.5 million and $5.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The dollar value of our cost of sales increased in both years due to greater sales unit volumes. Cost of sales was 1.6 percent, 1.8 percent and 2.1 percent of our net product revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue declined due to an increase in the average price of Korlym as well as a decrease in its cost of manufacture.
Research and development expenses - Research and development expenses include the cost of (1) recruiting and compensating development personnel, (2) clinical trials, (3) drug product and preclinical studies in support of clinical trials and regulatory submissions, (4) discovery research and (5) the development of drug formulations and manufacturing processes.
Research and development expenses increased to $114.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $89.0 million for the comparable period in 2019. The increase was due to increased spending on the advancement of our oncology and endocrinology development programs and on the recruitment and compensation of development personnel.
Research and development expenses increased to $89.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $75.2 million in 2018. The increase was primarily due to increased spending on the recruitment and compensation of development personnel and on the discovery and advancement of new selective cortisol modulators, partially offset by the completion of drug-drug interaction studies related to relacorilant.
It is difficult to predict the timing and cost of development activities, which are subject to many uncertainties and risks, including inconclusive or negative results, slow patient enrollment, adverse side effects and difficulties in the formulation or manufacture of study drugs and the lack of drug-candidate efficacy. In addition, clinical development is subject to intensive government oversight and regulations that may change unpredictably and without notice. We expect our research and development expense to be higher in 2021 than in 2020 as our clinical programs advance. Research and development spending in future years will depend on the outcome of our pre-clinical and clinical trials and our development plans.
Selling, general and administrative expenses - Selling, general and administrative expenses include (1) compensation of employees, consultants and contractors engaged in commercial and administrative activities, (2) the cost of vendors supporting commercial activities and (3) legal and accounting fees.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $105.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $100.4 million for the comparable period in 2019. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to increases in employee recruiting and compensation expenses, increased legal and marketing costs, volume-related pharmacy and other distribution costs and professional service fees.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $100.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $81.3 million for the comparable period in 2018. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to increased spending on the recruitment and compensation of additional employees, increased legal and marketing costs, and added distribution expenses arising from increased Korlym sales volumes.
We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to be higher in 2021 than in 2020 due to increased commercial and administrative activities arising from increased sales volumes, litigation and administrative support for increased research and development activities.
Interest and other income - Interest and other income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $3.4 million, $5.1 million and $2.7 million, respectively, and consisted primarily of interest income from marketable securities. Interest and other income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable period in 2019 primarily due to market-wide reductions in interest rates. The increase from the year ended December 31, 2019 from the comparable period in 2018 was due to growth in our holdings of cash and marketable securities.
Income tax expense - Income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $25.6 million, $22.5 million, and $16.7 million, respectively. The increases in income tax expense during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were primarily due to increases in net income and decreased discrete benefits from exercises of non-qualified stock options.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since 2015, we have relied on revenues from the sale of Korlym to fund our operations. Based on our current plans and expectations, we expect to fund our operations and planned research and development activities without needing to raise additional funds, although we may choose to raise additional funds for other reasons. If we were to raise funds, equity financing would be dilutive. Debt financing could involve restrictive covenants. Funds raised through collaborations with other companies may require us to relinquish certain rights in our product candidates.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $476.9 million, consisting of cash and cash equivalents of $76.2 million and marketable securities of $400.7 million, compared to cash and cash equivalents of $31.3 million and marketable securities of $284.0 million as of December 31, 2019.
The cash in our bank accounts and our marketable securities could be affected if the financial institutions holdings them were to fail or severely adverse conditions were to rise in the markets for public or private debt securities. We have never experienced a loss or lack of access to cash.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $152.0 million, $136.1 million and $115.7 million, respectively. These increases were primarily due to greater revenue, as a result of an increase in Korlym’s price as well as shipping Korlym to more patients.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $119.3 million, $117.8 million and $90.8 million, respectively, primarily due to increased purchases of marketable securities with cash generated by our operating activities.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $12.2 million. Net cash used in financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $28.6 million and $14.3 million, respectively. For the same periods, stock option exercises provided $23.2 million, $8.4 million and $9.3 million, respectively. We repurchased an aggregate of $9.7 million of our common stock during the year ended December 31, 2020 pursuant to our program to repurchase up to $200 million of our common stock (the “Stock Repurchase Program”). In the first quarter of 2020, we purchased from our Chief Executive Officer $0.3 million of our common stock at the current market price to provide him liquidity to satisfy tax liability arising from his net (cashless) exercise in 2019 of stock options that were about to expire. We repurchased an aggregate of $31.0 million and $23.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, pursuant to our program to repurchase up to $100 million of our common stock that expired on June 30, 2019. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we also acquired 0.1 million and 0.5 million shares at a cost of $1.1 million and $6.1 million, respectively, in satisfaction tax withholding requirements for the settlement of employee option exercises. We had no such transactions in 2018.
As of December 31, 2020, we had retained earnings of $82.5 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table presents our estimates of obligations under contractual agreements as of December 31, 2020.
(1) As of December 31, 2020, we had no remaining commitments to purchase API from PCAS and have a $0.2 million commitment to purchase Korlym tablets.
(2) In October 2019, we amended our office lease to add more space and extend its term from March 31, 2020 through March 31, 2022 for the original office space and on April 1, 2020, the lease term would begin for additional space through March 31, 2022. In June 2020, we amended our office lease to commence the additional space on June 15, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining minimum rental payments due under the lease were $2.6 million.
(3) In December 2013, we entered into an agreement with Quotient Sciences Limited (“Quotient”), a clinical research organization, to assist in the management and conduct of our Phase 1 studies of miricorilant and our other selective cortisol modulators. As of December 31, 2020, the total non-cancelable commitment under the agreement was approximately $0.1 million.
We have other contractual payment obligations and purchase commitments, the timing of which are contingent on future events, including the initiation and completion of manufacturing projects. In March 2014, we entered into a long-term agreement with one contract manufacturer, PCAS to produce mifepristone, the API for Korlym. On July 25, 2018, we amended this agreement to add a second manufacturing site and extend its term to December 31, 2021, with two one-year automatic renewals, unless either party provides 12 months advance written notice of its intent not to renew. The amendment provides exclusivity between PCAS and Corcept. If PCAS is unable to meet our requirements, we may purchase mifepristone from another supplier.
We have agreements with two third-party manufacturers to produce and bottle Korlym tablets.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs for preclinical studies and clinical trials. The contracts are cancellable, with varying provisions regarding termination. If a contract with a specific vendor were to be terminated, we would only be obligated for products and services we had received as of the effective date of the termination and any applicable cancellation fees.
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards
See Note 9, Income Taxes in our audited consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amount of assets, liabilities and expenses we report. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions we believe to be reasonable. Actual results may differ from our estimates. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the following accounting estimates and policies to be critical:
Net Product Revenue
To determine net product revenue, we deduct from sales the cost of our patient co-pay assistance program and our estimates of (i) government chargebacks and rebates, (ii) discounts provided to our SD for prompt payment and (iii) reserves for expected returns. We record these estimates at the time we recognize revenue and update them as new information becomes available. Our estimates take into account our understanding of the range of possible outcomes. If results differ from our estimates, we adjust our estimates, which changes our net product revenue and earnings. We report any changes in the period they become known to us, even if they concern transactions occurring in prior period.
Government Rebates
Korlym is eligible for purchase by, or qualifies for reimbursement from, Medicaid and other government programs that are eligible for rebates on the price they pay for Korlym. To determine the appropriate amount to reserve against these rebates, we identify Korlym sold to patients covered by government-funded programs, apply the applicable government discount to these sales and then estimate the portion of total rebates we expect will be claimed. We then (i) deduct this reserve from revenue in the period to which the rebates relate and (ii) include in accrued expenses on our consolidated balance sheet a current liability of equal amount.
Chargebacks
Although we sell Korlym to the SD at full price, some of the government entities to which the SD sells receive a discount. The SD recovers such discounts by reducing its payment to us (this reduction is called a “chargeback”). Chargebacks sometimes relate to Korlym sold to SD in prior periods. We deduct from our revenue in each period chargebacks claimed by the SD for Korlym we sold to the SD that period. We also create a reserve for chargebacks we estimate the SD will claim in future periods against Korlym it purchased in the current period but has not yet resold. We determine the amount of this reserve based on our experience with SD chargebacks and our understanding of the SD’s customer base and business practices. We deduct this reserve from revenue and include in accrued expenses on our consolidated balance sheet a current liability of equal amount.
Patient Assistance Program and Charitable Support
It is our policy that no patient be denied Korlym due to inability to pay. We provide financial assistance to eligible patients whose insurance policies have high deductibles or co-payments and deduct the amount of such assistance from gross revenue. We determine the assistance we provide each patient by applying our program guidelines to that patient’s financial position and their insurance policy’s co-payment and deductible requirements. We also donate cash to charities that help patients with financial need pay for the treatment of Cushing’s syndrome (which treatment may not include Korlym). We do not include in our revenue payments these charities make on behalf of patients receiving Korlym. We provide Korlym at no cost to patients without insurance who do not qualify for charitable support.
Sales Returns
For safety reasons, federal law prohibits patients from returning Korlym they have received. Korlym sold to our SD is subject to return. We deduct the amount of Korlym we estimate the SD will return from each period’s gross revenue. We base our estimates on quantitative and qualitative information including, but not limited to, historical return rates, the amount of Korlym held by the SD and projected demand. If we cannot reasonably estimate returns with respect to a particular sale, we defer recognition of revenue until we can make a reasonable estimate. To date, returns have not been material.
Leases
We account for leases in accordance with ASC 842, Leases, which requires lease transactions with terms longer than 12 months to be recognized on the balance sheet as a liability (“lease liabilities”), offset by an asset of equal amount (“right-of-use assets”).
We recognize right-of-use assets and lease liabilities at lease commencement. We measure lease liabilities based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term discounted by the rate equal to the rate we would pay on a loan with monthly payments and a term equal to the monthly payments and remaining term of our lease. We estimate our incremental borrowing rate based on bank quotes and an analysis of public companies with debt and credit carrying terms similar to our lease term. We do not include in the lease term options to extend or terminate the lease unless it is reasonably certain at commencement that we will exercise any such options. We account for the lease components separately from non-lease components for our operating leases.
Inventory and Cost of Sales
We value inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value and determine the cost of inventory we sell using the specific identification method, which approximates a first-in, first-out basis. We assess our inventory levels at each reporting period and write down inventory that is either expected to be at risk of expiration prior to sale, or has a cost basis in excess of its expected net realizable value, or for which there are inventory quantities in excess of expected requirements. We destroy expired inventory and recognize the related costs as cost of sales in that period’s statement of comprehensive income.
Cost of sales includes the cost of manufacturing Korlym, including materials, third-party manufacturing costs and indirect personnel and other overhead costs, based on the number of Korlym tablets for which we recognize revenue, as well as costs of stability testing, logistics and distribution incurred during the applicable period.
Accruals of Research and Development Costs
We base our accruals for discovery research, preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of work completed, milestones achieved, patient enrollment and past experience with similar activities. Our estimates include assessments of information from contract research organizations and the status of our own research, development and administrative activities.
Stock-based compensation
We account for stock-based compensation under the fair value method, based on the value of the award at the grant date. To date, our stock-based compensation has consisted entirely of option grants, which we value using the Black-Scholes model. We recognize stock-based compensation expense over the applicable vesting period, net of estimated forfeitures. If actual forfeitures differ from our estimates, we adjust stock-based compensation expense accordingly.
We recognize the expense of options granted to non-employees based on their fair value at the time of vesting.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”), which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected tax consequences of our future financial and operating activities. Under ASC 740, we determine deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the temporary difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using the tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect such differences to reverse. If we determine that it is more likely than not that we will not generate sufficient taxable income to realize the value of some or all of our deferred tax assets (net of our deferred tax liabilities), we establish a valuation allowance offsetting the amount we do not expect to realize. We perform this analysis each reporting period and reduce or increase the size of our valuation allowance accordingly.
The deferred tax assets that we record each period depend primarily on our ability to generate future taxable income in the United States. Each period, we evaluate the need for a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets and, if necessary, adjust the valuation allowance so that net deferred tax assets are recorded on our balance sheet only to the extent we conclude it is more likely than not that these deferred tax assets will be realized. If our outlook for future taxable income changes significantly, our assessment of the need for, and the amount of, a valuation allowance may also change.
We also account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC 740, which requires us to adjust our consolidated financial statements to reflect only those tax positions that are more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon review by federal or state examiners. We recognize in the consolidated financial statements the largest expected tax benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being sustained on examination by the taxing authorities. We report interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expenses.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our audited consolidated financial statements.