ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
A discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 can be found in “Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
General
The following management’s discussion and analysis describes the principal factors affecting our results of operations, liquidity, capital resources and contractual cash obligations. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements, information about our business practices, significant accounting policies, risk factors, and the transactions that underlie our financial results, which are included in various parts of this filing.
All of our filings with the SEC are available free of charge through our website (www.callon.com) as soon as reasonably practicable after we file them with, or furnish them to, the SEC. Information on our website does not form part of this 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We are an independent oil and natural gas company incorporated in the State of Delaware in 1994, but our roots go back over 70 years to our Company’s establishment in 1950. We are focused on the acquisition, exploration and development of high-quality assets in the leading oil plays of South and West Texas. Our activities are primarily focused on horizontal development in the Midland and Delaware Basins, both of which are part of the larger Permian Basin in West Texas, as well as the Eagle Ford, which we entered into through the Carrizo Acquisition in late 2019.
Our operating culture is centered on responsible development of hydrocarbon resources, safety and the environment, which we believe strengthens our operational performance. Our drilling activity is predominantly focused on the horizontal development of several prospective intervals in the Permian, including multiple levels of the Wolfcamp formation and the Lower Spraberry shales, and the Eagle Ford. We have assembled a multi-year inventory of potential horizontal well locations and intend to add to this inventory through delineation drilling of emerging zones on our existing acreage and through acquisition of additional locations through working interest acquisitions, leasing programs, acreage purchases, joint ventures and asset swaps.
Recent Developments
February Winter Storm
In February 2021, severe winter storms affected field operations in both the Permian and Eagle Ford resulting in the shut-in of nearly 100% of our operated production. Currently, we have returned nearly all of our Eagle Ford and Midland Basin wells to production and expect to have all of our Delaware well production returned by the end of February. The impact to our drilling and completion operations were not significant enough to alter our expectations for the full year development schedule.
COVID-19 Outbreak and Global Industry Downturn
The worldwide outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020, the uncertainty regarding the impact of COVID-19 and various governmental actions taken to mitigate the impact of COVID-19, have resulted in an unprecedented decline in demand for oil and natural gas. At the same time, the decision by Saudi Arabia in March 2020 to drastically reduce export prices and increase oil production followed by curtailment agreements among OPEC and other countries such as Russia further increased uncertainty and volatility around global oil supply-demand dynamics. These dual demand and supply shocks caused oil prices to collapse at the end of the first quarter of 2020 as well as created an excess supply of oil in the United States, which could continue for a sustained period; this is in addition to recent and continued excess supply of natural gas in the United States. This excess supply, in turn, resulted in transportation and storage capacity constraints in the United States during 2020, although these constraints have recently lessened and inventories have declined from peak levels.
Our expectation is that commodity prices, which are the most significant factors impacting our profitability, will remain cyclical and volatile. While commodity prices have recently increased to pre-COVID-19 levels, there is no assurance of how long they will remain at these levels.
2020 Highlights
Operational
•Our total production in 2020 increased by 147% to 37.2 MMBoe (63% oil) as compared to 2019 primarily as a result of the Carrizo Acquisition in late 2019 and wells placed on production during 2020 as a result of our horizontal drilling program.
•Although our actual 2020 operational capital expenditures were approximately 50% or our original operational capital budget as a result of COVID-19 and the macro-economic environment, we drilled 91 gross (86.0 net) horizontal well and completed 90 gross (81.4 net) horizontal wells for the year ended December 31, 2020 and had, as of December 31, 2020, 65 gross (62.1 net) horizontal wells awaiting completion.
•Estimated proved reserves as of December 31, 2020 were 475.9 MMBoe (61% oil), with 45% classified as proved developed.
Financing
•On November 13, 2020, we exchanged $389.0 million of aggregate principal amount of our existing Senior Unsecured Notes for $216.7 million aggregate principal amount of November 2020 Second Lien Notes and 1.75 million November 2020 Warrants. This exchange resulted in the removal of approximately $172.3 million from the long-term debt balance in our consolidated balance sheets.
•On September 30, 2020, we issued $300.0 million of aggregate principal amount of September 2020 Second Lien Notes and 7.3 million September 2020 Warrants for proceeds, net of issuance costs, of approximately $288.6 million.
•As of December 31, 2020, our Credit Facility had a borrowing base and elected commitment amount of $1.6 billion and $985.0 million of borrowings outstanding as compared to borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2019 of $1.3 billion.
Divestitures
•On September 30, 2020, we sold an undivided 2.0% (on an 8/8ths basis) overriding royalty interest, proportionately reduced to our net revenue interest, in and to our operated leases, excluding certain interests (“ORRI Transaction”) for net proceeds of $135.8 million, which were used to repay borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility.
•On November 2, 2020, we sold substantially all of our non-operated assets for net proceeds of $29.6 million, subject to post-closing adjustments, which were used to repay borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain operating information with respect to the Company’s oil and natural gas operations for the periods indicated:
(1) Includes activity on properties acquired in the Carrizo Acquisition subsequent to the December 20, 2019 closing date.
(2) Effective January 1, 2020, certain of our natural gas processing agreements were modified to allow us to take title to NGLs resulting from the processing of our natural gas. As a result, reserve volumes for NGLs and natural gas are presented separately for periods subsequent to January 1, 2020. For periods prior to January 1, 2020, except for reserve volumes specifically associated with Carrizo, we presented our reserve volumes for NGLs with natural gas.
(3) Reflects calendar average daily spot market prices.
Revenues
The following table reconciles the changes in oil, natural gas, NGLs, and total revenue for the period presented by reflecting the effect of changes in volume and in the underlying commodity prices.
(1) Includes activity on properties acquired in the Carrizo Acquisition subsequent to the December 20, 2019 closing date.
(2) Effective January 1, 2020, certain of our natural gas processing agreements were modified to allow us to take title to NGLs resulting from the processing of our natural gas. As a result, reserve volumes for NGLs and natural gas are presented separately for periods subsequent to January 1, 2020. For periods prior to January 1, 2020, except for reserve volumes specifically associated with Carrizo, we presented our reserve volumes for NGLs with natural gas.
(3) Excludes sales of oil and gas purchased from third parties and sold to our customers.
Commodity Prices
The prices for oil, natural gas, and NGLs remain extremely volatile primarily due to the underlying supply and demand concerns as a result of COVID-19 as well as the actions taken by OPEC and other countries as described above. This volatility was shown in the price of oil which ranged from a low of -$36.98 per Bbl to $63.27 per Bbl. Prices of oil, natural gas, and NGLs will affect the following aspects of our business:
•our revenues, cash flows and earnings;
•the amount of oil and natural gas that we are economically able to produce;
•our ability to attract capital to finance our operations and cost of the capital;
•the amount we are allowed to borrow under the Credit Facility; and
•the value of our oil and natural gas properties.
Period over Period Variances
The change in absolute value for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 can be primarily attributed to the Carrizo Acquisition which closed in December 2019. The Carrizo Acquisition had a material impact to our reported results of operations. In order to provide a more meaningful basis for comparison, we focused our discussion on per unit metrics and only expanded on changes in absolute value where appropriate.
Oil revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, oil revenues of $850.7 million increased $217.6 million, or 34%, compared to revenues of $633.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in oil revenue was primarily attributable to a 102% increase in production, partially offset by a 33% decrease in the average realized sales price, which declined to $36.13 per Bbl from $54.27 per Bbl. The increase in production was comprised of 9.5 MMBbls attributable to wells that were acquired in the Carrizo Acquisition and 5.7 MMBbls attributable to wells placed on production as a result of our horizontal drilling program, partially offset by normal and expected declines from our existing wells.
Natural gas revenue
Natural gas revenues increased $15.5 million, or 43%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 to $51.9 million as compared to $36.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase primarily relates to an approximate 107% increase in natural gas volumes, partially offset by a 31% decrease in the average price realized, which declined to $1.27 per Mcf from $1.85 per Mcf. The increase in production was comprised of 23.8 Bcf attributable to wells that were acquired in the Carrizo Acquisition and 6.8 Bcf attributable to wells placed on production as a result of our horizontal drilling program, partially offset by normal and expected declines from our existing wells.
NGL revenue
NGL revenues increased $79.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 to $81.3 million. The increase was due to certain of our natural gas processing agreements being modified effective January 1, 2020, to allow us to take title to NGLs resulting from the processing of our natural gas. As a result, sales volumes, prices, and revenues for NGLs and natural gas are presented separately for periods subsequent to January 1, 2020. For periods prior to January 1, 2020, except for sales volumes, prices, and revenues specifically associated with Carrizo, sales and reserve volumes, prices, and revenues for NGLs were presented with natural gas.
Operating Expenses
Lease operating expenses. These are daily costs incurred to extract oil and natural gas and maintain our producing properties. Such costs also include maintenance, repairs, gas treating fees, salt water disposal, insurance and workover expenses related to our oil and natural gas properties.
Lease operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 111% to $194.1 million compared to $91.8 million for the same period of 2019, primarily due to production volumes increasing 147%. Lease operating expense per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $5.22 compared to $6.09 for the same period of 2019 primarily due to continuing improvement of managing our field operating costs during the integration of the properties acquired from Carrizo as well as lower repairs and maintenance activities and workover expenses.
Production and valorem taxes. In general, severance taxes are based upon current year commodity prices whereas ad valorem taxes are based upon prior year commodity prices. Severance taxes are paid on produced oil and natural gas based on a percentage of revenues from products sold at fixed rates established by federal, state or local taxing authorities. We benefit from tax credits and exemptions in our various taxing jurisdictions where available and applicable. In the counties where our production is located, we are also subject to ad valorem taxes, which are generally based on the taxing jurisdictions’ valuation of our oil and gas properties.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, production and ad valorem taxes increased 47% to $62.6 million compared to $42.7 million for the same period in 2019, which is primarily related to a 46% increase in total revenues which increased production taxes and the inclusion of the properties from the Carrizo Acquisition in the property valuations for ad valorem taxes. Production and ad valorem taxes as a percentage of total revenues remained consistent for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 at 6.4%. Although production taxes as a percentage of total revenues decreased from the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the contribution of the Carrizo Acquisition assets which carried lower effective production tax rates as a result of the impacts of natural gas and NGL marketing deductions and exemptions, this was offset by an increase in ad valorem tax as a percentage of revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the timing of the property tax valuations compared to the significant decrease in the price of crude oil affecting our revenues during 2020.
Gathering, transportation and processing expenses. Gathering, transportation and processing costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $77.3 million. No expense was recognized for gathering, transportation and processing costs during the same period of 2019. The change is due to the assumption of the processing agreements assumed in the Carrizo Acquisition and certain contract modifications effective January 1, 2020. As such, the Company now records contractual fees associated with gathering, processing, treating and compression, as well as any transportation fees incurred to deliver the product to the purchaser, as gathering, transportation and processing expense. These fees were historically recorded as a reduction of revenue depending on when control transferred to the purchaser.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization (“DD&A”). Under the full cost accounting method, we capitalize costs within a cost center and then systematically amortize those costs on an equivalent unit-of-production method based on production and estimated proved oil and gas reserve quantities. Depreciation of other property and equipment is computed using the straight line method over their estimated useful lives, which range from two to twenty years. The following table sets forth the components of our depreciation, depletion and amortization for the periods indicated:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, DD&A increased 100% to $480.6 million from $240.6 million compared to the same period of 2019. The additional DD&A was primarily related to an increase in DD&A of evaluated oil and gas properties, which was primarily attributable to a 147% increase in production, as discussed above, partially offset by lower DD&A rates between the periods. For the year ended December 31, 2020, DD&A per Boe decreased to $12.92 compared to $15.95 for the same period of 2019 primarily as a result of the impairments of evaluated oil and gas properties that were recognized during 2020 as well as the Carrizo Acquisition which contributed to an increase in our proved reserves at a lower relative cost per Boe than our historical DD&A rate.
General and administrative, net of amounts capitalized (“G&A”). G&A for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $37.2 million compared to $45.3 million for the same period of 2019, primarily due to cost saving initiatives and a decrease in the fair value of the cash-settled restricted stock units and cash-settled stock appreciation rights partially offset by increased headcount of the combined companies.
Impairment of evaluated oil and gas properties. We recognized an impairment of evaluated oil and gas properties of $2.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to declines in the 12-Month Average Realized Price of crude oil of 31%. There was no impairment of evaluated oil and gas properties for the year ended December 31, 2019. See “Note 5 - Property and Equipment, Net” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Merger and integration expense. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred expenses associated with the Carrizo Acquisition of $28.5 million as compared to $74.4 million for the same period of 2019. See “Note 4 - Acquisitions and Divestitures” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Carrizo Acquisition.
Other Income and Expenses
Interest expense, net of capitalized amounts. We finance a portion of our capital expenditures, acquisitions and working capital requirements with borrowings under our Credit Facility or with term debt. We incur interest expense that is affected by both fluctuations in interest rates and our financing decisions. We reflect interest paid to our lender in interest expense, net of capitalized amounts. In addition, we include the amortization of deferred financing costs (including origination and amendment fees),
commitment fees and annual agency fees in interest expense. The following table sets forth the components of our interest expense, net of capitalized amounts for the periods indicated:
Interest expense, net of capitalized amounts, incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $91.4 million to $94.3 million compared to $2.9 million for the same period of 2019. The increase is primarily due to debt that was assumed as a result of the Carrizo Acquisition and the issuance of the Second Lien Notes during 2020 partially offset by an increase in capitalized interest as a result of an increase in the balance of unevaluated properties as a result of the Carrizo Acquisition.
(Gain) loss on derivative contracts. We utilize commodity derivative financial instruments to reduce our exposure to fluctuations in commodity prices. This amount represents the (i) (gain) loss related to fair value adjustments on our open derivative contracts and (ii) (gains) losses on settlements of derivative contracts for positions that have settled within the period. The net (gain) loss on derivative contracts for the periods indicated includes the following:
See “Note 8 - Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities” and “Note 9 - Fair Value Measurements” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(Gain) loss on extinguishment of debt. During November 2020, in connection with the exchange of $389.0 million of our Senior Unsecured Notes for the November 2020 Second Lien Notes, we recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt of $170.4 million, which consisted of the carrying values of the Senior Unsecured Notes exchanged less the aggregate principal amount of the November 2020 Second Lien Notes issued, net of the associated debt discount of $9.1 million, which was based on the November 2020 Second Lien Notes’ allocated fair value on the exchange date. During December 2019, in connection with the Carrizo Acquisition, we entered into a new credit facility and simultaneously terminated our prior credit facility. As a result of terminating the prior credit facility, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $4.9 million, which was comprised solely of the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs associated with the prior credit facility. See “Note 7 - Borrowings” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Sales and cost of purchased oil and gas. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded sales of purchased oil and gas of $49.3 million and cost of purchased oil and gas of $51.8 million related to commodities purchased from third parties and sold to our customers. No sales or cost of purchased oil and gas occurred during the same periods of 2019.
Income tax expense. We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences of (1) temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of existing assets and liabilities and (2) operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are based on enacted tax rates applicable to the future period when those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period the rate change is enacted. When appropriate, based on our analysis, we record a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We recorded income tax expense of $122.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $35.3 million for the same period of 2019. The increase in income tax expense is due to the recording of a valuation allowance during the year ended
December 31, 2020. See “Note 12 - Income Taxes” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the valuation allowance.
Preferred stock dividends. On July 18, 2019, we redeemed all outstanding shares of Preferred Stock, after which, the Preferred Stock was no longer deemed outstanding and dividends ceased to accrue. As such, we did not make any Preferred Stock dividend payments during the year ended December 31, 2020. Preferred Stock dividends of $4.0 million were paid during the year ended December, 31, 2019. See “Note 11 - Stockholders’ Equity” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Loss on redemption of preferred stock. As a result of the redemption of our Preferred Stock mentioned above, we recognized an $8.3 million loss due to the excess of the $73.0 million redemption price over the $64.7 million redemption date carrying value during 2019. See “Note 11 - Stockholders’ Equity” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
2021 Capital Budget and Funding Strategy. Our primary uses of capital are for the exploration and development of our oil and natural gas properties. Our 2021 Capital Budget has been established at up to $430.0 million, with approximately 80% directed towards drilling, completion, and equipment expenditures. Our scaled development plan for 2021 will continue to employ our life of field development philosophy and benefit from our balanced capital deployment strategy. The 2021 Capital Budget leverages the structural savings and operational efficiencies achieved during 2020 from shared best practices following the integration of Callon and Carrizo. Approximately 70% of the 2021 Capital Budget is allocated towards development in the Permian with the remaining 30% towards development in the Eagle Ford. As part of our 2021 operated horizontal drilling program, we expect to drill approximately 55 to 65 gross operated wells and complete approximately 90 to 100 gross operated wells.
Because we are the operator of a high percentage of our properties, we can control the amount and timing of our capital expenditures. We can choose to defer or accelerate a portion of our planned capital expenditures depending on various factors, including, but not limited to, continued depressed commodity prices, market conditions, our available liquidity and financing, acquisitions and divestitures of oil and gas properties, the availability of drilling rigs and completion crews, the cost of completion services, success of drilling programs, land and industry partner issues, weather delays, the acquisition of leases with drilling commitments, and other factors. We plan to execute a more moderated capital expenditure program through reduced reinvestment rates and balanced capital deployment for a more consistent cash flow generation and will be focused to further enhance our multi-zone, scale development program while leveraging a robust drilled, but uncompleted backlog to drive capital efficiency.
The following table is a summary of our 2020 capital expenditures (1):
(1) Capital expenditures, presented on an accrual basis, includes facilities, equipment, seismic, and land, but excludes asset retirement costs.
We continually evaluate our capital expenditure needs and compare them to our capital resources. Due to the decline in crude oil prices and ongoing uncertainty regarding the oil supply-demand macro environment, we reduced our development plan in order to preserve capital, including the temporary cessation of all drilling and completion activities for most of the second and third quarters of 2020. We reactivated two completion crews, one each in the Eagle Ford and Permian, both of which completed previously drilled multi-well projects during September. Subsequently, one of the two completion crews was released and three drilling rigs resumed operations, two restarting operations in the Permian during September and the third reactivated in the Eagle Ford during October. This reduction in activity resulted in our actual 2020 operational capital expenditures to be approximately 50% of our original operational capital budget for 2020 of $975.0 million.
Historically, our primary sources of capital have been cash flows from operations, borrowings under our revolving credit facility, proceeds from the issuance of debt securities and public equity offerings, and non-core asset dispositions. We regularly consider which resources, including debt and equity financings, are available to meet our future financial obligations, planned capital expenditures and liquidity requirements. In addition, depending upon our actual and anticipated sources and uses of liquidity, prevailing market conditions and other factors, we may, from time to time, seek to retire or repurchase our outstanding debt or equity securities through cash purchases in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. The amounts involved in any such transactions, individually or in aggregate, may be material. During 2020, to help manage our future financing cash outflows and liquidity position, we completed the exchange of $389.0 million of aggregate principal amount of our existing Senior Unsecured Notes
for $216.7 million aggregate principal amount of November 2020 Second Lien Notes and 1.75 million November 2020 Warrants. This exchange resulted in the removal of approximately $172.3 million from the long-term debt balance in our consolidated balance sheets and also reduced future interest payments.
We may consider divesting certain properties or assets that are not part of our core business or are no longer deemed essential to our future growth or enter into joint venture agreements, provided we are able to divest such assets or enter into joint venture agreements on terms that are acceptable to us. During 2020, we entered into the ORRI Transaction and sold substantially all of our non-operated assets for combined net proceeds of $165.4 million, which were used to repay borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility.
Overview of Cash Flow Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents increased $6.9 million to $20.2 million compared to $13.3 million at December 31, 2019.
(1) Includes activity on properties acquired in the Carrizo Acquisition subsequent to the December 20, 2019 closing date.
Operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $559.8 million and $476.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in operating activities was predominantly attributable to the following:
•An increase in revenue due to higher production volumes, offset by a decrease in realized pricing;
•A decrease in merger and integration expenses;
•An offsetting increase in operating expenses as a result of higher production volumes; and
•Changes related to timing of working capital payments and receipts.
Production, realized prices, and operating expenses are discussed above in Results of Operations. See “Note 8 - Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities” and “Note 9 - Fair Value Measurements” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of the components of the Company’s derivative contracts and disclosures related to derivative instruments including their composition and valuation.
Investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $529.9 million and $388.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in investing activities was primarily attributable to the following:
•A decrease in proceeds from sales of assets to $179.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which were primarily associated with the ORRI Transaction and the sale of substantially all of our non-operated assets, compared to proceeds from sales of assets of $294.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019;
•Partially offset by a $42.3 million decrease in acquisitions; and
•Net cash payments of $40.0 million associated with contingent considerations arrangements acquired in the Carrizo Acquisition that were paid in January 2020.
Financing activities. We finance a portion of our capital expenditures, acquisitions and working capital requirements with borrowings under the Credit Facility, term debt and equity offerings. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $23.0 million compared to net cash used in financing activities of $90.6 million during 2019. The decrease in net cash used in financing activities was primarily attributable to the following:
•Issuance of the September 2020 Second Lien Notes and September 2020 Warrants for net proceeds of approximately $288.6 million;
•Repayment of approximately $300.0 million on the Credit Facility during 2020;
•Repayment of Carrizo’s credit facility and funding the redemption of preferred stock upon closing the Carrizo Acquisition in 2019; and
•Redemption of Preferred Stock for approximately $73.0 million in 2019.
See “Note 7 - Borrowings”, “Note 10 - Share-Based Compensation”, and “Note 11 - Stockholders’ Equity” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our debt and equity transactions.
Credit Facility. On December 20, 2019, upon consummation of the Merger, we entered into the Credit Facility which provides for interest-only payments until December 20, 2024 (subject to springing maturity dates of (i) January 14, 2023 if the 6.25% Senior Notes are outstanding at such time, (ii) July 2, 2024 if the 6.125% Senior Notes are outstanding at such time, and (iii) if the Second Lien
Notes are outstanding at such time, the date which is 182 days prior to the maturity of any of the 6.25% Senior Notes or the 6.125% Senior Notes, in each case, to the extent a principal amount of more than $100.0 million with respect to each such issuance is outstanding as of such date), when the Credit Facility matures and any outstanding borrowings are due. The maximum credit amount under the Credit Facility is $5.0 billion. The borrowing base under the credit agreement is subject to regular redeterminations in the spring and fall of each year, as well as special redeterminations described in the credit agreement, which in each case may reduce the amount of the borrowing base. The Credit Facility is secured by first preferred mortgages covering our major producing properties. As of December 31, 2020, the borrowing base and elected commitment amount under the revolving credit facility was $1.6 billion, with borrowings outstanding of $985.0 million at a weighted average interest rate of 2.73%, and letters of credit outstanding of $25.2 million.
Our Credit Facility contains certain covenants including restrictions on additional indebtedness, payment of cash dividends and maintenance of certain financial ratios. Under the Credit Facility, we must maintain the following financial covenants determined as of the last day of the quarter, each as described above: (1) a Secured Leverage Ratio of no more than 3.00 to 1.00 and (2) a Current Ratio of not less than 1.00 to 1.00. We were in compliance with these covenants at December 31, 2020.
The Credit Facility also places restrictions on us and certain of our subsidiaries with respect to additional indebtedness, liens, dividends and other payments to shareholders, repurchases or redemptions of our common stock, redemptions of senior notes, investments, acquisitions, mergers, asset dispositions, transactions with affiliates, hedging transactions and other matters.
See “Note 7 - Borrowings” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information including details of the first, second, and third amendments to the Credit Facility.
Second Lien Notes. On September 30, 2020, we issued $300.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our September 2020 Second Lien Notes and 7.3 million September 2020 Warrants for aggregate consideration of $294.0 million. The Company used the proceeds, net of issuance costs, of approximately $288.6 million to repay borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility. See “Note 7 - Borrowings” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Senior Unsecured Notes Exchange. On November 13, 2020, we closed on the exchange of $389.0 million of aggregate principal amount of the Senior Unsecured Notes for $216.7 million aggregate principal amount of November 2020 Second Lien Notes at a weighted average exchange ratio of approximately $557 per $1,000 of principal exchanged and approximately 1.75 million November 2020 Warrants. As a result of the exchange, we recognized a gain on extinguishment of debt of $170.4 million in our consolidated statement of operations, which consisted of the carrying values of the Senior Unsecured Notes exchanged less the aggregate principal amount of the November 2020 Second Lien Notes issued, net of the associated debt discount of $9.1 million, which was based on the November 2020 Second Lien Notes’ allocated fair value on the exchange date. See “Note 7 - Borrowings” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about the exchange.
Even considering the downturn in commodity prices as well as a drop in demand as a result of COVID-19, we expect to have sufficient liquidity to pay interest on our Credit Facility, Second Lien Notes, and Senior Unsecured Notes as well as to fund our development program. Upon a redetermination, if any borrowings in excess of the revised borrowing base were outstanding, we could be forced to immediately repay a portion of the borrowings outstanding under the credit agreement. Additionally, if a low commodity price environment were to persist for an extended period, our ability to remain in compliance with our restrictive financial covenants in our Credit Facility and our indentures could be challenged. If we are unable to remain in compliance with our restrictive financial covenants, we could be subject to lender elections for default resolution.
Hedging. As of February 19, 2021, we had the following outstanding oil, natural gas and NGL derivative contracts:
(1) Premiums from the sale of call options were used to increase the fixed price of certain simultaneously executed price swaps and three-way collars.
(2) The short call swaption contracts have exercise expiration dates as follows: 455,000 Bbls expire on March 31, 2021 and 1,825,000 Bbls expire on December 31, 2021.
(3) In January 2021, we paid approximately $3.1 million to terminate 184,000 Bbls of ICE Brent swaps. Additionally, in February 2021, we executed offsetting ICE Brent swaps on 159,300 Bbls, resulting in a locked-in loss of approximately $2.9 million which we will pay as the applicable contracts settle.
(1) Premiums from the sale of call options were used to increase the fixed price of certain simultaneously executed price swaps and three-way collars.
Preferred Stock. On June 18, 2019, we announced we had given notice for the redemption (the “Redemption”) of all outstanding shares of the Preferred Stock. On July 18, 2019 (the “Redemption Date”), the Preferred Stock were redeemed at a redemption price equal to $50.00 per share, plus an amount equal to all accrued and unpaid dividends in an amount equal to $0.24 per share, for a total redemption price of $50.24 per share or $73.0 million (the “Redemption Price”). We recognized an $8.3 million loss on the redemption due to the excess of the $73.0 million redemption price over the $64.7 million redemption date carrying value of the Preferred Stock. After the Redemption Date, the Preferred Stock were no longer deemed outstanding, dividends on the Preferred Stock ceased to accrue, and all rights of the holders with respect to such Preferred Stock were terminated, except the right of the holders to receive the Redemption Price, without interest. We paid $4.0 million for Preferred Stock dividends for the year ended December 31, 2019. See “Note 11 - Stockholders’ Equity” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion.
Contractual Obligations
The following table includes our current contractual obligations and purchase commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)The Credit Facility has a maturity date of December 20, 2024, subject to springing maturity dates as discussed above. See “Note 7 - Borrowings” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(2)Includes the outstanding principal amount only.
(3)Includes estimated cash payments on the 9.00% Second Lien Senior Secured Notes, 6.25% Senior Notes, 6.125% Senior Notes, 8.25% Senior Notes, 6.375% Senior Notes, the Credit Facility and commitment fees calculated based on the unused portion of lender commitments as of December 31, 2020, at the applicable commitment fee rate.
(4)Drilling rig leases represent future minimum expenditure commitments for drilling rig services under contracts to which the Company was a party on December 31, 2020. The value in the table represents the gross amount that we are committed to pay. However, we will record our proportionate share based on our working interest in our consolidated financial statements as incurred. In January 2021, we extended one of our drilling rig contracts for a term of one year. The gross contractual obligation for this extended drilling rig contract is approximately $5.5 million and is not included in the table above as it was entered into subsequent to December 31, 2020. See “Note 17 - Commitments and Contingencies” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to our drilling rig leases.
(5)Operating leases primarily consist of contracts for office space. See “Note 13 - Leases” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(6)Delivery commitments represent contractual obligations we have entered into for certain gathering, processing and transportation service agreements which require minimum volumes of oil or natural gas to be delivered. The amounts in the table above reflect the aggregate undiscounted deficiency fees assuming no delivery of any oil or natural gas.
(7)Produced water disposal commitments represent contractual obligations we have entered into for certain service agreements which require minimum volumes of produced water to be delivered. The amounts in the table above reflect the aggregate undiscounted deficiency fees assuming no delivery of any produced water.
(8)Amounts represent our estimates of future asset retirement obligations. Because these costs typically extend many years into the future, estimating these future costs requires management to make estimates and judgments that are subject to future revisions based upon numerous factors, including the rate of inflation, changing technology and the political and regulatory environment. See “Note 14 - Asset Retirement Obligations” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Other commitments
The following table includes our current oil sales contracts and firm transportation agreements as of December 31, 2020:
(1)For each of the commitments shown in the table above, the committed barrels may include volumes produced by us and other third-party working, royalty, and overriding royalty interest owners whose volumes we market on their behalf. We expect to fulfill these delivery commitments with our existing production or through the purchases of third-party commodities.
(2)Each of the firm transportation agreements shown in the table above grant us access to delivery points in several locations along the Gulf Coast.
(3)The committed volumes shown in the table above for this particular firm transportation agreement are average volumes. For the terms of August 2020-July 2023, August 2023-July 2027 and August 2027-July 2030, the committed volumes are 7,500 Bbls/d, 10,000 Bbls/d and 12,500 Bbls/d, respectively.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies
The following summarizes our critical accounting policies. See a complete list of significant accounting policies in “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Use of estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make judgments affecting estimates and assumptions for reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Estimates of proved oil and gas reserves are used in calculating DD&A of evaluated oil and natural gas property costs, the present value of estimated future net revenues included in the full cost ceiling test, estimates of future taxable income used in assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, and the estimated timing of cash outflows underlying asset retirement obligations. There are numerous uncertainties inherent in the estimation of proved oil and gas reserves and in the projection of future rates of production and the timing of development expenditures. Other significant estimates are involved in determining asset retirement obligations, acquisition date fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, impairments of unevaluated leasehold costs, fair values of commodity derivative assets and liabilities, fair values of contingent consideration arrangements, grant date fair value of stock-based awards, and contingency, litigation, and environmental liabilities. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Oil and natural gas properties
Oil and natural gas properties are accounted for using the full cost method of accounting under which all productive and nonproductive costs directly associated with property acquisition, exploration and development activities are capitalized as oil and gas properties. The internal cost of employee compensation and benefits, including stock-based compensation, directly associated with acquisition, exploration and development activities are capitalized to either evaluated or unevaluated oil and gas properties based on the type of activity. Internal costs related to production and similar activities are expensed as incurred.
Proceeds from the sale or disposition of evaluated and unevaluated oil and gas properties are accounted for as a reduction of evaluated oil and gas property costs, unless the sale significantly alters the relationship between capitalized costs and estimated proved reserves in which case a gain or loss is recognized. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we did not have any sales of oil and gas properties that significantly altered such relationship.
Capitalized oil and gas property costs are amortized on an equivalent unit-of-production method, converting natural gas to barrels of oil equivalent at the ratio of six thousand cubic feet of gas to one barrel of oil, which represents their approximate relative energy content. The equivalent unit-of-production depletion rate is computed on a quarterly basis by dividing current quarter production by estimated proved oil and gas reserves at the beginning of the quarter then applying such depletion rate to evaluated oil and gas property costs, which includes estimated asset retirement costs, less accumulated amortization, plus estimated future expenditures to be incurred in developing proved reserves, net of estimated salvage values.
Excluded from this amortization are costs associated with unevaluated leasehold and seismic costs associated with specific unevaluated properties and related capitalized interest. Unevaluated property costs are transferred to evaluated property costs at such time as wells are completed on the properties or we determine that these costs have been impaired. We assess properties on an individual basis or as a group and consider the following factors, among others, to determine if these costs have been impaired: exploration program and intent to drill, remaining lease term, and the assignment of proved reserves. As a result of the downturn in the oil and gas industry as well as in the broader macroeconomic environment in 2020, we analyzed our unevaluated leasehold giving consideration to our updated exploration program as well as to the remaining lease term of certain unevaluated leaseholds. As a result, we impaired $229.6 million unevaluated leasehold costs and transferred these costs to evaluated properties during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Geological and geophysical costs not associated with specific prospects are recorded to evaluated oil and gas property costs as incurred. The amount of interest costs capitalized is determined on a quarterly basis based on the average balance of unevaluated properties and the weighted average interest rate of outstanding borrowings. Capitalized interest cannot exceed gross interest expense.
At the end of each quarter, the net book value of oil and gas properties, less related deferred income taxes, are limited to the “cost center ceiling” equal to (i) the sum of (a) the present value of estimated future net revenues from estimated proved oil and gas reserves, less estimated future expenditures to be incurred in developing and producing the estimated proved reserves computed using a discount factor of 10%, (b) the costs of unevaluated properties not being amortized, and (c) the lower of cost or estimated fair value of unevaluated properties included in the costs being amortized; less (ii) related income tax effects. Any excess of the net book value of oil and gas properties, less related deferred income taxes, over the cost center ceiling is recognized as an impairment of evaluated oil and gas properties. An impairment recognized in one period may not be reversed in a subsequent period even if higher commodity prices in the future result in a cost center ceiling in excess of the net book value of oil and gas properties, less related deferred income taxes.
The estimated future net revenues used in the cost center ceiling are calculated using the average realized prices for sales of oil, NGLs, and natural gas on the first calendar day of each month during the 12-month period prior to the end of the quarter (the “12-Month Average Realized Price”), held flat for the life of the production, except where different prices are fixed and determinable from applicable contracts for the remaining term of those contracts. Prices do not include the impact of commodity derivative instruments as we elected not to meet the criteria to qualify for hedge accounting treatment.
Primarily as a result of the significant reduction in the 12-Month Average Realized Price of oil, we recognized impairments of evaluated oil and gas properties of $2.5 billion for the year December 31, 2020. We did not recognize impairments of evaluated oil and gas properties for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. Details of the 12-Month Average Realized Price of crude oil for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 are summarized in the table below:
The decrease in the 12-Month Average Realized Price as of December 31, 2020 reduced our proved oil and gas reserve volumes by approximately 26.2 MMBoe. This reduction was primarily attributable to proved developed reserves of producing wells and proved undeveloped reserves with shorter economic lives. Volumes associated with locations of proved undeveloped reserves that were no longer economic and removed from proved reserves as a result of the decrease in the 12-Month Average Realized Price as of December 31, 2020 were less than 1.0 MMBoe.
Our current forecast for the first quarter of 2021 includes the following:
•Estimated 12-Month Average Realized Price based on the first calendar day of each month oil and gas prices available for the 11 months ended February 1, 2021 and an estimate for the twelfth month based on a quoted forward price;
•Estimated range of the first quarter of 2021 cost center ceiling, at the high end, that would exceed the net book value of oil and gas properties, resulting in no impairment in the carrying value of evaluated oil and gas properties, and at the low end, would result in an impairment in the carrying value of evaluated oil and gas properties of $100.0 million;
•No proved undeveloped reserves that would no longer be economic and would be removed from proved reserves as of March 31, 2021; and
•Assumes that all other inputs and assumptions are as of December 31, 2020, other than the price of crude oil, natural gas, and NGLs, and remain unchanged.
Drilling and completion activity, acquisitions or dispositions of oil and gas properties, production, and changes in development and operating costs occurring subsequent to December 31, 2020 may require revisions to estimates of proved reserves, which would impact the calculation of the cost center ceiling described above. Further impairments in subsequent quarters may occur if the trailing
12-month commodity prices continue to be lower than the comparable trailing 12-month commodity prices applicable to 2020. Based on the current outlook for future commodity prices, we do not believe that those prices, if realized, would have a significant adverse impact on our proved oil and gas reserves volumes.
In addition, the process of estimating proved oil and gas reserves requires that the Company’s independent and internal reserve engineers exercise judgment based on available geological, geophysical and technical information. We have described the risks associated with reserve estimation and the volatility of oil and natural gas prices under Part I, “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
The table below presents various pricing scenarios to demonstrate the sensitivity of our December 31, 2020 cost center ceiling to changes in 12-month average benchmark crude oil and natural gas prices underlying the 12-Month Average Realized Prices. The sensitivity analysis is as of December 31, 2020 and, accordingly, does not consider drilling and completion activity, acquisitions or dispositions of oil and gas properties, production, changes in crude oil and natural gas prices, and changes in development and operating costs occurring subsequent to December 31, 2020 that may require revisions to estimates of proved reserves. See also Part I, “Item 1A. Risk Factors-If oil and natural gas prices remain depressed for extended periods of time, we may be required to make significant downward adjustments to the carrying value of our oil and natural gas properties.”
Asset retirement obligations
We record an estimate of the fair value of liabilities for obligations associated with plugging and abandoning oil and gas wells, removing production equipment and facilities and restoring the surface of the land in accordance with the terms of oil and gas leases and applicable local, state and federal laws. Estimates involved in determining asset retirement obligations include the future plugging and abandonment costs of wells and related facilities, the ultimate productive life of the properties, a credit-adjusted risk-free discount rate and an inflation factor in order to determine the present value of the asset retirement obligation. The present value of the asset retirement obligations is accreted each period and the increase to the obligations is reported in “Depreciation, depletion and amortization” in the consolidated statements of operations. To the extent future revisions to these assumptions impact the present value of the existing asset retirement obligation liability, a corresponding adjustment is made to evaluated oil and gas properties in the consolidated balance sheets. See “Note 14 - Asset Retirement Obligations” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Estimating the future plugging and abandonment costs of wells and related facilities requires management to make estimates and judgments because most of the obligations are many years in the future and asset removal technologies and costs are constantly changing, as are regulatory, political, environmental, safety and public relations considerations.
Derivative instruments
We use commodity derivative instruments to mitigate the effects of commodity price volatility for a portion of our forecasted sales of production and achieve a more predictable level of cash flow. We do not use these instruments for speculative or trading purposes. Settlements of derivative contracts are generally based on the difference between the contract price and prices specified in the derivative instrument and a NYMEX price or other futures index price.
Our commodity derivative instruments, as well as our contingent consideration arrangements, are carried at their fair value in the consolidated balance sheets with all gains and losses as a result of changes in the fair value recognized in the consolidated statements of operations in the period in which the changes occur. The estimated fair value of our derivative contracts is based upon current forward market prices on NYMEX and in the case of collars and floors, the time value of options. For additional information regarding our derivatives instruments and their fair values, see “Note 8 - Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities” and “Note 9 - Fair Value Measurements” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements and “Part II,