ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This section provides management’s discussion of Chesapeake Utilities and its consolidated subsidiaries, with specific information on results of operations, liquidity and capital resources, as well as discussion of how certain accounting principles affect our financial statements. It includes management’s interpretation of our financial results and our operating segments, the factors affecting these results, the major factors expected to affect future operating results as well as investment and financing plans. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Several factors exist that could influence our future financial performance, some of which are described in Item 1A, Risk Factors. They should be considered in connection with forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report, or otherwise made by or on behalf of us, since these factors could cause actual results and conditions to differ materially from those set out in such forward-looking statements.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we completed the sale of the assets and contracts of PESCO. As a result, PESCO’s results for all periods presented have been separately reported as discontinued operations.
In March 2020, the CDC declared a national emergency due to the rapidly growing outbreak of COVID-19. In response to this declaration and the rapid spread of COVID-19 within the United States, federal, state and local governments throughout the country imposed varying degrees of restrictions on social and commercial activity to promote social distancing in an effort to slow the spread of the illness. These restrictions have continued to significantly impact economic conditions in the United States in 2020 and will continue into 2021. Chesapeake Utilities is considered an “essential business,” which allows us to continue operational activities and construction projects while the social distancing restrictions remain in place. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions, we implemented our pandemic response plan, which includes having all employees who can work remotely do so in order to promote social distancing and providing personal protective equipment to field employees to reduce the spread of COVID-19.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the estimated impacts that COVID-19 had on our earnings were approximately $1.0 million, primarily driven by reduced consumption of energy largely in the commercial and industrial sectors and incremental expenses associated with COVID-19, including protective personal equipment, bad debt expense and premium pay for field personnel. The additional operating expenses we incurred support the ongoing delivery of our essential services during these unprecedented times. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we established regulatory assets for the net incremental expense incurred for our natural gas and electric distribution businesses as currently authorized by the Delaware, Maryland and Florida PSCs. We are committed to communicating timely updates and will continue to monitor developments affecting our employees, customers, suppliers, stockholders and take additional precautions as warranted to operate safely and to comply with the CDC, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, state and local requirements in order to protect its employees, customers and the communities. Refer to Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 19, Rates and Other Regulatory Activities, for further information on the potential deferral of incremental expenses associated with COVID-19.
The following discussions and those later in the document on operating income and segment results include the use of the term “gross margin," which is determined by deducting the cost of sales from operating revenue. Cost of sales includes the purchased cost of natural gas, electricity and propane and the cost of labor spent on direct revenue-producing activities, and excludes depreciation, amortization and accretion. Gross margin should not be considered an alternative to operating income or net income, which are determined in accordance with GAAP. We believe that gross margin, although a non-GAAP measure, is useful and meaningful to investors as a basis for making investment decisions. It provides investors with information that demonstrates the profitability achieved by us under our allowed rates for regulated energy operations and under our competitive pricing structures for unregulated energy operations. Our management uses gross margin in measuring our business units’ performance and has historically analyzed and reported gross margin information publicly. Other companies may calculate gross margin in a different manner.
Earnings per share information is presented on a diluted basis, unless otherwise noted.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 25
OVERVIEW AND HIGHLIGHTS
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 26
2020 compared to 2019
Key variances in continuing operations between 2020 and 2019 included:
* See the Major Projects and Initiatives table.
(1) Interest charges includes amortization of a regulatory liability of $1.5 million related to the Hurricane Michael regulatory proceeding settlement.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 27
SUMMARY OF KEY FACTORS
Recently Completed and Ongoing Major Projects and Initiatives
We constantly pursue and develop additional projects and initiatives to serve existing and new customers, further grow our businesses and earnings, with the intention of increasing shareholder value. The following represent the major projects/initiatives recently completed and currently underway. In the future, we will add new projects and initiatives to this table once substantially finalized and the associated earnings can be estimated.
(1) Includes gross margin generated from interim services.
(2) Includes gross margin from natural gas distribution services.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 28
Detailed Discussion of Major Projects and Initiatives
Pipeline Expansions
Western Palm Beach County, Florida Expansion
Peninsula Pipeline is constructing four transmission lines to bring additional natural gas to our distribution system in West Palm Beach, Florida. The first phase of this project was placed into service in December 2018 and generated incremental gross margin of $2.0 million during 2020 compared to 2019. We expect to complete the remainder of the project in phases through the second quarter of 2021, and estimate that the project will generate annual gross margin of $5.0 million in 2021 and $5.2 million in 2022.
Del-Mar Energy Pathway
In December 2019, the FERC issued an order approving the construction of the Del-Mar Energy Pathway project. Eastern Shore anticipates that this project will be fully in-service by the beginning of the fourth quarter of 2021. The new facilities will: (i) ensure an additional 14,300 Dts/d of firm service to four customers, (ii) provide additional natural gas transmission pipeline infrastructure in eastern Sussex County, Delaware, and (iii) represent the first extension of Eastern Shore’s pipeline system into Somerset County, Maryland. Construction of the project began in January 2020, and interim services in advance of this project generated additional gross margin $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The estimated annual gross margin from this project including natural gas distribution service in Somerset County, Maryland, is approximately $4.4 million in 2021 and $6.7 million annually thereafter.
Auburndale
In August 2019, the Florida PSC approved Peninsula Pipeline's Transportation Service Agreement with the Florida Division of Chesapeake Utilities. Peninsula Pipeline purchased an existing pipeline owned by the Florida Division of Chesapeake Utilities and Calpine, and has completed the construction of pipeline facilities in Polk County, Florida. Peninsula Pipeline provides transportation service to the Florida Division of Chesapeake Utilities; these facilities increased both delivery capacity and downstream pressure as well as introduced a secondary source of natural gas for the Florida Division of Chesapeake Utilities' distribution system. Peninsula Pipeline generated additional gross margin from this project of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 and expects to generate annual gross margin of $0.7 million in 2021 and beyond.
Callahan Intrastate Pipeline
In May 2018, Peninsula Pipeline announced a plan to construct a jointly owned intrastate transmission pipeline with Seacoast Gas Transmission in Nassau County, Florida. The 26-mile pipeline will serve growing demand in both Nassau and Duval Counties. This project was placed in service in June 2020, one month earlier than initially forecasted, and generated $3.9 million in additional gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect to generate $7.6 million annually in gross margin in 2021 and beyond.
Guernsey Power Station
Guernsey Power Station and our affiliate, Aspire Energy Express, entered into a precedent agreement for firm transportation capacity whereby Guernsey Power Station will construct a power generation facility and Aspire Energy Express will provide firm natural gas transportation service to this facility. Guernsey Power Station commenced construction of the project in October 2019. Aspire Energy Express is expected to commence construction of the gas transmission facilities to provide the firm transportation service to the power generation facility in the fourth quarter of 2021. This project is expected to produce gross margin of approximately $0.5 million in 2021 and $1.5 million in 2022 and beyond.
CNG Transportation
Marlin Gas Services provides CNG temporary hold services, contracted pipeline integrity services, emergency services for damaged pipelines and specialized gas services for customers who have unique requirements. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Marlin Gas Services generated additional gross margin of $1.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. We estimate that Marlin Gas Services will generate annual gross margin of approximately $7.9 million in 2021, and $8.5 million in 2022, with potential for additional growth in future years. Marlin Gas Services continues to actively expand the territories it serves, as well as leverage its patented technology to serve other markets, including pursuing liquefied natural gas transportation opportunities and renewable natural gas transportation opportunities from diverse supply sources to various pipeline interconnection points, as further outlined below.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 29
RNG Transportation
Noble Road Landfill RNG Project
In September 2020, Fortistar and Rumpke Waste & Recycling announced commencement of construction of the Noble Road Landfill RNG Project in Shiloh, Ohio. The project includes the construction of a new state-of-the-art facility that will utilize advanced, patented technology to treat landfill gas by removing carbon dioxide and other components to purify the gas and produce pipeline quality RNG. Aspire Energy will utilize its existing natural gas gathering assets to inject the RNG from this project to its system for distribution to end use customers. Once flowing, the RNG volume will represent nearly 10 percent of Aspire Energy’s gas gathering volumes.
Bioenergy Devco
In June 2020, our Delmarva natural gas operations and Bioenergy Devco (“BDC”), a developer of anaerobic digestion facilities that create renewable energy and healthy soil products from organic material, entered into an agreement related to the development of a project to create renewable natural gas. BDC and our affiliates are collaborating on this project in addition to several other project sites where organic waste can be converted into a potentially carbon-negative energy source. This project will provide us the opportunity to maintain the value of the green attributes of renewable natural gas as the gas is being distributed to natural gas distribution customers.
The renewable natural gas resource created from organic material at BDC's anaerobic digestion facilities in Delaware, will be processed for use by our Delmarva natural gas operations. Marlin Gas Services will transport the sustainable fuel from the BDC facility to an Eastern Shore interconnection, where it will be introduced to the distribution system and ultimately distributed to our natural gas customers.
CleanBay Project
In July 2020, our Delmarva natural gas operations and CleanBay Renewables Inc. ("CleanBay") announced a new partnership to bring renewable natural gas to our operations. As part of this partnership, we will transport the renewable natural gas produced at CleanBay's planned Westover, Maryland bio-refinery, to our natural gas infrastructure in the Delmarva Peninsula region. Eastern Shore and Marlin Gas Services, will transport the renewable natural gas from CleanBay to our Delmarva natural gas distribution system where it is ultimately delivered to the Delmarva natural gas distribution end use customers.
At the present time, we have disclosed that we expect to generate $1.0 million in 2021 in incremental margin from renewable natural gas transportation beginning in 2021. As we continue to finalize contract terms associated with some of these projects, additional information will be provided regarding incremental margin at a future time.
Acquisitions
Boulden Propane
In December 2019, Sharp acquired certain propane customers and operating assets of Boulden which provides propane distribution service to approximately 5,200 customers in Delaware, Maryland and Pennsylvania. The customers and assets acquired from Boulden have been assimilated into Sharp. The operations acquired from Boulden generated $3.6 million of incremental gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. We estimate that this acquisition will generate additional gross margin of approximately $4.2 million in 2021, and $4.4 million in 2022, with the potential for additional growth in future years.
Elkton Gas
In July 2020, we closed on the acquisition of Elkton Gas, which provides natural gas distribution service to approximately 7,000 residential and commercial customers within a franchised area of Cecil County, Maryland. The purchase price was approximately $15.6 million, which included $0.6 million of working capital. Elkton Gas’ territory is contiguous to our franchised service territory in Cecil County, Maryland. We generated $1.3 million in additional gross margin from Elkton Gas for the year ended December 31, 2020 and estimate that this acquisition will generate gross margin of approximately $4.0 million in 2021 and $4.2 million in 2022 and beyond.
Western Natural Gas
In October 2020, Sharp acquired certain propane operating assets of Western Natural Gas, which provides propane distribution service throughout Jacksonville, Florida and the surrounding communities, for approximately $6.7 million, net of cash acquired. The acquisition was accounted for as a business combination within our Unregulated Energy Segment in the fourth quarter of 2020. We generated $0.4 million in additional gross margin from Western Natural Gas in 2020 and we estimate that this acquisition will generate gross margin of approximately $1.8 million in 2021.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 30
Regulatory Initiatives
Florida GRIP
Florida GRIP is a natural gas pipe replacement program approved by the Florida PSC that allows automatic recovery, through rates, of costs associated with the replacement of mains and services. Since the program's inception in August 2012, we have invested $164.9 million of capital expenditures to replace 331 miles of qualifying distribution mains, including $21.0 million and $16.7 million of new pipes during 2020 and 2019, respectively. GRIP generated additional gross margin of $1.2 million for the year ended 2020 compared to 2019.
Hurricane Michael
In October 2018, Hurricane Michael passed through FPU's electric distribution operation's service territory in Northwest Florida and caused widespread and severe damage to FPU's infrastructure resulting in 100 percent of its customers in the Northwest Florida service territory losing electrical service.
In August 2019, FPU filed a limited proceeding requesting recovery of storm-related costs associated with Hurricane Michael (capital and expenses) through a change in base rates. FPU also requested treatment and recovery of certain storm-related costs as regulatory assets for items currently not allowed to be recovered through the storm reserve as well as the recovery of capital replaced as a result of the storm. Recovery of these costs included a component of an overall return on capital additions and regulatory assets. In March 2020, we filed an update to our original filing to account for actual charges incurred through December 2019, revised the amortization period of the storm-related costs from 30 years as originally requested to 10 years, and included costs related to Hurricane Dorian of approximately $1.2 million in this filing.
In September 2019, FPU filed a petition with the Florida PSC, for approval of its consolidated electric depreciation rates. The petition was joined to the Hurricane Michael docket. The approved rates, which were part of the settlement agreement in September 2020 that is described below, were retroactively applied effective January 1, 2020.
In September 2020, the Florida PSC approved a settlement agreement between FPU and the Office of the Public Counsel regarding final cost recovery and rates associated with Hurricane Michael. Previously, in late 2019, the Florida PSC approved an interim rate increase, subject to refund, effective January 1, 2020, associated with the restoration effort following Hurricane Michael. We fully reserved these interim rates, pending a final resolution and settlement of the limited proceeding. The settlement agreement allowed us to: (a) refund the over-collection of interim rates through the fuel clause; (b) record regulatory assets for storm costs in the amount of $45.8 million including interest which will be amortized over six years; (c) recover these storm costs through a surcharge for a total of $7.7 million annually; and (d) collect an annual increase in revenue of $3.3 million to recover capital costs associated with new plant investments and a regulatory asset for the cost of removal and undepreciated plant. The new base rates and storm surcharge were effective on November 1, 2020. The following table summarizes the impact of Hurricane Michael regulatory proceeding for the year ended December 31, 2020:
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 31
Capital Cost Surcharge Programs
In December 2019, the FERC approved Eastern Shore’s capital cost surcharge to become effective January 1, 2020. The surcharge, an approved item in the settlement of Eastern Shore’s last general rate case, allows Eastern Shore to recover capital costs associated with mandated highway or railroad relocation projects that required the replacement of existing Eastern Shore facilities. Eastern Shore expects to produce gross margin of approximately $1.5 million in 2021 and $3.0 million in 2022 from relocation projects.
Other Major Factors Influencing Gross Margin
Weather and Consumption
Weather conditions accounted for decreased gross margin of $4.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019 and $5.8 million compared to Normal temperatures as defined below. The following table summarizes heating degree day ("HDD") and cooling degree day (“CDD”) variances from the 10-year average HDD/CDD ("Normal") for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
HDD and CDD Information
Natural Gas Distribution Margin Growth
Customer growth for our natural gas distribution operations, as a result of the addition of new customers and the conversion of customers from alternative fuel sources to natural gas service, generated $3.4 million of additional margin in 2020. The average number of residential customers served on the Delmarva Peninsula and Florida increased by approximately 5.3 percent and 4.1 percent, respectively, during 2020. On the Delmarva Peninsula, a larger percentage of the margin growth was generated from residential growth given the expansion of gas into new housing communities and conversions to natural gas as our distribution infrastructure continues to build out. In Florida, as new communities continue to build out due to population growth and infrastructure is added to support the growth, there is increased load from both residential customers as well as new commercial and industrial customers. The details are provided in the following table:
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 32
REGULATED ENERGY
2020 compared to 2019
Operating income for the Regulated Energy segment for 2020 was $92.1 million, an increase of $5.5 million, or 6.4 percent, compared to 2019. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we established $1.9 million of regulatory assets based on the estimated net incremental expense resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic for our natural gas distribution and electric businesses as currently authorized by the Delaware, Maryland and Florida PSCs. Excluding the estimated unfavorable COVID-19 impacts of $4.2 million for the year, operating income increased $9.7 million as a result of the Hurricane Michael regulatory proceeding settlement, higher gross margin from expansion projects completed by Eastern Shore and Peninsula Pipeline, organic growth in our natural gas distribution businesses, contribution from the Elkton Gas acquisition and margin growth from GRIP. These increases were offset by lower customer consumption driven primarily by milder weather; higher depreciation, amortization and property taxes, including amortization of the regulatory asset associated with the Hurricane Michael regulatory proceeding settlement; new expenses associated with Elkton Gas; and higher other operating expenses.
Items contributing to the year-over-year gross margin increase are listed in the following table:
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 33
The following narrative discussion provides further detail and analysis of the significant items in the foregoing table.
Margin Contribution from Hurricane Michael Regulatory Proceeding Settlement
We generated $10.9 million in additional gross margin as a result of the settlement of the Hurricane Michael regulatory proceeding. Refer to Note 19, Rates and Other Regulatory Activities, in the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Eastern Shore and Peninsula Pipeline Service Expansions
We generated additional gross margin of $6.3 million from Peninsula Pipeline's Western Palm Beach County, Auburndale and Callahan projects and $1.7 million in additional gross margin from Eastern Shore's Del-Mar Energy Pathway project.
Natural Gas Distribution Customer Growth
We generated additional gross margin of $3.4 million from natural gas customer growth. Gross margin increased by $1.5 million in Florida and $1.9 million on the Delmarva Peninsula in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to residential customer growth of 5.3 percent on the Delmarva Peninsula and 4.1 percent in Florida. On the Delmarva Peninsula, a larger percentage of the margin growth was generated from residential growth given the expansion of gas into new communities and conversions, while in Florida, as gas heating is not a significant portion of residential use, a greater portion of the margin growth occurred in the commercial and industrial sectors.
Margin Contribution from Elkton Gas
Gross margin increased by $1.3 million due to the margin generated by Elkton Gas which we acquired in July 2020.
Florida GRIP
Continued investment in the Florida GRIP generated additional gross margin of $1.2 million in 2020 compared to 2019.
Eastern Shore Margin from Capital Relocation and Non-service Expansion Projects
We generated additional gross margin of $1.0 million from Eastern Shore's surcharge on capital spent on several governmental-mandated relocation and non-service expansion projects.
Unfavorable COVID-19 Impacts
Gross margin decreased by $3.8 million in 2020 compared to 2019, as a result of the lower customer consumption, which was caused by the slowing of economic activities in our service territories as a result of restrictions imposed to promote social distancing and slow down the spread of COVID-19.
Decreased Customer Consumption - Weather Related
Gross margin decreased by $1.3 million due to milder weather and lower other consumption on the Delmarva Peninsula and in Florida in 2020 compared to 2019. The weather on the Delmarva Peninsula was 9 percent warmer in 2020 compared to 2019.
The major components of the increase in other operating expenses are as follows:
2019 compared to 2018
The results for the Regulated Energy segment for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 are described in Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 34
UNREGULATED ENERGY
2020 Compared to 2019
Operating income for the Unregulated Energy segment for 2020 was $20.7 million, an increase of $0.7 million compared to 2019. The increased operating income was due to an increase in gross margin of $4.5 million, which was partially offset by an increase of $3.8 million in other operating expenses. Excluding the estimated COVID-19 impacts of $1.7 million, operating income increased $2.4 million as a result of incremental gross margin from the acquisitions of the Boulden and Western Natural Gas propane assets, higher retail propane margins per gallon, increased demand for Marlin Gas Services' CNG transportation services and higher rates for Aspire Energy. These increases were partially offset by reduced gross margins from overall warmer temperatures, higher depreciation, amortization and property taxes, expenses associated with recent acquisitions, and increased insurance expense.
Gross Margin
Items contributing to the year-over-year increase in gross margin are listed in the following table:
The following narrative discussion provides further detail and analysis of the significant items in the foregoing table.
Propane Operations
•Boulden and Western Natural Gas - We generated gross margin of $3.6 million from Boulden which was acquired by Sharp in December 2019 and $0.4 million from Western Natural Gas which was acquired by Sharp in October 2020.
•Increased Retail Propane Margins - Gross margin increased by $1.9 million, due to lower propane inventory costs and favorable market conditions. These market conditions, which include competition with other propane suppliers, as well as the availability and price of alternative energy sources, may fluctuate based on changes in demand, supply and other energy commodity prices.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 35
•Decreased Customer Consumption Primarily Driven by Weather - Gross margin decreased by $2.4 million for the Mid-Atlantic propane operations as weather on the Delmarva Peninsula was 9 percent warmer in 2020 compared to 2019.
Marlin Gas Services
•Gross margin increased by $1.8 million, as compared to 2019 due to higher demand for CNG hold services.
Aspire Energy
•Increased Margin Driven by Changes in Rates - Gross margin increased by $1.3 million, due primarily to higher margins from negotiated rate increases.
•Decreased Customer Consumption Primarily Driven by Weather - Gross margin decreased by $0.5 million due to lower consumption as weather in Ohio was approximately 5 percent warmer in 2020 compared to 2019.
Unfavorable COVID-19 Impacts
•Gross margin decreased by $1.5 million as a result of lower customer consumption, which was caused by the slowing of economic activities in our service territories as a result of restrictions imposed to promote social distancing and to slow down the spread of COVID-19.
Other Operating Expenses
Items contributing to the period-over-period increase in other operating expenses are listed in the following table:
2019 compared to 2018
The results for the Unregulated Energy segment for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 are described in Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which is incorporated by reference.
Divestiture of PESCO
As discussed in Note 4, Acquisitions and Divestitures, during the fourth quarter of 2019, we sold PESCO's assets and contracts and accordingly have exited the natural gas marketing business. This was done in an effort to enable us to focus on the strategies that support our core energy delivery business. As a result, we began to report PESCO as discontinued operations during the third quarter of 2019 and excluded PESCO's performance from continuing operations for all periods presented and classified its assets and liabilities as held for sale, where applicable.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 36
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE), NET
Other income (expense), net was $3.2 million and $(1.8) million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Other income (expense), net includes non-operating investment income (expense), interest income, late fees charged to customers, gains or losses from the sale of assets for our unregulated businesses and pension and other benefits expense. The increase was primarily due to gains from the sale of two properties and lower pension expense in 2020. The property sales were the result of consolidation of certain operations facilities.
INTEREST CHARGES
2020 Compared to 2019
Interest charges for 2020 decreased by $0.5 million, compared to the same period in 2019, attributable primarily to a decrease of $4.6 million in interest expense primarily on lower levels outstanding under our revolving credit facilities and lower interest rates on short-term borrowings, $1.5 million of an amortization credit/reduction in interest expense associated with a regulatory liability that was established in connection with the Hurricane Michael regulatory proceeding settlement, and $0.5 million primarily due to higher capitalized interest associated with growth projects. This decrease was offset by an increase of $5.9 million in interest expense on long-term debt as a result of several long-term debt placements in 2019 and 2020 and $1.0 million in interest and fees associated with the early payoff of the 9.08% FPU secured first mortgage bonds.
INCOME TAXES
2020 Compared to 2019
Income tax expense from continuing operations was $23.5 million for 2020 compared to $21.1 million for 2019. Our effective income tax rate was 25.0 percent and 25.7 percent for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we implemented certain provisions of the CARES Act that allowed us to carryback net operating losses from 2018 and 2019 into prior year periods where the federal income tax rate was higher. As a result, we recognized a $1.8 million reduction in tax expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Excluding this impact of the CARES Act, our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 26.9 percent.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our capital requirements reflect the capital-intensive and seasonal nature of our business and are principally attributable to investment in new plant and equipment, retirement of outstanding debt and seasonal variability in working capital. We rely on cash generated from operations, short-term borrowings, and other sources to meet normal working capital requirements and to temporarily finance capital expenditures. We may also issue long-term debt and equity to fund capital expenditures and to more closely align our capital structure with our target capital structure. We maintain an effective shelf registration statement with the SEC for the issuance of shares of common stock under various types of equity offerings, including shares of common stock under our ATM equity program, as well as an effective registration statement with respect to the DRIP. Depending on our capital needs and subject to market conditions, in addition to other possible debt and equity offerings, we may consider issuing additional shares under the direct share purchase component of the DRIP and/or under the ATM equity program. Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, we issued shares of common stock under both the DRIP and the ATM equity program.
Our energy businesses are weather-sensitive and seasonal. We normally generate a large portion of our annual net income and subsequent increases in our accounts receivable in the first and fourth quarters of each year due to significant volumes of natural gas, electricity, and propane delivered by our distribution operations, and our natural gas transmission operations to customers during the peak heating season. In addition, our natural gas and propane inventories, which usually peak in the fall months, are largely drawn down in the heating season and provide a source of cash as the inventory is used to satisfy winter sales demand.
Capital expenditures for investments in new or acquired plant and equipment are our largest capital requirements. Our capital expenditures were $195.9 million (including the purchase of certain propane assets of Western Natural Gas and certain natural gas assets of Elkton Gas) in 2020.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 37
The following table shows total capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020 by segment and by business line:
In the table below, we have provided a preliminary range of our forecasted capital expenditures for 2021:
The 2021 budget, excluding acquisitions, includes capital expenditures associated with the following projects: Delmarva Natural Gas distribution's Somerset County expansion and the Bioenergy Devco RNG Project, Eastern Shore's Del-Mar Energy Pathway and the CleanBay RNG projects, Florida's Western Palm Beach County expansion and other potential pipeline projects, continued expenditures under the Florida GRIP, further expansions of our natural gas distribution and transmission systems, continued natural gas and electric system infrastructure improvement activities, facilities to support Marlin Gas Services' legacy growth and expansion into RNG and LNG transport, information technology systems, and other strategic initiatives and investments.
The capital expenditure projection is subject to continuous review and modification. Actual capital requirements may vary from the above estimates due to a number of factors, including changing economic conditions, capital delays because of COVID-19 that are greater than currently anticipated, customer growth in existing areas, regulation, new growth or acquisition
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 38
opportunities, availability of capital and other factors discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors. Historically, actual capital expenditures have typically lagged behind the budgeted amounts.
The timing of capital expenditures can vary based on delays in regulatory approvals, securing environmental approvals and other permits. The regulatory application and approval process has lengthened in the past few years, and we expect this trend to continue.
Capital Structure
We are committed to maintaining a sound capital structure and strong credit ratings. This commitment, along with adequate and timely rate relief for our regulated energy operations, is intended to ensure our ability to attract capital from outside sources at a reasonable cost, which will benefit our customers, creditors, employees and stockholders.
The following tables present our capitalization, excluding and including short-term borrowings, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 follows:
Our target ratio of equity to total capitalization, including short-term borrowings, is between 50 and 60 percent. Our equity to total capitalization ratio, including short-term borrowings, was 50 percent as of December 31, 2020. We seek to align permanent financing with the in-service dates of capital projects. We may utilize more temporary short-term debt when the financing cost is attractive as a bridge to the permanent long-term financing or if the equity markets are volatile.
In the third and fourth quarter of 2020, we issued 1.0 million shares of common stock through our DRIP and the ATM programs and received net proceeds of approximately $83.0 million which were added to our general funds. See Note 16, Stockholders’ Equity, in the consolidated financial statements for additional information on commissions and fees paid in connection with these issuances.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no restrictions on our cash balances. Chesapeake Utilities’ Senior Notes contain a restriction that limits the payment of dividends or other restricted payments in excess of certain pre-determined thresholds. As of December 31, 2020, $324.6 million of our consolidated net income were free of such restrictions.
Term Notes
In January 2019, we issued a $30.0 million unsecured term note through Branch Banking and Trust Company, with a maturity date of February 28, 2020. This note was paid in full in February 2020 utilizing our short-term borrowing facilities.
Uncollateralized Senior Notes
All of our Senior Notes require periodic principal and interest payments as specified in each note. They also contain various restrictions. The most stringent restrictions state that we must maintain equity of at least 40.0 percent of total capitalization (including short-term borrowings), and the fixed charge coverage ratio must be at least 1.2 times. The most recent Senior Notes issued since September 2013 also contain a restriction that we must maintain an aggregate net book value in our regulated business assets of at least 50.0 percent of our consolidated total assets. Failure to comply with those covenants could result in accelerated due dates and/or termination of the Senior Note agreements.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 39
Shelf Agreements
We have entered into Shelf Agreements with Prudential, MetLife and NYL, whom are under no obligation to purchase any unsecured debt. The following table summarizes our Shelf Agreements at December 31, 2020:
(1) In April 2020, we amended the Prudential Shelf Agreement to increase the available borrowing capacity by $150.0 million. The Shelf Agreement expires in April 2023. In July 2020, we issued $50 million of Prudential Shelf Notes at the rate of 3.00 percent per annum.
(2) In May 2020, we amended an agreement with MetLife to provide a new $150 million MetLife Shelf Agreement for a three-year term ending May 2023.
(3) In August 2020 we issued $40 million of NYL Shelf Notes at the rate of 2.96 percent per annum. The NYL Shelf Agreement expires in November 2021.
The Senior Notes, Shelf Agreements and Shelf Notes set forth certain business covenants to which we are subject when any note is outstanding, including covenants that limit or restrict our ability, and the ability of our subsidiaries, to incur indebtedness, or place or permit liens and encumbrances on any of our property or the property of our subsidiaries.
Short-Term Borrowings
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our short-term borrowing totaled $175.6 million and $247.4 million, respectively, at weighted average interest rates of 1.28 percent and 2.62 percent, respectively. Included in the December 31, 2020 balance, is $60.0 million in short-term debt for which we have entered into interest rate swap agreements.
In September 2020, we entered into a new $375.0 million syndicated Revolver with six participating lenders. As a result of entering into the Revolver, in September 2020, we terminated and paid all outstanding balances under the previously existing bilateral lines of credit and the previous revolving credit facility.
The availability of funds under the Revolver is subject to conditions specified in the credit agreement, all of which we currently satisfy. These conditions include our compliance with financial covenants and the continued accuracy of representations and warranties contained in these agreements. We are required by the financial covenants in the Revolver to maintain, at the end of each fiscal year, a funded indebtedness ratio of no greater than 65 percent. As of December 31, 2020, we are in compliance with this covenant.
The Revolver expires on September 29, 2021 and is available to provide funds for our short-term cash needs to meet seasonal working capital requirements and to temporarily fund portions of our capital expenditures. Borrowings under the Revolver are subject to a pricing grid, including the commitment fee and the interest rate charged. Our pricing is adjusted each quarter based upon our total indebtedness to total capitalization ratio. As of December 31, 2020, our pricing under the Revolver included a commitment fee of 0.175 percent and an interest rate of 1.125 percent over LIBOR. Our available credit under the new Revolver at December 31, 2020 was $196.9 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had issued $4.8 million in letters of credit to various counterparties under the syndicated Revolver. Although the letters of credit are not included in the outstanding short-term borrowings and we do not anticipate they will be drawn upon by the counterparties, the letters of credit reduce the available borrowings under our syndicated Revolver.
In the second quarter of 2020, we entered into interest rate swaps with notional amounts totaling $100.0 million associated with three of our short-term lines of credit which were settled in October 2020. The interest rate swaps were entered to hedge the variability in cash flows attributable to changes in the short-term borrowing rates during this period. The fixed swap rates ranged between 0.2615 and 0.3875 percent for the period. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we entered into an additional interest rate swap with notional amounts totaling $60.0 million, through December 2021 with pricing of 0.20 percent and 0.205 percent for the period associated with our outstanding borrowing under the Revolver. In February 2021, we entered into an additional interest rate swap with a notional amount of $40.0 million through December 2021 at pricing of 0.17 percent. Our short-term borrowing is based on the 30-day LIBOR rate. The interest swap was cash settled monthly as the counter-party pays us the 30-day LIBOR rate less the fixed rate.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 40
We are authorized by our Board of Directors to borrow up to $375 million of short-term debt, as required.
Key statistics regarding our unsecured short-term credit facilities (our Revolver and previous bilateral lines of credit and revolving credit facility) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of our operating, investing and financing cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities
Changes in our cash flows from operating activities are attributable primarily to changes in net income, adjusted for non-cash items, such as depreciation and changes in deferred income taxes, and changes in working capital. Working capital requirements are determined by a variety of factors, including weather, the prices of natural gas, electricity and propane, the timing of customer collections, payments for purchases of natural gas, electricity and propane, and deferred fuel cost recoveries.
We normally generate a large portion of our annual net income and related increases in our accounts receivable in the first and fourth quarters of each year due to significant volumes of natural gas and propane delivered to customers during the peak heating season by our natural gas and propane operations and our natural gas supply, gathering and processing operation. In addition, our natural gas and propane inventories, which usually peak in the fall months, are largely drawn down in the heating season and provide a source of cash as the inventory is used to satisfy winter sales demand.
During 2020 and 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $158.9 million and $103.0 million, respectively, resulting in an increase in cash flows of $55.9 million. Significant operating activities generating the cash flows change were as follows:
•Changes in net accounts receivable and accrued revenue and accounts payable and accrued liabilities increased cash flows by $23.0 million, due in part to the absence of PESCO, whose assets and contracts were sold in the fourth quarter of 2019, as well as the timing and receipt of customer receipts and vendor payments;
•Net income, adjusted for non-cash adjustments and reconciling activities, increased cash flows by $23.6 million, due primarily to higher net income, depreciation and amortization and gain on sale of assets;
•Net cash flows from income taxes receivable increased by $11.9 million due primarily to tax refunds resulting from implementation of the CARES Act in 2020 which allowed taxable losses to be carried back against prior year taxable income;
•Changes in net regulatory assets and liabilities increased cash flows by $2.8 million due primarily to the change in fuel costs collected through the various cost recovery mechanisms;
•Changes in net prepaid expenses and other current assets, customer deposits and refunds and other assets and liabilities, net increased cash flows by $1.1 million; offset by
•Net cash flows from changes in propane inventory, storage gas and other inventories which decreased by approximately $6.5 million.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 41
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $181.6 million and $186.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, resulting in an increase in cash flows of $5.0 million. Key investing activities contributing to the cash flow change included:
•Cash used to pay for capital expenditures was $165.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $184.7 million in December 31, 2019;
•Net cash of $22.2 million was primarily used to acquire certain propane operating assets of Elkton Gas and Western Natural Gas in 2020, compared to net cash of $24.0 million used to acquire operating assets of Boulden in 2019; and
•Cash received from sales of assets was $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to sale of properties as a result of consolidation of certain operations facilities.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $19.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash of $84.5 million provided by financing activities during the prior year which resulted in a decrease in cash flows of $65.3 million, primarily due to the following:
•Increased cash flows of $61.0 million and $23.3 million, from new equity issued under the ATM and waiver component of the DRIP, respectively;
•Decreased cash flows from higher repayments of short-term borrowing of $25.7 million under our line of credit arrangements;
•Decreased cash flows of $109.8 million associated with less long-term debt issuances. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds of $89.8 million from the issuance of Prudential Shelf Notes in July 2020 and NYL Shelf Notes in August 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019 we received $199.6 million in net cash proceeds from the issuance of Term Notes, Prudential Shelf Notes and Uncollateralized Senior Notes.
•Decreased cash flows of $11.7 million as a result of the repayment of more long-term debt;
•Increased cash flows of $0.3 million as a result of changes in cash overdrafts in 2020; and
•Cash dividend payments of $27.2 million in 2020 compared to $24.7 million for 2019.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
We have the following contractual obligations and other commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1) This represents principal payments on long-term debt. See Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 13, Long-Term Debt, for additional information. The expected interest payments on long-term debt are $18.5 million, $34.7 million, $31.5 million and $95.3 million, respectively, for the periods indicated above. Expected interest payments for all periods total $180.0 million.
(2) See Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 15, Leases, for additional information.
(3) See Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 21, Other Commitments and Contingencies, for additional information.
(4) These amounts associated with our unfunded post-employment and post-retirement benefit plans are based on expected payments to current retirees and assume a retirement age of 62 for currently active employees. There are many factors that would cause actual payments to differ from these amounts, including early retirement, future health care costs that differ from past experience and discount rates implicit in calculations. See Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 17, Employee Benefit Plans, for additional information on the plans.
(5) We have recorded long-term liabilities of $15.9 million at December 31, 2020 for two qualified, defined benefit pension plans. The assets funding these plans are in a separate trust and are not considered assets of ours or included in our balance sheets. The Contractual Obligations table above includes $2.3 million, reflecting the payments we expect to make to the trust funds in 2021. Additional contributions may be required in future years based on the actual return earned
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 42
by the plan assets and other actuarial assumptions, such as the discount rate and long-term expected rate of return on plan assets. See Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 17, Employee Benefit Plans, for further information on the plans. Additionally, the Contractual Obligations table above includes deferred compensation obligations totaling $10.8 million, funded with Rabbi Trust assets in the same amount. The Rabbi Trust assets are recorded under Investments on the consolidated balance sheets. We assume a retirement age of 65 for purposes of distribution from this trust.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Our Board of Directors has authorized us to issue corporate guarantees securing obligations of our subsidiaries and to obtain letters of credit securing our subsidiaries' obligations. The maximum authorized liability under such guarantees and letters of credit as of December 31, 2020 was $20.0 million. The aggregate amount guaranteed at December 31, 2020 was $5.7 million, with the guarantees expiring on various dates through September 2021.
As of December 31, 2020, we have issued letters of credit totaling approximately $4.8 million related to the electric transmission services for FPU's electric division, the firm transportation service agreement between TETLP and our Delaware and Maryland divisions, and our current and previous primary insurance carriers. These letters of credit have various expiration dates through October 5, 2021. There have been no draws on these letters of credit as of December 31, 2020. We do not anticipate that the counterparties will draw upon these letters of credit, and we expect that they will be renewed to the extent necessary in the future. Additional information is presented in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 21, Other Commitments and Contingencies in the consolidated financial statements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
We prepare our financial statements in accordance with GAAP. Application of these accounting principles requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingencies during the reporting period. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Since a significant portion of our businesses are regulated and the accounting methods used by these businesses must comply with the requirements of the regulatory bodies, the choices available are limited by these regulatory requirements. In the normal course of business, estimated amounts are subsequently adjusted to actual results that may differ from the estimates.
Regulatory Assets and Liabilities
As a result of the ratemaking process, we record certain assets and liabilities in accordance with ASC Topic 980, Regulated Operations, and consequently, the accounting principles applied by our regulated energy businesses differ in certain respects from those applied by the unregulated businesses. Amounts are deferred as regulatory assets and liabilities when there is a probable expectation that they will be recovered in future revenues or refunded to customers as a result of the regulatory process. This is more fully described in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the consolidated financial statements. If we were required to terminate the application of ASC Topic 980, we would be required to recognize all such deferred amounts as a charge or a credit to earnings, net of applicable income taxes. Such an adjustment could have a material effect on our results of operations.
Valuation of Environmental Liabilities and Related Regulatory Assets
As more fully described in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 20, Environmental Commitments and Contingencies, in the consolidated financial statements, we are currently participating in the investigation, assessment or remediation of former MGP sites for which we have sought or will seek regulatory approval to recover through rates the estimated costs of remediation and related activities. Amounts have been recorded as environmental liabilities based on estimates of future costs to remediate these sites, which are provided by independent consultants.
Financial Instruments
We utilize financial instruments to mitigate commodity price risk associated with fluctuations of natural gas, electricity and propane and to mitigate interest rate risk. We continually monitor the use of these instruments to ensure compliance with our risk management policies and account for them in accordance with GAAP, such that every derivative instrument is recorded as either an asset or a liability measured at its fair value. It also requires that changes in the derivatives' fair value are recognized in the current period earnings unless specific hedge accounting criteria are met. If these instruments do not meet the definition of derivatives or are considered “normal purchases and normal sales,” they are accounted for on an accrual basis of accounting.
Additionally, GAAP also requires us to classify the derivative assets and liabilities based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. Our assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement requires judgment and may affect the fair value of the assets and liabilities and their placement within the fair value hierarchy.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 43
We determined that certain propane put options, call options, swap agreements and interest rate swap agreements met the specific hedge accounting criteria. We also determined that most of our contracts for the purchase or sale of natural gas, electricity and propane either: (i) did not meet the definition of derivatives because they did not have a minimum purchase/sell requirement, or (ii) were considered “normal purchases and normal sales” because the contracts provided for the purchase or sale of natural gas, electricity or propane to be delivered in quantities that we expect to use or sell over a reasonable period of time in the normal course of business. Accordingly, these contracts were accounted for on an accrual basis of accounting.
Additional information about our derivative instruments is disclosed in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 8, Derivative Instruments, in the consolidated financial statements.
Operating Revenues
Revenues for our natural gas and electric distribution operations are based on rates approved by the PSC of each state in which we operate. Customers’ base rates may not be changed without formal approval by these PSCs. However, the PSCs authorized our regulated operations to negotiate rates, based on approved methodologies, with customers that have competitive alternatives. Eastern Shore’s revenues are based on rates approved by the FERC. The FERC has also authorized Eastern Shore to negotiate rates above or below the FERC-approved maximum rates, which customers can elect as an alternative to negotiated rates.
Peninsula Pipeline, our Florida intrastate pipeline subsidiary that is subject to regulation by the Florida PSC, has negotiated firm transportation service contracts with third-party customers and with certain affiliates.
For regulated deliveries of natural gas, electricity and propane, we read meters and bill customers on monthly cycles that do not coincide with the accounting periods used for financial reporting purposes. We accrue unbilled revenues for natural gas and electricity that have been delivered, but not yet billed, at the end of an accounting period to the extent that they do not coincide. We estimate the amount of the unbilled revenue by jurisdiction and customer class. A similar computation is made to accrue unbilled revenues for propane customers with meters, such as community gas system customers, whose billing cycles do not coincide with the accounting periods.
Our Ohio natural gas transmission/supply operation recognizes revenues based on actual volumes of natural gas shipped, using contractual rates, which are based upon index prices that are published monthly.
Eight Flags records revenues based on the amount of electricity and steam generated and sold to its customers.
Our mobile compressed natural gas operation recognizes revenue for CNG services at the end of each calendar month for services provided during the month based on agreed upon rates for labor, equipment utilized, costs incurred for natural gas compression, miles driven, mobilization and demobilization fees.
Each of our natural gas distribution operations in Delaware and Maryland, our bundled natural gas distribution service in Florida and our electric distribution operation in Florida has a fuel cost recovery mechanism. This mechanism provides a method of adjusting billing rates to reflect changes in the cost of purchased fuel. The difference between the current cost of fuel purchased and the cost of fuel recovered in billed rates is deferred and accounted for as either unrecovered fuel cost or amounts payable to customers. Generally, these deferred amounts are recovered or refunded within one year.
We charge flexible rates to industrial interruptible customers on our natural gas distribution systems to compete with the price of alternative fuel that they can use. Neither we, nor any of our interruptible customers, are contractually obligated to deliver or receive natural gas on a firm service basis.
Allowance for Credit Losses
An allowance for expected credit losses is recorded against amounts due to reduce the net receivable balance to the amount we reasonably expect to collect based upon our collections experience, the condition of the overall economy and our assessment of our customers’ inability or reluctance to pay. If circumstances change, however, our estimate of the recoverability of accounts receivable may also change. Circumstances which could affect our estimates include, but are not limited to, customer credit issues, the level of natural gas, electricity and propane prices, impacts from pandemics and general economic conditions. Accounts are written off once they are deemed to be uncollectible.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
We test goodwill for impairment at least annually in December. The annual impairment testing for 2020 indicated no impairment of goodwill. Additional information is presented in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 11, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, in the consolidated financial statements.
Chesapeake Utilities Corporation 2020 Form 10-K Page 44
Other Assets Impairment Evaluations
We periodically evaluate whether events or circumstances have occurred which indicate that long-lived assets may not be recoverable. When events or circumstances indicate that an impairment is present, we record an impairment loss equal to the excess of the asset's carrying value over its fair value, if any.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits
Pension and other postretirement plan costs and liabilities are determined on an actuarial basis and are affected by numerous assumptions and estimates including the market value of plan assets, estimates of the expected returns on plan assets, assumed discount rates, the level of contributions made to the plans, and current demographic and actuarial mortality data. The assumed discount rates and the expected returns on plan assets are the assumptions that generally have the most significant impact on the pension costs and liabilities. The assumed discount rates, the assumed health care cost trend rates and the assumed rates of retirement generally have the most significant impact on our postretirement plan costs and liabilities. Additional information is presented in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 17, Employee Benefit Plans, in the consolidated financial statements, including plan asset investment allocation, estimated future benefit payments, general descriptions of the plans, significant assumptions, the impact of certain changes in assumptions, and significant changes in estimates.
For 2020, actuarial assumptions include expected long-term rates of return on plan assets of 3.50 percent and 6.00 percent for Chesapeake Utilities' pension plan and FPU’s pension plan, respectively, and discount rates of 2.25 percent and 2.50 percent for Chesapeake Utilities' and FPU’s plans, respectively. The discount rate for each plan was determined by management considering high-quality corporate bond rates, such as the Prudential curve index and the FTSE Index, changes in those rates from the prior year and other pertinent factors, including the expected lives of the plans and the availability of the lump-sum payment option. A 0.25 percent decrease in the discount rate could decrease our annual pension and postretirement costs by an immaterial amount, and a 0.25 percent increase could increase our annual pension and postretirement costs by an immaterial amount.
Actual changes in the fair value of plan assets and the differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected return on plan assets could have a material effect on the amount of pension benefit costs that we ultimately recognize. A 0.25 percent change in the rate of return could change our annual pension cost by approximately $0.2 million and would not have an impact on the postretirement and Chesapeake Utilities supplemental executive retirement pension plan ("Chesapeake SERP") because these plans are not funded.
Tax-Related Contingency
We account for uncertainty in income taxes in the consolidated financial statements only if it is more likely than not that an uncertain tax position is sustainable based on its technical merits. Recognizable tax positions are then measured to determine the amount of benefit recognized in the consolidated financial statements. We recognize penalties and interest related to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of other income.
We account for contingencies associated with taxes other than income when the likelihood of a loss is both probable and quantifiable. In assessing the likelihood of a loss, we do not consider the existence of current inquiries, or the likelihood of future inquiries, by tax authorities as a factor. Our assessment is based solely on our application of the appropriate statutes and the likelihood of a loss, assuming the proper inquiries are made by tax authorities.