Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to those set forth under the caption “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this report.
Introduction
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to provide an understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. The discussion and analysis is organized as follows:
•
Overview
. This section provides a general description of our business and information about our business that we believe is important in understanding our financial condition and results of operations.
•
Basis of Presentation
. This section provides information about key accounting estimates and policies that we followed in preparing our consolidated financial statements for the 2020 fiscal year.
•
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
. This section discusses those accounting policies that are both considered important to our financial condition and results of operations, and require significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in their application. All of our significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policies, are also summarized in the notes to our accompanying consolidated financial statements.
•
Results of Operations
. This section provides an analysis of our results of operations for the three fiscal years presented in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
•
Liquidity and Capital Resources
. This section provides an analysis of our cash flows, capital resources, off-balance
sheet arrangements and our outstanding commitments, if any.
•
Caution Concerning Forward-Looking Statements
. This section discusses how certain forward-looking statements made throughout this MD&A and in other sections of this report are based on management’s present expectations about future events and are inherently susceptible to uncertainty and changes in circumstance.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing innovative therapies for people with rare, debilitating, chronic diseases. We are currently focusing our efforts on products that treat diseases in the neuromuscular and neurological space, but we recently decided to expand our strategic focus to include acquiring or in-licensing
innovative technology platforms and earlier stage programs in other rare disease therapeutic categories outside of these spaces. We are dedicated to making a meaningful impact on the lives of those suffering from rare diseases, and we believe in putting patients first in everything we do.
Impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on our business
The COVID-19
pandemic has resulted, and is expected to continue to result, in significant economic disruption, and has adversely affected and will likely continue to adversely affect our business. We are actively monitoring the situation and are taking those actions that may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our patients, investigators, employees and stockholders.
In March 2020, in light of worsening conditions as a result of the pandemic, we implemented a number of safety related initiatives among our employees, including a travel ban and a work from home policy for all employees. This included our customer-facing employees, who began working remotely and utilizing telephone and web-based
technologies to provide support to patients and their healthcare providers. We believe that because many healthcare providers have delayed seeing new patients because of the pandemic, there has been a delay in the diagnosis of new LEMS patients and their initiating therapy, which has slowed our efforts to locate new patients who could benefit from our therapy. However, we believe that as more healthcare providers resume seeing new patients on a regular basis, that this aspect of the COVID-19
pandemic on our business will lessen.
Our Firdapse®
supply chain remains robust and thus far we have observed no disruptions in the production of Firdapse®
. We reiterate that we are committed to providing patients with the ability to obtain an uninterrupted supply of Firdapse®
, and we believe that we have an adequate supply of Firdapse®
to address patients’ needs for the foreseeable future. Further, we are advised by our U.S. manufacturing partners that they have implemented contingency plans to remain in operation. We are committed to meeting our patients’ needs for Firdapse®
and believe that our supply chain will continue to remain solid and uninterrupted through the COVID-19
outbreak and beyond.
Until such time as the COVID-19
pandemic is over, it will likely adversely impact the timetable of our ongoing and contemplated clinical trials and studies, and increase the costs of such trials and studies, consistent with the impact that the COVID-19
pandemic has had on many biopharmaceutical companies.
Strategic Plan for 2021 and Beyond
Our Board of Directors recently approved an expansion in our company’s strategic focus to include acquiring or in-licensing
innovative technology platforms and earlier stage programs in other therapeutic categories outside of neuromuscular diseases. To accomplish these new priorities, we are prepared to invest more heavily in research and development, including acquiring earlier stage opportunities and innovative technology. We believe that this strategic expansion will better position our company to build out a broader more diversified portfolio of drug candidates that we believe will add greater value to our company over the near and long-term. However, there can be no assurance that whatever product candidates or technology platforms we acquire, if any, will be successfully developed.
To spearhead this investment, we have commenced a national search for a key executive to manage this more progressive strategy. This person will likely be an M.D. or Ph.D. with at least 15-20
years of relevant pharmaceutical experience and experience in developing innovative drug technology. This person will be responsible for portfolio expansion planning and developing medicines from discovery through marketing authorizations, as well as strategic leadership across all R&D activities including, direct oversight of science and clinical research.
Firdapse®
In October 2012, we licensed the North American rights to Firdapse®
, a proprietary form of amifampridine phosphate, or chemically known as 3,4-diaminopyridine
phosphate. When we acquired the rights to the product, it had already been granted orphan drug designation by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of patients with LEMS, a rare and sometimes fatal autoimmune disease characterized by muscle weakness. Additionally, in August 2013, we were granted “breakthrough therapy designation” by the FDA for Firdapse®
for the treatment of LEMS. Further, the FDA has granted Orphan Drug Designation for Firdapse®
for the treatment of Myasthenia Gravis (MG).
On November 28, 2018, we received approval from the FDA for Firdapse®
10 mg tablets for the treatment of adult LEMS patients (ages 17 and above). In January 2019, we launched Firdapse®
in the United States, selling through a field force experienced in neurologic, central nervous system or rare disease products consisting at the time of approximately 20 field personnel, including sales (Regional Account Managers), patient assistance and insurance navigation support (Patient Access Liaisons), and payor reimbursement (National Account Managers). We also have a field-based force of six medical science liaisons who are helping educate the medical communities and patients about LEMS and about our ongoing clinical trial activities evaluating Firdapse®
for other ultra-orphan, neuromuscular diseases. Finally, we are working with several rare disease advocacy organizations (including Global Genes, the National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD), and the Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America) to help increase awareness and level of support for patients living with LEMS, Anti-MuSK antibody positive myasthenia gravis, or MuSK-MG,
and other neurological diseases, and to provide education for the physicians who treat these rare diseases and the patients they treat.
In early 2020, we expanded our field sales group by almost one hundred percent and contracted with an experienced inside sales agency generating leads through telemarketing to targeted physicians. We made these changes to expand our sales efforts beyond the neuromuscular specialists who regularly treat LEMS patients to reach the roughly 9,000 neurology and neuromuscular healthcare providers that may be treating an adult LEMS patient who can benefit from Firdapse®
. We also continue to make available at no-cost
a LEMS voltage gated calcium channel (VGCC) antibody testing program for use by physicians who suspect that one of their patients may have LEMS and wish to reach a definitive diagnosis. Further, we are continuing to expand our digital and social media activities in order to introduce our product and services to potential patients and their healthcare providers.
We are supporting the distribution of Firdapse®
through “Catalyst Pathways”™
, our personalized treatment support program. “Catalyst Pathways”™
is a single source for personalized treatment support, education and guidance through the challenging dosing and titration regimen to an effective therapeutic dose. It also includes distributing the drug through a very small group of exclusive specialty pharmacies (primarily AnovoRx), which is consistent with the way that most pharmaceutical products for ultra-orphan diseases are distributed and dispensed to patients. We believe that by using specialty pharmacies in this way, the difficult task of navigating the health care system is far better for the patient needing treatment for their rare disease and the health care community in general.
In order to help adult LEMS patients afford their medication, we, like other pharmaceutical companies which are marketing drugs for ultra-orphan conditions, have developed an array of financial assistance programs that are available to reduce patient co-pays
and deductibles to a nominal affordable amount. For eligible patients with commercial coverage, a co-pay
assistance program designed to keep out-of-pocket
costs to not more than $10.00 per month is available for all LEMS patients prescribed Firdapse®
. We are also donating, and committing to continue to donate, money to qualified, independent charitable foundations dedicated to providing assistance to any U.S. LEMS patients in financial need. Subject to compliance with regulatory requirements, our goal is that no LEMS patient is ever denied access to their medication for financial reasons.
In May 2019, the FDA approved a New Drug Application (NDA) for Ruzurgi®
, another version of amifampridine (3,4-DAP),
for the treatment of pediatric LEMS patients (ages 6 to under 17). While the NDA for Ruzurgi®
only covers pediatric patients, we believe that Ruzurgi®
is regularly being prescribed off label to adult LEMS patients. We believe that under applicable law, Jacobus is not permitted to market its amifampridine product to adult LEMS patients in the United States, and we are continuing to aggressively take all steps available to us to protect Firdapse’s®
exclusivity under the Orphan Drug Act. There can be no assurance, however, that we will be able to stop the off-label
prescribing of Ruzurgi®
to adult LEMS patients. If Jacobus is able to successfully sell Ruzurgi®
off-label
to additional adult LEMS patients, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We also believe that the FDA’s approval of Ruzurgi®
violated our statutory rights and was in multiple other respects arbitrary, capricious and contrary to law. As a result, in June 2019 we filed suit against the FDA and several related parties challenging this approval and related drug labeling. Our complaint, which was filed in the federal district court for the Southern District of Florida, alleged that the FDA’s approval of Ruzurgi®
violated multiple provisions of FDA regulations regarding labeling, resulting in misbranding in violation of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FDCA); violated our statutory rights to Orphan Drug Exclusivity and New Chemical Entity Exclusivity under the FDCA; and was in multiple other respects arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law, in violation of the Administrative Procedure Act. Among other remedies, the suit sought an order setting aside the FDA’s approval of Ruzurgi®
.
On July 30, 2020, the Magistrate Judge considering our lawsuit against the FDA filed a Report and Recommendation in which she recommended to the District Judge handling the case that she grant the FDA’s and Jacobus’ motions for summary judgment and deny our motion for summary judgment. On September 29, 2020, the District Judge adopted the Report and Recommendation of the Magistrate Judge, granted the FDA’s and Jacobus’ motions for summary judgment, and dismissed our case.
We believe that the District Judge’s decision is incorrect as a matter of law and contrary to the plain language of the Orphan Drug Act. We believe that if the District Judge’s decision to grant summary judgment is correct on the law, it means that the FDA has the authority to effectively eliminate the benefits of exclusivity under the Orphan Drug Act, which we believe will chill the incentive for drug companies to spend the millions of dollars necessary to develop an orphan drug. As a result, we have appealed the decision to the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals. There can be no assurance of the result of such proceeding.
We are currently developing a long-acting formulation of amifampridine phosphate. A number of candidate formulations have been prepared, and three of the most promising formulations were evaluated in a pharmacokinetic (PK) study completed during the fourth quarter of 2020. The results of this first PK study will be used to inform the design and refinement of future product formulations and additional PK work to be conducted in 2021. We have also completed a number of advisory board meetings with both patients and doctors in order to establish the optimum target characteristics of the long-acting formulation of amifampridine phosphate that are desired by the LEMS patient community and treating physicians. There can be no assurance that we will be able to successfully develop a long-acting formulation of amifampridine phosphate, that any such formulation will be approved by the FDA for marketing, or that any such formulation will be commercially viable.
On August 10, 2020, we announced the top-line
results from our Phase 3 clinical trial (MSK-002)
evaluating Firdapse®
for the treatment of adults with MuSK-MG.
Our trial was a multi-site, international (United States, Italy and Serbia), double-blind, placebo-controlled, clinical trial being conducted under a Special Protocol Assessment (SPA) with the FDA. Unfortunately, the MSK-002
trial did not achieve statistical significance on its primary endpoint or its secondary endpoint. However, we have recently concluded a detailed analysis of the data from this trial in an effort to understand why the MuSK-MG
Phase 3 trial did not meet statistical significance on its endpoints, even though clinical improvement was observed by patients and investigators during the initial dose-titration period of the trial and in our previous proof-of-concept
trial. We found in our analysis that there was a large degree of symptom variability during the double-blind withdrawal period. We believe that sources of such variability can be addressed in a redesigned study that may better demonstrate the efficacy of our drug for the treatment of MuSK-MG.
We plan to present our hypotheses and a revised protocol to the FDA with respect to the MuSK-MG
indication for discussion during the first half of 2021. However, there can be no assurance that the FDA will either grant a meeting, agree with our protocol design or, even if the study is successful, accept the results of a single study of a different trial design as sufficient evidence for approval of the MuSK-MG
indication. While we prepare for the meeting with FDA, we also plan to evaluate new clinical trial sites and discuss the new trial design with investigators. After meeting with the FDA, we will determine whether or not to proceed with a new trial that incorporates the new trial design.
Our exploratory study, SMA-001
(A Randomized Placebo Controlled Crossover Study to Evaluate the Safety and Efficacy of Amifampridine Phosphate in Ambulatory Patients with Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) Type 3), met the primary endpoint of a statistically significant difference for the Hammersmith Functional Motor Scale Expanded (HFMSE). Clinically, however, the effect was modest. The secondary endpoints were not statistically significant, although several individual quality of life measures demonstrated a nominally positive statistically significant change. Key opinion leaders with whom we have spoken believed that Firdapse®
needed to show a large clinically significant change if there was the possibility to affect disease progression through retrograde signaling from enhanced neuromuscular junction function. After considering all of these factors, we have concluded that the modest results exhibited in this study are unlikely to result in a sufficient modification of disease progression, and, particularly in light of the fact that there are now three approved disease modifying medications for SMA Type 3, we have decided not to pursue the SMA Type 3 indication further.
We intend to conduct a proof-of-concept
study evaluating Firdapse®
as a treatment for Hereditary Neuropathy with Liability to Pressure Palsies (HNPP). The scientific basis for considering this indication is that leakage of neuron potassium channels is observed in HNPP. Since Firdapse®
is a potassium channel blocker, it may mitigate the pathological effects of the potassium channel leakage in HNPP patients. There can be no assurance that this proof-of-concept
study will be successful.
There can be no assurance that clinical trials of Firdapse®
that we undertake in the future will be successful. Further, there can be no assurance that we will ever be granted the right to commercialize Firdapse®
for any additional indications.
Our NDS filing for Firdapse®
for the symptomatic treatment of LEMS was approved by Health Canada on July 31, 2020. In August 2020, we entered into a license agreement with KYE Pharmaceuticals (KYE), pursuant to which we licensed the Canadian rights for Firdapse®
for the treatment of LEMS to KYE. Pursuant to the license agreement, KYE is obligated to pay us an up-front
payment based on approval and product supply, data protection milestones based on achievements of sales and regulatory milestones, and a sharing of defined net sales upon commercialization.
On August 10, 2020, Health Canada issued a Notice of Compliance (NOC) to Medunik for Ruzurgi®
for the treatment of LEMS. We have since initiated a legal proceeding in Canada seeking judicial review of Health Canada’s decision to issue the NOC for Ruzurgi®
as incorrect and unreasonable under Canadian law. Data protection, per Health Canada regulations, is supposed to prevent Health Canada from issuing a NOC to a drug that directly or indirectly references an innovative drug’s data, for eight years from the date of the innovative drug’s approval. The Ruzurgi®
Product Monograph clearly references pivotal nonclinical carcinogenicity and reproductive toxicity data for amifampridine phosphate developed by us. As such, we believe that our data was relied upon to establish the nonclinical safety profile of Ruzurgi®
needed to meet the standards of the Canadian Food and Drugs Act. There can be no assurance of the results of this proceeding.
In May 2019, we entered into an amendment to our license agreement for Firdapse®
. Under the amendment, we have expanded our commercial territory for Firdapse®
, which originally was comprised of North America, to include Japan. Additionally, we have an option to further expand our territory under the license agreement to include most of Asia, as well as Central and South America, upon the achievement of certain milestones in Japan. Under the amendment, we will pay royalties on net sales in Japan of a similar percentage to the royalties that we are currently paying under our original license agreement for North America.
We have met with Japanese regulatory authorities and believe that we have reached an agreement with them as to the scope of the clinical trial that we will be required to undertake in Japan before we will be permitted to submit an application to the Japanese regulatory authorities to seek to commercialize Firdapse®
for the treatment of LEMS in Japan. We also have applied for orphan drug designation in Japan for the symptomatic treatment of LEMS. There can be no assurance that we will successfully obtain the right to commercialize Firdapse®
in Japan or obtain orphan drug designation.
All of our patent rights for Firdapse®
are derived from our license agreement. In August 2020, the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) allowed Patent No. 10,798,893 (the ’893 patent) to our licensor and thereby to us, and the patent issued on October 6, 2020. The patent is directed to the use of suitable doses of amifampridine to treat patients, regardless of the therapeutic indication, that are slow metabolizers of amifampridine. Any drug product containing amifampridine with a label that states the patented dosing regimens and doses in the Dosing and Administration section prior to April 7, 2034, the expiration date of the patent, could possibly infringe this patent. Generic drug product labels would necessarily have to do this, and we intend to take all appropriate actions to protect our intellectual property.
In that regard, in October 2020, we filed a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for New Jersey against Jacobus and a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania against the specialty pharmacy marketing Ruzurgi®
, PantherRx Rare LLC (PantherRx), for infringement of the ‘893 Patent. The suits have since been combined in the U.S. District Court for New Jersey. The lawsuit arises from Jacobus’ and PantherRx’s sales and marketing of Ruzurgi®
(amifampridine, 10 mg). The lawsuit alleges that the Ruzurgi®
product infringes the ‘893 patent when administered in accordance with its product labeling. The lawsuit seeks damages and injunctive relief to prevent further marketing of Ruzurgi®
in violation of our patent rights.
We are also pursuing additional patent applications for Firdapse®
in an effort to further protect our drug product. There can be no assurance that any additional patents will be issued which provide additional intellectual property protection for our drug product.
There can be no assurance that we do not or will not infringe on patents held by third parties or that third parties in the future will not claim that we have infringed on their patents. In the event that our products or technologies infringe or violate the patent or other proprietary rights of third parties, there is a possibility we may be prevented from pursuing product development, manufacturing or commercialization of our products that utilize such technologies until the underlying patent dispute is resolved. For example, there may be patents or patent applications held by others that contain claims that our products or operations might be determined to infringe or that may be broader than we believe them to be. Given the complexities and uncertainties of patent laws, there can be no assurance as to the impact that future patent claims against us may have on our business, financial condition, results of operations, or prospects.
Generic Sabril®
In December 2018, we entered into a definitive agreement with Endo International plc’s subsidiary, Endo Ventures Limited (“Endo”), for the further development and commercialization of generic Sabril®
tablets through Endo’s United States Generic Pharmaceuticals segment, Par Pharmaceutical. Pursuant to the agreement, in December 2018, we received an up-front
payment of $500,000. We will be entitled to receive a milestone payment of $2.0 million on the commercial launch of the product. Further, we will receive a sharing of defined net profits upon commercialization and we are obligated to share the costs of certain development expenses.
There can be no assurance that our collaboration with Endo for the development of generic Sabril®
(vigabatrin) tablets will be successful and that if an abbreviated new drug application (ANDA) is approved for vigabatrin tablets in the future, that it will be profitable to us.
Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and investments of approximately $140.3 million. Based on our current financial condition and forecasts of available cash, we believe that we have sufficient funds to support our operations for at least the next 12 months. There can be no assurance that we will continue to be successful in commercializing Firdapse®
or will continue to be profitable. Further, there can be no assurance that if we need additional funding in the future, whether such funding will be available to us. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for further information on our liquidity and cash flow.
Basis of Presentation
Revenues.
At December 31, 2020 we continued to generate revenues from product sales of Firdapse®
in the U.S. We expect these revenues to fluctuate in future periods based on our sales of Firdapse®
. We received approval from Health Canada on July 31, 2020, for Firdapse®
for the symptomatic treatment of LEMS and as of December 31, 2020, the Company has launched Firdapse®
in Canada. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not generate revenues under our collaborative agreement with Endo. We expect our revenues from the Endo collaborative agreement to fluctuate in future periods based on our collaborator’s ability to meet various regulatory milestones set forth in such agreement. At December 31, 2020, we generated revenues of $332,186 from our collaborative agreement with KYE Pharmaceuticals. We expect our revenue from the KYE collaborative agreement to fluctuate in future periods based on our collaborator’s ability to market and sell Firdapse®
in Canada.
Cost of Sales.
Cost of sales consists of third-party manufacturing costs, freight, royalties, and indirect overhead costs associated with sales of Firdapse®
. Cost of sales may also include period costs related to certain inventory manufacturing services, inventory adjustments charges, unabsorbed manufacturing and overhead costs, and manufacturing variances. Prior to FDA approval in November 2018, the cost of manufacturing Firdapse®
was expensed, including our build-up
of anticipated launch product. This will cause the cost of sales to appear artificially low as we consumed product manufactured and in process prior to approval, and will continue to do so until we deplete such product.
Research and Development Expenses.
Our research and development expenses consist of costs incurred for company-sponsored research and development activities, as well as support for selected investigator-sponsored research. The major components of research and development costs include preclinical study costs, clinical manufacturing costs, clinical study and trial expenses, insurance coverage for clinical trials, consulting, and other third-party costs, salaries and employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, supplies and materials, and allocations of various overhead costs related to our product development efforts. To date, all of our research and development resources have been devoted to the development of Firdapse®
, CPP-109
(our version of vigabatrin), and formerly CPP-115,
and we currently expect that our future development costs will be attributable principally to the continued development of Firdapse®
.
Our cost accruals for clinical studies and trials are based on estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with numerous clinical study and trial sites and clinical research organizations (CROs). In the normal course of our business we contract with third parties to perform various clinical study and trial activities in the on-going
development of potential products. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation and vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under the contracts depend on factors such as the achievement of certain events or milestones, the successful enrollment of patients, the allocation of responsibilities among the parties to the agreement, and the completion of portions of the clinical study or trial or similar conditions. The objective of our accrual policy is to match the recording of expenses in our consolidated financial statements to the actual services received and efforts expended. As such, expense accruals related to preclinical and clinical studies or trials are recognized based on our estimate of the degree of completion of the event or events specified in the specific study or trial contract. We monitor service provider activities to the extent possible; however, if we underestimate activity levels associated with various studies or trials at a given point in time, we could be required to record significant additional research and development expenses in future periods. Preclinical and clinical study and trial activities require significant up-front
expenditures. We anticipate paying significant portions of a study or trial’s cost before they begin and incurring additional expenditures as the study or trial progresses and reaches certain milestones.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses.
During 2019, we actively committed funds to developing our commercialization program for Firdapse®
and we have continued to incur substantial commercialization expenses, including sales, marketing, patient services, patient advocacy and other commercialization related expenses as we have continued our sales program for Firdapse®
.
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel expenses for accounting, corporate, compliance, and administrative functions. Other costs include administrative facility costs, regulatory fees, insurance, and professional fees for legal including litigation cost, information technology, accounting, and consulting services.
Stock-Based Compensation.
We recognize expense for the fair value of all stock-based awards to employees, directors, and consultants in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (U.S. GAAP). For stock options, we use the Black-Scholes option valuation model in calculating the fair value of the awards.
Income Taxes.
Our effective income tax rate is the ratio of income tax expense (benefit) over our income (loss) before income taxes.
We incurred operating losses from inception through the three-month period ended March 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $3 million and $45 million, respectively. The net operating loss carry-forwards at December 31, 2020 will expire at various dates beginning 2035 through 2037. If an ownership change, as defined under Internal Revenue Code 382, occurs, the use of these carry-forwards may be subject to limitations.
In the third quarter of 2020, we determined that there was sufficient positive evidence to conclude that it is more likely than not that our additional deferred taxes of approximately $33.0 million are realizable. As a result, we reduced the valuation allowance accordingly.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards.
For discussion of recently issued accounting standards, please see Note 2, “Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies,” in the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Non-GAAP
Financial Measures.
We prepare our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto which accompany this report in accordance with U.S. GAAP. To supplement our financial results presented on a U.S. GAAP basis, we may use non-GAAP
financial measures in our reports filed with the Commission and/or our communications with investors. Non-GAAP
measures are provided as additional information and not as an alternative to our consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with GAAP. Our non-GAAP
financial measures are intended to enhance an overall understanding of our current financial performance. We believe that the non-GAAP
financial measures we present provide investors and prospective investors with an alternative method for assessing our operating results in a manner that we believe is focused on the performance of ongoing operations and provide a more consistent basis for comparison between periods.
The non-GAAP
financial measure that we present exclude from the calculation of net income the expense associated with stock-based compensation. Further, we often report non-GAAP
net income (loss) per share, which is calculated by dividing non-GAAP
net income (loss) by the weighted average common shares outstanding.
Any non-GAAP
financial measures that we report should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for comparable U.S. GAAP accounting, and investors should read them in conjunction with our financial statements and notes thereto prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Finally, the non-GAAP
measures of net income (loss) we may use may be different from, and not directly comparable to, similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments, estimates, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. We continually evaluate our judgments, estimates and assumptions. We base our estimates on the terms of underlying agreements, our expected course of development, historical experience and other factors we believe are reasonable based on the circumstances, the results of which form our management’s basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The amounts of assets and liabilities reported in our consolidated balance sheets and the amounts reported in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss) are affected by estimates and assumptions, which are used for, but not limited to, the accounting for revenue recognition, leases, preclinical study and clinical trial expenses, stock-based compensation and valuation allowance for deferred tax assets. The accounting policies described below are not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies but represent the accounting estimates which involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by U.S. GAAP. There are also areas in which our management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result. Our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this report contain accounting policies and other disclosures as required by U.S. GAAP.
Revenue Recognition.
Revenue from product sales are recorded at the net sales price (transaction price), which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established. Components of variable consideration include trade discounts and allowances, product returns, provider chargebacks and discounts, government rebates, and other incentives, such as voluntary patient assistance, and other allowances that are offered within contracts with our Customer, payors, and other indirect customers relating to the sale of our products. These reserves are based on the amounts earned, or to be claimed on the related sales, and are classified as reductions of accounts receivable (if the amount is payable to the Customer) or a current liability (if the amount is payable to a party other than a customer). These estimates take into consideration a range of possible outcomes which are probability-weighted in accordance with the expected value method in Topic 606 for relevant factors such as current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data, and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the respective underlying contracts.
The amount of variable consideration which is included in the transaction price may be constrained, and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized under the contract will not occur in a future period. Our analyses also contemplated application of the constraint in accordance with the guidance, under which it determined a material reversal of revenue would not occur in a future period for the estimates as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and, therefore, the transaction price was not reduced further during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we will adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known. Refer to Note 2, “Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies,” in the consolidated financial statements included in this report for further details on revenue recognition.
Stock-Based Compensation.
We recognize stock-based compensation for the fair value of all share-based payments, including grants of stock options and restricted stock units. For stock options, we use the Black-Scholes option valuation model to determine the fair value of stock options on the date of grant. This model derives the fair value of stock options based on certain assumptions related to expected stock price volatility, expected option life, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. Expected volatility is based on reviews of historical volatility of our common stock. The estimated expected option life is based upon the simplified method. Under this method, the expected option life is presumed to be the mid-point
between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. We will continue to use the simplified method until we have sufficient historical exercise data to estimate the expected life of the options. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon the U.S. Treasury yield curve appropriate for the expected life of our stock options awards. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the assumptions used were an estimated annual volatility of 81.4% and 75.5%, expected holding periods of four and a half years, and risk-free interest rates of 0.24% to 1.64% and 1.51% to 2.53%, respectively.
Valuation Allowance for Deferred Tax Assets.
We assess the need for a valuation allowance against our deferred tax asset each quarter through the review of all available positive and negative evidence. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a tax valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Management’s analysis depends on historical and projected taxable income. Projected taxable income includes significant assumptions related to revenue, commercial expenses and research and development activities. In the third quarter of 2020, we determined that there was sufficient positive evidence to conclude that it is more likely than not that our additional deferred taxes are realizable. As a result, we reduced the valuation allowance accordingly.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $118.7 million in net revenue from product sales of Firdapse®
in the U.S. compared to $102.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of approximately $16.4 million was due to net price increases and increases in sales volumes of approximately 9.6%. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we also recognized $332,186 in revenues from collaborative arrangements. We had no revenues from our collaborative arrangements for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cost of Sales.
Cost of sales was approximately $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost of sales consisted principally of royalty payments, which are based on net revenue as defined in the applicable license agreement. Further, cost of sales may be artificially low until we fully utilize product manufactured that was recorded as expense prior to FDA approval of Firdapse®
.
Research and Development Expenses.
Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were approximately $16.5 million and $18.8 million, respectively, and represented approximately 21% and 27% of total operating costs and expenses, respectively. Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expenses decreased approximately $2.3 million compared to the same period in 2019, primarily attributable to the decreases in medical and regulatory affairs and quality assurance expenses and expenses from our ongoing clinical trials evaluating Firdapse®
for the treatment of MuSK-MG
and SMA Type 3, as we closed out these trials in the latter part of 2020; partly offset by increases in employee stock-based compensation, which is non-cash
and relates to the expense of stock compensation awards to certain employees and stock option awards due to headcount increases.
We expect that research and development expenses will continue to be substantial in 2021 as we begin a proof-of-concept
trial for HNPP, continue our Expanded Access Program, take steps to continue the development of a long-acting formulation of Firdapse®
, continue our regulatory path to seek approval of Firdapse®
in Japan and evaluate Firdapse®
as a treatment for other neuromuscular diseases.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were approximately $44.2 million and $36.9 million, respectively, and represented approximately 57% and 52% of total operating costs and expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, selling, general and administrative expenses increased approximately $7.4 million, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily attributable to the following:
•
increases in selling (commercialization) expenses, which consist primarily of the costs of the expansion of our sales force and the cost of contracting with a rare-disease experienced inside sales agency;
•
increases in general and administrative expenses are primarily due to increases in legal cost, including litigation, investor relations costs and the expansion of our operations and headcount to support our ongoing efforts to increase our net revenues from sales of Firdapse®
partly offset by decrease in 2020 contributions to 501(c)(3) organizations supporting LEMS patients, due to the accrual in the fourth quarter of 2019 of approximately $1.5 million in pledge contributions attributable to 2020 activities; and
•
increases in employee stock-based compensation which is non-cash
and relates to the expense of stock option awards to certain employees and directors and stock option awards due to headcount increases.
We expect that selling, general and administrative expenses will be substantial in future periods as we continue our efforts to increase our revenues from Firdapse®
and take steps to expand our business.
Stock-Based Compensation.
Total stock-based compensation for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $6.3 million and $3.8 million, respectively. In 2020, grants were principally of stock options relating to 2020 year-end
bonus awards and grants to new employees. In 2019, option grants were principally for year-end
bonus awards and to new employees hired in connection with the launch of Firdapse®
.
Other Income, Net.
We reported other income, net in all periods, primarily relating to our investment of our cash and cash equivalents and investments. The decrease in other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 of approximately $1.0 million when compared to the same period in 2019 is primarily due to lower yields on investments, despite higher invested balances. Other income, net, consists of interest income, dividend income, and unrealized and realized gain (loss) on trading securities.
Income Taxes.
We incurred net operating losses from inception through the three-month period ended March 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $3 million and $45 million, respectively, available to reduce future taxable income. Remaining net operating loss carry-forwards will expire at various dates beginning 2035 and ending in 2037. If an ownership change, as defined under Internal Revenue Code 382, occurs, the use of these carry-forwards may be subject to limitations.
We had no uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2019, our deferred tax assets were primarily the result of US net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards and a full valuation was recorded against our gross deferred tax asset balance. For the year ending December 31, 2020 we recorded a net valuation release of $41.6 million ($0.40 per basic share and $0.39 per diluted share) on the basis of management’s determination that it is more likely than not that the amount of its deferred tax assets will be realized.
Net Income (Loss).
Our net income was approximately $75.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 ($0.72 per basic and $0.71 per diluted share) as compared to net income of approximately $31.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 ($0.31 per basic and $0.30 per diluted share).
Non-GAAP
Net Income.
Our non-GAAP
net income for 2020, which excludes an approximately $6.3 million expense associated with non-cash
stock-based compensation, was approximately $81.2 million ($0.78 per basic and $0.76 per diluted share). Our non-GAAP
income for 2019, which excludes an approximately $3.8 million expense associated with non-cash
stock-based compensation, was approximately $35.7 million ($0.35 per basic and $0.34 per diluted share).
Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Revenues.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized $102.3 million in net revenue from product sales of Firdapse®
. We had no revenues from product sales for the year ended December 31, 2018. We had no revenues from our collaborative arrangement in 2019. We had revenues in 2018 in the amount of $500,000 relating to the up-front
payment from Endo in connection with the collaboration for vigabatrin tablets.
Cost of Sales.
Cost of sales was $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in cost of sales was entirely attributable to the commercial launch of Firdapse®
in January 2019. Cost of sales includes royalty payments which are based on net revenue as defined in the applicable license agreement.
Research and Development Expenses.
Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were approximately $18.8 million and $19.9 million, respectively, and represented approximately 27% and 56% of total operating costs and expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019, and 2018 respectively. Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2019, research and development expenses decreased approximately $1.1 million compared to same period in 2018, primarily attributable to a decrease in milestone payments made as part of the settlement agreement with the former stockholders of Huxley Pharmaceuticals during the third quarter of 2018.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were approximately $36.9 million and $15.9 million, respectively, and represented approximately 52% and 44% of total operating costs and expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019, and 2018 respectively. Selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2019, selling, general and administrative expenses increased approximately $21.0 million, compared to the same period in 2018, primarily attributable to the following:
•
increases in selling (commercialization) expenses, which consist primarily of commercial systems implementation costs, hiring of the sales force and supporting personnel, product launch costs, and costs of our market access and market research efforts (pre-commercial
expenses incurred in 2018 in the amount of $6,897,483 before our launch of commercial Firdapse®
were included in general and administrative expenses);
•
increases in general and administrative costs attributable to the growth of our organization as we have grown from an R&D company to a commercial stage pharmaceutical company;
•
contributions to 501(c)(3) organizations supporting LEMS patients, including the accrual in the fourth quarter of 2019 of approximately $1.5 million in pledge contributions attributable to 2020 activities; and
•
increases in employee stock-based compensation which is non cash and relates to the expense of stock options awarded to certain employees, officers and directors.
Stock-Based Compensation.
Total stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $3,824,815 and $3,550,644, respectively. The increase in stock-based compensation for the year ended December 31, 2019, when compared to the same period in 2018, is primarily due to the expense of grants to new employees hired in connection with the launch of Firdapse®
.
Other Income, Net.
We reported other income, net in all periods primarily relating to our investment of funds received from offerings of our securities and product sales. The increase in other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 when compared to the same period in 2018 is primarily due to higher invested balances and higher yields on investments. Other income, net, consists of interest income, dividend income, and realized gain (loss) on trading securities. For the year ended December 31, 2019, other income, net also includes $100,000 received as part of a settlement agreement between us and Northwestern University relating to CPP-115.
These proceeds were used fund our drug development activities and our operations.
Income Taxes.
Our effective income tax rate was 4.6% and 0% for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Differences in the effective tax and the statutory federal income tax rate of 21% is driven by state income taxes and anticipated annual permanent differences, including orphan drug credit expense limitations and other items.
We had no uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018. We have a full valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets at December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018.
Net Income (Loss).
Our net income was $31,875,337 in the year ended December 31, 2019 ($0.31 per basic and $0.30 per diluted share) as compared to a net loss of ($34,003,514) in the year ended December 31, 2018 ($0.33 per basic and diluted share).
Non-GAAP
Net Income.
Our non-GAAP
net income, which excludes for 2019 a $3,824,815 expense associated with stock-based compensation was $35,700,152 ($0.35 and $0.34, respectively, per basic and diluted share). Our non-GAAP
net loss for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $30,452,870 ($0.30 per basic and diluted share), which excludes non-cash
stock compensation of $3,550,664.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through multiple public and private offerings of our securities and, since January 2019, from revenues from product sales of Firdapse®
. At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents and investments aggregating $140.3 million and working capital of $136.5 million. At December 31, 2019, we had cash and cash equivalents and investments aggregating $94.5 million and working capital of $87.3 million. At December 31, 2020, substantially all of our cash and cash equivalents were deposited with one financial institution, and such balances were in excess of federally insured limits. Further, as of such date, substantially all such funds were invested in money market accounts, short-term interest bearing obligations and U.S. Treasuries.
We incurred operating losses through the quarter ended March 31, 2019 and reported operating income for the first time during the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2019. We expect to continue to spend substantial dollars on our current and future drug development programs.
Based on forecasts of available cash, we believe that we have sufficient resources to support our currently anticipated operations for at least the next 12 months from the date of this report. There can be no assurance that we will remain profitable or that we will be able to obtain any additional funding that we may require in the future.
In the future, we may require additional working capital to support our operations depending on our future success with Firdapse®
sales and whether our results continue to be profitable and cash flow positive. There can be no assurance as to the amount of any such funding that will be required for these purposes or whether any such funding will be available to us when it is required.
In that regard, our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the scope, rate of progress and cost of our clinical trials and other product development activities;
•
future clinical trial results;
•
the terms and timing of any collaborative, licensing and other arrangements that we may establish;
•
the cost and timing of regulatory approvals;
•
the cost and delays in product development as a result of any changes in regulatory oversight applicable to our products;
•
the level of revenues that we report from sales of Firdapse®
;
•
the effect of competition and market developments;
•
the cost of filing and potentially prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights; and
•
the extent to which we acquire or invest in other products.
We may raise additional funds if required in the future through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, corporate collaborations or other means. We also may seek governmental grants for a portion of the required funding for our clinical trials and preclinical trials. We may further seek to raise capital to fund additional product development efforts or product acquisitions, even if we have sufficient funds for our planned operations. Any sale by us of additional equity or convertible debt securities could result in dilution to our stockholders. There can be no assurance that any such required additional funding will be available to us at all or available on terms acceptable to us. Further, to the extent that we raise additional funds through collaborative arrangements, it may be necessary to relinquish some rights to our technologies or grant sublicenses on terms that are not favorable to us. If we are not able to secure additional funding when needed, we may have to delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate one or more research and development programs, which could have an adverse effect on our business.
On July 23, 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC to sell up to $200 million of common stock, preferred stock, warrants to purchase common stock, debt securities and units consisting of one or more of such securities (the “2020 Shelf Registration Statement”). The 2020 Shelf Registration Statement (file no. 333-240052)
was declared effective by the SEC on July 31, 2020. As of the date of this report, no offerings have been completed under the 2020 Shelf Registration Statement.
Cash Flows.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $45,034,864 and $34,611,473, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to our net income of $74,983,000, a decrease of $4,549,571 in accounts receivable, net, an increase of $138,573 in accounts payable, and $7,134,049 net of non-cash
expenses. This was partially offset by increases of $3,976,697 in prepaid expenses and other current and non-current
assets and $2,693,808 in inventory and decreases of $1,209,280 in accrued expenses and other liabilities, $919,280 in operating lease liability and $32,971,264 in non-cash
deferred taxes. During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to our net income of $31,875,337, increases of $1,780,080 in accounts payable, $12,540,197 in accrued expenses and other liabilities, and of $3,831,736 of non-cash
expenses. This was partially offset by increases of $10,536,997 in accounts receivable, net, $1,900,780 in inventory, and $2,701,293 in prepaid expenses and other current and non-current
assets and a decrease of $276,807 in operating lease liability.
Net cash used in investing activities was $5,011,398 for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting primarily of purchases of investments of $10,000,000 and partially offset by proceeds from sales/maturities of investments of $5,000,000. Net cash provided by investing activities was $37,224,595 for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisting primarily of proceeds from sales/maturities of investments of $71,969,365, partially offset by purchases of investments of $34,725,401.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $701,933 and $1,116,242, respectively, consisting primarily of proceeds from the exercise of options to purchase shares of common stock.
Contractual Obligations and Arrangements.
We have entered into the following contractual arrangements:
•
Payments under our license agreement
. We have agreed to pay the following royalties under our license agreement:
o Royalties to our licensor for seven years from the first commercial sale of Firdapse®
equal to 7% of net sales (as defined in the License Agreement) in North America for any calendar year for sales up to $100 million, and 10% of net sales in North America in any calendar year in excess of $100 million; and
o Royalties to the third-party licensor of the rights sublicensed to us from the first commercial sale of Firdapse®
equal to 7% of net sales (as defined in the License Agreement between BioMarin and the third-party licensor) in any calendar year for the duration of regulatory exclusivity within a territory and 3.5% for territories in any calendar year in territories without regulatory exclusivity.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an aggregate of approximately $16.3 million of royalties, which is included in cost of sales in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
•
Employment agreements
. We have entered into an employment agreement with our Chief Executive Officer that required us to make base salary payments of approximately $600,000 in 2020. The agreement expires in November 2022.
•
Purchase commitment.
We have entered into a purchase commitment with our contract manufacturing organization for approximately $500,000 per year. The agreement expires in December 2023.
•
Lease for office space
. We operate our business in leased office space in Coral Gables, Florida. During 2020, we leased approximately 7,800 square feet of office space for which we pay annual rent of approximately $330,000. We entered into an agreement in May 2020 that amended our lease for the office facilities. Under the amended lease, our leased space will increase from approximately 7,800 square feet of space to approximately 10,700 square feet of space. We moved into the new space around March 1, 2021 when the space became available for use.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements.
We currently have no debt or finance leases. We have an operating lease for our office facilities. We do not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as such term is defined in rules promulgated by the SEC.
Caution Concerning Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains “forward-looking statements”, as that term is defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These include statements regarding our expectations, beliefs, plans or objectives for future operations and anticipated results of operations. For this purpose, any statements contained herein that are not statements of historical fact may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. Without limiting the foregoing, “believes”, “anticipates”, “proposes”, “plans”, “expects”, “intends”, “may”, and other similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or other achievements to be materially different from any future results, performances or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section entitled “Item 1A - Risk Factors.”
The continued successful commercialization of Firdapse®
and the development of additional indications for Firdapse®
is highly uncertain. Factors that will affect our success include the uncertainty of:
•
The impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on our business or on the economy generally;
•
Whether we will be able to continue to successfully market Firdapse®
while maintaining full compliance with applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations;
•
Whether our estimates of the size of the market for Firdapse®
for the treatment of Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome (“LEMS”) will turn out to be accurate;
•
Whether we will be able to locate LEMS patients who are undiagnosed or are misdiagnosed with other diseases;
•
Whether patients will discontinue from the use of our drug at rates that are higher than historically experienced or are higher than we project;
•
Whether the daily dose taken by patients changes over time and affects our results of operations;
•
Whether Firdapse®
patients can be successfully titrated to stable therapy;
•
Whether we can continue to market Firdapse®
on a profitable and cash flow positive basis;
•
Whether any revenue guidance that we provide to the public market will turn out to be accurate;
•
Whether payors will reimburse for our product at the price that we charge for the product;
•
The ability of our third-party suppliers and contract manufacturers to maintain compliance with current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP);
•
The ability of our distributor and the specialty pharmacies that distribute our product to maintain compliance with applicable law;
•
Our ability to maintain compliance with applicable rules relating to our patient assistance programs and our contributions to 501(c)(3) organizations that support LEMS patients;
•
The scope of our intellectual property and the outcome of any future challenges or opposition to our intellectual property, and, conversely, whether any third-party intellectual property presents unanticipated obstacles for Firdapse®
;
•
Whether our lawsuits against Jacobus and the specialty pharmacy distributing its product for patent infringement will be successful;
•
The effect on our business and future results of operations arising from the approval by the FDA of Ruzurgi®
for the treatment of pediatric LEMS patients (ages 6 to under 17);
•
Whether our appeal of the District Court’s decision in our suit against the United States FDA seeking to vacate the FDA’s approval of Ruzurgi®
will be successful;
•
Whether we can continue to compete successfully if the approval of Ruzurgi®
is not overturned and Ruzurgi®
continues to be prescribed for off-label
use by adult LEMS patients;
•
Whether, because of the lower price of Ruzurgi®
, payors will require that patients try off-label
Ruzurgi®
first before they approve Firdapse®
as a treatment for adult LEMS patients;
•
The impact on Firdapse®
of adverse changes in potential reimbursement and coverage policies from government and private payors such as Medicare, Medicaid, insurance companies, health maintenance organizations and other plan administrators, or the impact of pricing pressures enacted by industry organization, the federal government or the government of any state, including as a result of increased scrutiny over pharmaceutical pricing or otherwise;
•
The impact on our business and results of operations of public statements by politicians and a vocal group of LEMS patients and doctors who object to our pricing of Firdapse®
;
•
Changes in the healthcare industry and the effect of political pressure from and actions by President Biden, Congress and/or medical professionals seeking to reduce prescription drug costs;
•
The state of the economy generally and its impact on our business;
•
Changes to the healthcare industry occasioned by any changes in laws relating to the pricing of drug products, or changes in the healthcare industry generally;
•
The scope, rate of progress and expense of our clinical trials and studies, pre-clinical
studies, proof-of-concept
studies, and our other drug development activities, and whether our trials and studies will be successful;
•
Our ability to complete any clinical trials and studies that we may undertake on a timely basis and within the budgets we establish for such trials and studies;
•
Whether COVID-19
will further affect the timing and costs of our currently ongoing and contemplated clinical trials;
•
Whether Firdapse®
will ever be approved for the treatment of any neuromuscular disease other than LEMS;
•
Whether we can successfully commercialize Firdapse®
in Canada on a profitable basis;
•
Whether our suit to overturn the approval of Ruzurgi®
in Canada will be successful;
•
The impact on sales of Firdapse®
in the United States if an amifampridine product is purchased in Canada for use in the United States;
•
Whether we will be able to successfully complete the clinical trial in Japan that will be required to seek approval to commercialize Firdapse®
in Japan;
•
Whether we will be able to obtain approval to commercialize Firdapse®
in Japan;
•
Whether we can successfully develop, obtain approval of and successfully market a long-acting version of amifapridine;
•
Whether our efforts to grow our business beyond Firdapse®
through acquisitions of companies or in-licensing
of product opportunities will be successful;
•
Whether we will have sufficient capital to finance any such acquisitions;
•
Whether our version of generic vigabatrin tablets will ever be approved by the FDA;
•
Even if our version of vigabatrin tablets is approved for commercialization, whether Endo Ventures/Par Pharmaceutical (our collaborator in this venture) will be successful in marketing the product; and
•
Whether we will earn milestone payments on the first commercial sale of vigabatrin tablets and royalties on sales of generic vigabatrin tablets.
Our current plans and objectives are based on assumptions relating to the continued commercialization of Firdapse®
and the development of additional indications for Firdapse®
. Although we believe that our assumptions are reasonable, any of our assumptions could prove inaccurate. In light of the significant uncertainties inherent in the forward-looking statements we have made herein, which reflect our views only as of the date of this report, you should not place undue reliance upon such statements. We undertake no obligation to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.