Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is intended to assist in understanding and assessing the trends and significant changes in our results of operations and financial condition. Our historical results may not indicate, and should not be relied upon as an indication of, our future performance. Our forward-looking statements reflect our current views about future events, are based on assumptions and are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by these statements. See Item 1. “Business-Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of risks associated with reliance on forward-looking statements. Factors that may cause differences between actual results and those contemplated by forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report.
Executive Overview
Our Business
We design, manufacture and sell sealing, fuel and brake delivery, and fluid transfer systems for use in passenger vehicles and light trucks manufactured by global OEMs. Prior to its divestiture on April 1, 2019, the Company also operated an AVS business. In 2020, approximately 83% of our sales consisted of original equipment sold directly to OEMs for installation on new vehicles. The remaining 17% of our sales were primarily to Tier I and Tier II suppliers and non-automotive manufacturers. Accordingly, sales of our products are directly affected by the annual vehicle production of OEMs and, in particular, the production levels of the vehicles for which we provide specific parts. Most of our products are custom designed and engineered for a specific vehicle platform. Our sales and product development personnel frequently work directly with the OEMs’ engineering departments in the design and development of our various products.
Although each OEM may emphasize different requirements as the primary criteria for judging its suppliers, we believe success as an automotive supplier generally requires outstanding performance with respect to quality, price, service, performance, design and engineering capabilities, innovation, timely delivery, financial stability and an extensive global footprint. Also, we believe our continued commitment to invest in global common processes is an important factor in servicing global customers with the same quality and consistency of product wherever we produce in the world. This is especially important when supplying products for global platforms.
In addition, to remain competitive and offset continued customer pricing pressure, we must also consistently achieve and sustain cost savings. In an ongoing effort to reduce our cost structure, we run a global continuous improvement program which includes training for our employees, as well as implementation of lean tools, structured problem solving, best business practices, standardized processes and change management. We also evaluate opportunities to consolidate facilities and to relocate certain operations to lower cost countries. We believe we will continue to be successful in our efforts to improve our design and engineering capability and manufacturing processes while achieving cost savings, including through our continuous improvement initiatives.
Our OEM sales are generally based upon purchase orders issued by the OEMs, with updated releases for volume adjustments. As such, we typically do not have a backlog of orders at any point in time. Once selected to supply products for a particular platform, we typically supply those products for the platform life, which is normally six to seven years, although there is no guarantee that this will occur. In addition, when we are the incumbent supplier to a given platform, we believe we have a competitive advantage in winning the redesign or replacement platform.
In 2020, approximately 51% of our sales were generated in North America. Because of our significant international operations, we are subject to the risks associated with doing business in other countries, such as currency volatility, high interest and inflation rates, and the general political and economic risk that are associated with some of these markets.
Recent Trends and Conditions
General Economic Conditions and Outlook
The global automotive industry is susceptible to uncertain economic conditions that could adversely impact new vehicle demand and production. Business conditions may vary significantly from period to period or region to region.
The COVID-19 pandemic created an unusually high degree of economic disruption and uncertainty during 2020. A considerable amount of economic uncertainty remains heading into 2021 despite advances in vaccine technology and availability. Many industries remain significantly impacted by reduced labor availability as well as policies, regulations, risks
and concerns surrounding the novel coronavirus. The result is continued uncertainty for the broader economic outlook and for the automotive industry around the world. Economists at the World Bank Group expect global economic output to increase by approximately 4% in 2021, remaining approximately 5% below pre-pandemic levels.
In North America, economic conditions and consumer confidence have improved since the second quarter of 2020 but continue to be negatively impacted by concerns over the COVID-19 pandemic and related government-imposed restrictions in certain states. Uncertainty related to the implementation of economic policies by the new administration in the United States will also likely weigh on consumer confidence in the region through the first half of 2021.
The United States government has taken historic measures to provide fiscal stimulus to the economy in an effort to sustain businesses, limit job losses and preempt deeper declines in consumer confidence during the pandemic. Further stimulus actions are considered likely. In view of these efforts, World Bank economists now expect economic expansion of approximately 3.5% in the United States and 3.7% economic growth in Mexico in 2021.
In Europe, the World Bank is projecting economic growth of approximately 3.6% for 2021. Current and potential future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to weigh on the economies of the region. Due to the resurgence of COVID-19 in various regions, certain European governments have again mandated temporary closures of broad segments of their economies. While automotive production is continuing, on-going health risks, geopolitical concerns and the implementation of new environmental regulations in the automotive industry will likely continue to impact vehicle demand and economic growth.
In Asia Pacific, the World Bank expects China’s economic growth rate to rebound to 7.9% in 2021, reflecting the release of pent-up domestic consumer demand and continuation of production and exports. In addition, continued fixed asset investment in industrial technology and infrastructure, aided by more liberal credit policies, will likely support near-term economic growth.
In South America, the World Bank estimates that the Brazilian economy will grow by approximately 3.0% in 2021. The rebound is expected to be stronger in industrial and agriculture sectors while recovery in the services sector will be more subdued due to lingering consumer concerns and risk aversion impacting travel and tourism. In addition, the discontinuation of the government’s 2020 fiscal stimulus program will likely weigh on consumption. We remain cautious for the mid to long-term outlook given the long history of political instability and economic volatility in the region.
Production Levels
Our business is directly affected by the automotive vehicle production rates in North America, Europe, Asia Pacific and South America. Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, as a result of COVID-19, we experienced the shutdown of effectively all of our facilities in Asia Pacific coinciding with the shutdown of our customer facilities in that region. Facility shutdowns then occurred in March 2020 for a majority of our facilities in North America, Europe and South America.
Production resumed in Asia Pacific by the end of the first quarter of 2020, albeit at a lower capacity, and has steadily increased in production capacity throughout the year. For our North America and Europe facilities, production resumed in May 2020 at a lower capacity and has increased through the subsequent months. Finally, for our South America facilities, production resumed in the second quarter, but has increased more slowly compared to the other regions. We are collaborating closely with our customers as production volume continues to increase and approach pre-COVID-19 levels, while also adhering to enhanced safety standards and measures to protect our employees.
According to the forecasting firm IHS Markit, global light vehicle production was approximately 74.5 million units in 2020. This reflects a decline of approximately 16.2% globally.
Light vehicle production in certain regions for 2020 and 2019, as well as projections for 2021, are provided in the following table:
(1) Production data based on IHS Markit, January 2021.
The COVID-19 pandemic has emerged as the biggest risk factor facing the automotive industry. In the first half of 2020, total vehicle production decreased substantially across the globe. Plant shutdowns have greatly slowed production and have been accompanied by decreased demand for vehicles, as new vehicle sales are highly dependent on strong consumer confidence and low unemployment. While the outlook for the full year 2021 remains uncertain, the global economy has begun to rebound from the impacts of the pandemic. Additionally, continued distribution of vaccine treatments could improve consumer confidence. Lower unemployment rates and lower than normal light vehicle inventory levels could also have a positive impact on light vehicle production going forward.
Industry Overview
Competition in the automotive supplier industry is intense and has increased in recent years as OEMs have demonstrated a preference for stronger relationships with fewer suppliers. Because of a growing emphasis on global vehicle platforms, automotive suppliers with a global manufacturing footprint capable of fully servicing customers around the world will typically have a competitive advantage over smaller, regional competitors. This dynamic is likely to result in further consolidation of competing suppliers within our industry over time.
OEMs have shifted some research and development, design and testing responsibility to suppliers, while at the same time shortening new product cycle times. To remain competitive, suppliers must have state-of-the-art engineering and design capabilities and must be able to continuously improve their engineering, design and manufacturing processes to effectively service the customer. Suppliers are increasingly expected to collaborate on, or assume the product design and development of, key automotive components and to provide innovative solutions to meet evolving technologies aimed at improved emissions and fuel economy.
Increased competitiveness in the industry, as well as customer focus on costs, has resulted in continued pressure on suppliers for price reductions, reducing the overall profitability of the industry. Consolidations and market share shifts among vehicle manufacturers continue to put additional pressures on the supply chain. These pricing and market pressures will continue to drive our focus on reducing our overall cost structure through continuous improvement initiatives, capital redeployment, restructuring and other cost management processes.
In addition to the above, other factors will present opportunities for automotive suppliers who are positioned for the changing environment, including autonomous and connected vehicles, evolving government regulation, and consumer preference for environmentally friendly products and technology, including hybrid and electric vehicle architectures.
Raw Materials
Our business is susceptible to inflationary pressures with respect to raw materials which may place operational and profitability burdens on the entire supply chain. Costs related to raw materials, such as steel, aluminum, and oil and oil-derived commodities, continue to be volatile. In addition, we continue to expect commodity cost volatility to have a continual impact on future earnings and operating cash flows. As such, on an ongoing basis, we work with our customers and suppliers to mitigate both inflationary pressures and our material-related cost exposures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2. “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. These policies require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments that management makes in the preparation of the financial statements and accompanying notes. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if (i) it requires us to make assumptions about matters that were uncertain at the time we were making the estimate, and (ii) changes in the estimate or different estimates that we could have selected could have had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. Such critical accounting estimates are discussed below. For these, materially different amounts could be reported under varied conditions and assumptions. While other items in our consolidated financial statements require estimation, however, in our judgment, they are not as critical as those discussed below.
Goodwill. The Company’s organizational structure changed on January 1, 2020. See Note 24. “Business Segments” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report for further detail on this reorganization of our business. Prior to this change in organizational structure, the Company’s North America operating segment was the only reporting unit in which goodwill was recorded. As a result of the change in organizational structure, a portion of the goodwill that was previously attributable to the North America reporting unit was reallocated to the Industrial Specialty Group reporting unit based on the relative fair value approach. The Industrial Specialty
Group reporting unit is a component of the Advanced Technology Group operating segment, which is reflected in “Corporate, eliminations and other”. The change in organizational structure of the business represented a triggering event to test goodwill for impairment as of January 1, 2020. No impairment was identified as a result of completing the goodwill impairment test.
Goodwill is tested for impairment by reporting unit as of October 1 of each year or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that an impairment may exist. Other than the change in organizational structure noted above, there were no other indicators of potential impairment during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For our goodwill analysis, fair value is based on the cash flows projected in the reporting units’ strategic plans and long-range planning forecasts, discounted at a risk-adjusted rate of return. Our long-range planning forecasts are based on our assessment of revenue growth rates generally based on industry specific data, external vehicle build assumptions published by widely used external sources, and customer market share data based on known and targeted awards over a three-year period. The projected profit margin assumptions included in the plans are based on the current cost structure and adjustments for anticipated cost reductions or increases. If different assumptions were used in these plans, the related cash flows used in measuring fair value could be different and impairment of goodwill might be recorded. The annual goodwill impairment analysis for 2020 resulted in no impairment. See Note 10. “Goodwill and Intangible Assets” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report for additional information.
Long-Lived Assets. We monitor our long-lived assets for impairment indicators on an ongoing basis. If impairment indicators exist, we analyze the undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated from the long-lived assets compared to the related net book values. If the net book value exceeds the undiscounted cash flows, an impairment loss is measured and recognized. An impairment loss is measured as the difference between the net book value and the fair value of the long-lived assets. Fair value is based upon either estimated salvage value or estimated orderly liquidation value. Cash flows are estimated using internal budgets based on recent sales data, independent automotive production volume estimates and customer commitments, as well as assumptions related to discount rates. Changes in economic or operating conditions impacting these estimates and assumptions could result in the impairment of long-lived assets. In 2020, we recorded impairment charges related to buildings and machinery and equipment in North America, Europe, Asia Pacific, and Corporate and other segments. In 2019, we recorded impairment charges related to machinery and equipment in our Europe, Asia Pacific, and Corporate and other segments. See Note 9. “Property, Plant and Equipment” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report for additional information.
Restructuring. Specific accruals have been recorded in connection with restructuring initiatives. These accruals include estimates principally related to employee separation costs, the closure and/or consolidation of facilities and contractual obligations. Actual amounts recognized could differ from the original estimates. Restructuring-related reserves are reviewed on a quarterly basis, and changes to plans are appropriately recognized when identified. Changes to plans associated with the restructuring of existing businesses are generally recognized as employee separation and plant closure costs in the period the change occurs. See Note 7. “Restructuring” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report for additional information.
Revenue Recognition and Sales Commitments. We generally enter into agreements with customers to produce products at the beginning of a vehicle’s life. Although such contracts do not usually include minimum quantities, fulfillment of customers’ purchasing requirements can be our obligation for the entire production life of the vehicle. These agreements generally may be terminated by our customer at any time, but such cancellations have historically been minimal. In limited cases, we may be committed to supply products at selling prices that do not cover our costs. In such situations, we recognize losses as they are incurred.
We receive blanket purchase orders from many customers annually. Generally, such purchase orders and related documents establish the annual terms, including pricing, related to a vehicle model. However, purchase orders generally do not specify quantities. We recognize revenue based on a point in time, generally when products are shipped or delivered to customers. As part of certain agreements, customers ask for price reductions. We accrue for such concessions by reducing revenue as products are shipped. We also generally have ongoing adjustments to customer pricing arrangements based on the content and cost of our products. Such pricing accruals are adjusted as they are settled with customers.
Income Taxes. In determining the provision for income taxes for financial statement purposes, we make estimates and judgments which affect our evaluation of the carrying value of our deferred tax assets as well as our calculation of certain tax liabilities. We evaluate the carrying value of our deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis. In completing this evaluation, we consider all available positive and negative evidence. Such evidence includes historical operating results, the existence of cumulative earnings and losses in the most recent fiscal years, taxable income in prior carryback year(s) if permitted under the tax law, expectations for future pretax operating income which considers forecasted revenue trends within the automotive
industry, the time period over which our temporary differences will reverse, and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if, based on the weight of this evidence, it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the recorded deferred tax assets will not be realized in future periods.
Concluding that a valuation allowance is not required is difficult when there is significant negative evidence which is objective and verifiable, such as cumulative losses in recent years. We utilize three years’ cumulative pre-tax book results adjusted for significant permanent book to tax differences as a measure of cumulative results in recent years. In certain jurisdictions, our analysis indicates that we have cumulative three-year historical losses on this basis. This is considered significant negative evidence which is difficult to overcome. However, the three-year loss position is not solely determinative, and, accordingly, management considers all other available positive and negative evidence in its analysis. Although we are in a three-year cumulative loss in certain jurisdictions as of December 31, 2020, we have a recent history of earnings prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect to return to profitability in jurisdictions where a valuation allowance is not recorded as the effects of the pandemic subside and we begin to generate sufficient taxable income to utilize our deferred tax assets. In other foreign jurisdictions and U.S. states we concluded that it is more likely than not that the net deferred tax assets may not be realized in the future. Accordingly, we continue to maintain and adjust as appropriate the valuation allowance related to those net deferred tax assets. However, since future financial results may differ from previous estimates, periodic adjustments to our valuation allowances may be necessary.
In addition, the calculation of our tax benefits and liabilities includes uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations. We recognize tax benefits and liabilities based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. We adjust these liabilities based on changing facts and circumstances; however, due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties and the impact of any tax audits, the ultimate resolutions may be materially different from our estimated liabilities. See Note 17. “Income Taxes” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report for additional information.
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions. Included in our results of operations are significant pension and postretirement benefit costs, which are measured using actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions, including discount rates, mortality rates, expected returns on plan assets and health care cost trend rates. These assumptions are determined as of the current year measurement date. We consider current market conditions, including changes in interest rates, in making these assumptions. Changes in pension and postretirement benefit costs may occur in the future due to changes in these assumptions. Our net pension and postretirement benefit costs, which included non-cash settlement charges of $0.2 million, were approximately $5.7 million and $0.4 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
To develop the discount rate for each pension plan, the expected cash flows underlying the plan’s benefit obligations were discounted using a December 31, 2020 pension index to determine a single equivalent rate. To develop our expected return on plan assets, we considered historical long-term asset return experience, the expected investment portfolio mix of plan assets and an estimate of long-term investment returns. To develop our portfolio of plan assets, we considered the duration of the plan liabilities and gave more weight to equity positions, including both public and private equity investments, than to fixed-income securities.
Weighted average assumptions used to determine pension benefit obligations as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
Weighted average assumptions used to determine net periodic benefit costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
*As the U.S. plans are frozen, the rate of compensation increase was not applicable.
The sensitivity of our pension cost and obligations to changes in key assumptions, holding all other assumptions constant, is as follows:
Aggregate pension net periodic benefit cost is forecasted to be approximately $3.6 million in 2021.
Health care cost trend rates are assumed to reflect market trend, actual experience and future expectations. Health care cost trend rate assumptions used to determine the postretirement benefit obligation as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
Aggregate other postretirement net periodic benefit cost is forecasted to be approximately $1.1 million in 2021.
The Company’s policy is to fund pension plans such that sufficient assets will be available to meet future benefit requirements and contribute amounts deductible for United States federal income tax purposes or amounts required by local statute. The Company estimates it will make funding cash contributions to its U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans of approximately $1.0 million and $4.5 million, respectively in 2021.
The Company does not prefund its postretirement benefit obligations. Rather, payments are made as costs are incurred by covered retirees. We expect net other postretirement benefit payments to be approximately $2.6 million in 2021.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019.
Sales
Sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 23.6%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decline was mainly driven by the decrease in vehicle production volume due to government imposed global shutdowns related to the COVID-19 pandemic, net divestitures, foreign exchange and customer price reductions.
* Net of customer price reductions
Gross Profit
* Net of customer price reductions
Cost of products sold is primarily comprised of material, labor, manufacturing overhead, freight, depreciation, warranty costs and other direct operating expenses. Cost of products sold for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $521.4 million, or 19.0%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Materials comprise the largest component of our cost of products sold and represented approximately 46% and 51% of total cost of products sold for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The change in the cost of products sold was driven by the decrease in production volumes due to government imposed global shutdowns related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the sale of our AVS product line in 2019, the divestiture of our European rubber fluid transfer and specialty sealing businesses and Indian operations in 2020, continuous improvement and lean manufacturing, material cost reductions, commodity price fluctuations, restructuring savings, foreign exchange, and wage inflation.
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $211.6 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of sales, gross profit was 6.2% and 11.6% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease was driven by the decline in vehicle production volume due to government imposed global shutdowns related to the COVID-19 pandemic, customer price reductions, variable employee compensation expenses and wage inflation. These items were partially offset by net favorable operational performance, restructuring savings, the non-recurrence of prior period commercial settlements in China, foreign exchange and material cost reductions.
Selling, Administration and Engineering. Selling, administration and engineering expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $263.6 million, or 11.1% of sales, compared to $302.5 million, or 9.7% of sales, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in expense was primarily due to savings generated from salaried headcount initiatives including net divestitures and lower travel expenses, partially offset by general inflation and higher variable employee compensation expenses.
Gain on Sale of Business, net. The gain on sale of business of $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to our 2020 divestitures, which included the European fluid transfer and specialty sealing business, our Indian operations, the deconsolidation of a joint venture in our Asia Pacific region, and the finalized adjustments related to the sale of our AVS product line. Gain on sale of business of $191.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 related to the sale of our AVS product line within our North America, Europe and Asia Pacific segments.
Amortization of Intangibles. Intangible amortization for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $6.4 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a customer relationship intangible asset in the North America region that was fully amortized during the second quarter of 2020.
Impairment of Assets Held for Sale. Non-cash impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $86.5 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase related to reducing the carrying value of the divested assets to fair value less costs to sell. Fair value was determined using a market approach, estimated based on expected proceeds.
Other Impairment Charges. Non-cash asset impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $5.2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The charges related to property, plant and equipment impairment charges and building operating lease impairment charges.
Restructuring. Restructuring charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $11.6 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our restructuring actions include plant closures and workforce reductions and are initiated to maintain our competitive footprint or in response to changes in global and regional automotive markets. The decreases attributable to Europe and Corporate and other were primarily due to footprint rationalization actions and salaried employee initiatives that were completed in 2019. During 2020, the increases attributable to North America were primarily due to plant
closures. We will continue to incur additional restructuring costs related to plans for ongoing footprint consolidation, primarily in Europe and North America.
Interest Expense, net. Net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $15.1 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher outstanding debt balances including the Senior Secured Notes that we issued during 2020.
Pension Settlement Charges. Non-cash pension settlement charges of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to non-U.S. pension plans. Settlement charges of $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 related primarily to the purchase of a bulk annuity policy to de-risk a portion of our pension obligations in the U.S.
Other Expense, net. Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $1.7 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower foreign currency losses in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit). Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $60.8 million on losses before taxes of $330.2 million. This compares to income tax expense of $36.1 million on earnings before taxes of $98.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The tax benefit in 2020 differed from the statutory rate due to incremental valuation allowances recorded on tax losses generated in certain foreign jurisdictions and U.S. states, permanent benefits generated by the ability to carry back net operating losses in the U.S. up to five years at the tax rates in effect during those periods under the business tax provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) enacted during 2020, the mix of income between the U.S. and foreign sources, permanent impacts from the divestiture of our European rubber, fluid transfer, and specialty sealing businesses as well as our Indian operations, tax credits and incentives, and other nonrecurring discrete items. Tax expense in 2019 differed from the statutory rate due to incremental valuation allowance recorded on tax losses generated in certain foreign jurisdictions, permanent impacts from the sale of the AVS product line, the mix of income between U.S. and foreign sources, tax incentives, other tax credits, and other nonrecurring discrete items.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018.
Refer to Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 for discussion of the results of operations for the year ended December 31,
2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, which is incorporated by reference herein.
Segment Results of Operations
Our business is organized into the following reportable segments: North America, Europe, Asia Pacific and South America. All other business activities are reported in Corporate, eliminations and other. We use Segment adjusted EBITDA as the measure of earnings to assess the performance of each segment and determine the resources to be allocated to the segments. We have defined adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, restructuring expense, and special items.
The following tables presents sales and segment adjusted EBITDA for each of the reportable segments.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Sales
* Net of customer price reductions
•Volume and mix, net of customer price reductions, was mainly driven by the impact of the decline in vehicle production volume caused by government imposed global shutdowns related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
•The impact of foreign currency exchange was primarily related to the Brazilian Real and the Euro.
Segment adjusted EBITDA
* Net of customer price reductions
•Volume and mix, net of customer price reductions, was mainly driven by the impact of the decline in vehicle production volume caused by government imposed global shutdowns related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
•The impact of foreign currency exchange was impacted by the Brazilian Real, the Chinese Renminbi, Canadian Dollar, the Euro, the Polish Zloty, and the Czech Koruna.
•The Cost Decreases / (Increases) category above includes:
◦Reduction in compensation-related expenses, due to salaried headcount initiatives, purchasing savings through lean initiatives, and restructuring savings;
◦Commodity cost fluctuations, wage increases and variable employee compensation increases;
◦The non-recurrence of the prior year one-time impact of commercial settlements in Asia Pacific and tax settlements in Brazil;
◦Net manufacturing efficiencies of $63 million, weakened by the impact of COVID-19, primarily driven by our European, North America and Asia Pacific segments.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2018
Sales
* Net of customer price reductions
•The impact of foreign currency exchange primarily related to the Euro, the Chinese Renminbi, and the Brazilian Real.
Segment adjusted EBITDA
* Net of customer price reductions
•The unfavorable impact of foreign currency exchange was primarily driven by the Canadian Dollar, the Euro, the Chinese Renminbi, the Polish Zloty, the Czech Koruna and the Brazilian Real.
•The Cost Decreases / (Increases) category above includes:
◦The increase in commodity, general inflation, and tariffs;
◦Tax settlements in South America and the one-time impact of commercial settlements in Asia Pacific;
◦Net operational efficiencies of $80.9 million primarily driven by our North America, Europe, and Asia Pacific segments; and
◦The decrease in selling, administrative and engineering expense due to efficiencies related to cost improvement initiatives.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Short and Long-Term Liquidity Considerations and Risks
We intend to fund our ongoing working capital, capital expenditures, debt service and other funding requirements through a combination of cash flows from operations, cash on hand, borrowings under our senior asset-based revolving credit facility (“ABL Facility”) and receivables factoring. We utilize intercompany loans and equity contributions to fund our worldwide operations. There may be country-specific regulations which may restrict or result in increased costs in the repatriation of these funds. See Note 11. “Debt” to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report for a detailed discussion of terms and conditions related to our debt.
We continue to take aggressive action to preserve cash and enhance liquidity, including significantly decreasing our capital expenditures. In the second quarter of 2020, we issued $250 million in 13% Senior Secured Notes to provide additional liquidity due to the financial uncertainties resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Based on those actions and current projections for increasing OEM customer production, we believe that our cash flows from operations, cash on hand, borrowings under our ABL Facility and receivables factoring will enable us to meet our ongoing working capital, capital expenditures, debt service and other funding requirements for the next twelve months, despite the challenges presented by the COVID-19 pandemic. We continuously monitor and forecast our liquidity situation, take the necessary actions to preserve our liquidity and evaluate other financial alternatives that may be available to us should the need arise. Our ability to fund our working capital needs, debt payments and other obligations, and to comply with the financial covenants, including borrowing base limitations, under our ABL Facility, depend on our future operating performance and cash flows and many factors outside of our control, including the costs of raw materials, the state of the overall automotive industry and financial and economic conditions, including the impact of COVID-19, and other factors.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $97.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change was primarily due to decreased cash earnings, partially offset by collections on receivables and changes in other working capital items.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $97.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $149.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The lower inflow was primarily due to decreased cash earnings, and timing of customer payments, partially offset by payments to suppliers and changes in accrued liabilities.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $106.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $84.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash used in investing activities consisted primarily of capital spending of $91.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by investing activities consisted primarily of gross proceeds of $243.4 million from the sale of our AVS product line, partially offset by capital spending of $164.5 million. Significant decreases in capital expenditures occurred throughout 2020, in order to preserve liquidity in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We anticipate that we will spend approximately $100 million to $125 million on capital expenditures in 2021.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $84.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $383.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $207.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $84.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The inflow was primarily due to proceeds from issuance of the Senior Secured Notes during the year ended December 31, 2020 There were also no share repurchases during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash used in financing activities totaled $84.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $14.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The change was primarily due to repayment of borrowings under our revolving credit facility and local borrowing lines. Cash used for share repurchases was $36.6 million and $60.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Senior Notes
On November 2, 2016, the Company’s wholly-owned subsidiary, CSA Inc. (the “Issuer”) completed a private offering of debt securities consisting of the issuance of $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of its 5.625% notes due 2026 (the “Senior Notes”). The proceeds from the sale of the Senior Notes were used to repay the non-extended term loans outstanding under the Term Loan Facility and to pay fees and expenses related to the refinancing. The Senior Notes are guaranteed by us, as well as each of CSA Inc.’s wholly-owned existing or subsequently organized U.S. subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions, to the extent such subsidiary guarantees the ABL Facility and the Term Loan Facility. The Issuer may redeem all or part of the Senior Notes at various points in time prior to maturity, as described in the indenture. The Senior Notes will mature on November 15, 2026. Interest on the Senior Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears in cash on May 15 and November 15 of each year.
If a Change of Control (as defined in the indenture) occurs, we will be required to make an offer to repurchase all of the Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the repurchase date.
Senior Secured Notes
On May 29, 2020, Cooper Standard Automotive Inc. (the “Issuer”), issued $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of its 13.0% Senior Secured Notes due 2024 (the “Senior Secured Notes”), pursuant to the Indenture, dated as of May 29, 2020 (the “Indenture”), by and among the Issuer, the other guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, in a transaction exempt from registration under Rule 144A and Regulation S of the Securities Act of 1933. Proceeds from the Senior Secured Notes were used to provide additional liquidity for the Company. The Senior Secured Notes are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by CS Intermediate HoldCo 1 LLC and each of the Issuer’s present and future subsidiaries that are obligors or guarantee the Term Loan Facility and each of the Issuer’s wholly owned domestic subsidiaries that are obligors under, or guarantee, certain other indebtedness, subject to certain exceptions. The notes are also guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by Cooper-Standard Latin America B.V.
The Issuer may redeem all or part of the Senior Secured Notes prior to maturity at the prices set forth in the Indenture. The Senior Secured Notes mature on June 1, 2024. Interest on the Senior Secured Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears in cash on June 1 and December 1 of each year, commencing on December 1, 2020.
ABL Facility
On November 2, 2016, CS Intermediate Holdco 1 LLC (“Parent”), CSA U.S. (the “U.S. Borrower”), Cooper-Standard Automotive Canada Limited (the “Canadian Borrower”), Cooper-Standard Automotive International Holdings B.V. (the “Dutch Borrower”, and, together with the U.S. Borrower and the Canadian Borrower, the “Borrowers”) and certain subsidiaries of the U.S. Borrower, entered into a third amendment of our ABL Facility. In March 2020, the Company entered into the First Amendment of the Third Amended and Restated Loan Agreement (“the Amendment”). As a result of the Amendment, the senior asset-based revolving credit facility (“ABL Facility”) maturity was extended to March 2025 and the aggregate revolving loan commitment was reduced to $180.0 million.
In addition, our ABL Facility provides for an uncommitted $100.0 million incremental loan facility, for a potential total ABL Facility of $280.0 million.
The ABL Facility includes affirmative and negative covenants that impose substantial restrictions on our financial and business operations. The ABL Facility also contains various events of default that are customary for comparable facilities.
Loan and letter of credit availability under the agreement is subject to a borrowing base, which at any time is limited to the lesser of: (A) the maximum facility amount (subject to certain adjustments) and (B) (i) up to 85% of eligible accounts receivable; plus (ii) the lesser of 70% of eligible inventory or 85% of the appraised net orderly liquidation value of eligible inventory; plus (iii) up to the lesser of $30.0 million and 85% of eligible tooling accounts receivable; minus reserves established by the agent. The obligations under the ABL Facility and the related guarantees are secured by various assets, as detailed in Note 11. “Debt” to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report.
Borrowings under the ABL Facility bear interest at a rate equal to, at the Borrowers’ option:
•in the case of borrowings by U.S. Borrower, London Inter-Bank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) or the base rate plus, in each case, an applicable margin; or
•in the case of borrowings by the Canadian Borrower, bankers’ acceptance (“BA”) rate, Canadian prime rate or Canadian base rate plus, in each case, an applicable margin; or
•in the case of borrowings by the Dutch Borrower, LIBOR plus an applicable margin.
The applicable margin may vary between 1.50% and 2.00% with respect to the LIBOR or Canadian BA rate-based borrowings and between 0.50% and 1.00% with respect to U.S. base rate, Canadian prime rate and Canadian base rate borrowings. The applicable margin is subject, in each case, to quarterly pricing adjustments (based on average facility availability).
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $150.9 million in availability. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $1.0 million and $0.7 million, respectively, in unamortized debt issuance costs.
Term Loan Facility - Amendments
On November 2, 2016, CSA U.S., as borrower, entered into the first amendment of our Term Loan Facility. The Term Loan Facility provides for loans in an aggregate principal amount of $340.0 million. Subject to certain conditions, the Term Loan Facility, without the consent of the then existing lenders (but subject to the receipt of commitments), may be expanded (or a new term loan or revolving facility added) by an amount that will not cause the consolidated secured net debt ratio to exceed 2.25 to 1.00, plus $400.0 million, plus any voluntary prepayments (including revolving facility and ABL Facility to the extent commitments are reduced) not funded from proceeds of long-term indebtedness. The Term Loan Facility matures on November 2, 2023, unless earlier terminated.
The Term Loan Facility contains incurrence-based negative covenants customary for high yield senior secured debt securities. These negative covenants are subject to exceptions, qualifications and certain carveouts.
On May 2, 2017, CSA U.S. entered into Amendment No. 2 to the Term Loan Facility to modify the interest rate. Subsequently, on March 6, 2018, the Company entered into Amendment No. 3 to the Term Loan Facility to further modify the interest rate. In accordance with this amendment, borrowings under the Term Loan Facility bear interest, at the Company’s option, at either (1) with respect to Eurodollar rate loans, the greater of the applicable Eurodollar rate and 0.75% plus 2.0% per annum, or (2) with respect to base rate loans, the base rate, (which is the highest of the then current federal funds rate plus 0.5%, the prime rate most recently announced by the administrative agent under the term loan, and the one-month Eurodollar rate plus 1.0%) plus 1.0% per annum. As a result of the Amendment No. 3, the Company recognized a loss on refinancing and extinguishment of debt of $0.8 million in the first quarter of 2018, which was due to the partial write off of new and unamortized debt issuance costs and unamortized original issue discount.
All obligations of the borrower under the Term Loan Facility are guaranteed jointly and severally on a senior secured basis by us and the wholly-owned U.S. restricted subsidiaries of CSA U.S.
As of December 31, 2020, the principal amount of $326.4 million was outstanding, and the Company had $1.7 million unamortized debt issuance costs and $1.1 million of unamortized original issue discount.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As a part of our working capital management, we sell certain European customers accounts receivable through a third party financial institution in off-balance sheet arrangements. The amount sold varies each month based on the amount of underlying receivables and cash flow needs. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $85.1 million and $103.8 million, respectively, of receivables outstanding under receivable transfer agreements entered into by various locations. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, total accounts receivable factored were $476.4 million and $556.1 million, respectively. Costs incurred on the sale of receivables were $0.8 million, $1.0 million and $1.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. These amounts are recorded in other expense, net in the consolidated statements of operations. These are permitted transactions under the credit agreements governing our ABL Facility and Term Loan Facility and the indenture governing the Senior Notes and Senior Secured Notes.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no other off-balance sheet arrangements.
Other Capital Transactions Impacting Liquidity
Share Repurchase Program
In June 2018, our Board of Directors approved a common stock repurchase program (the “2018 Program”) authorizing us to repurchase, in the aggregate, up to $150.0 million of our outstanding common stock. Under the 2018 Program, repurchases may be made on the open market, through private transactions, accelerated share repurchases, round lot or block transactions on
the New York Stock Exchange or otherwise, as determined by management and in accordance with prevailing market conditions and federal securities laws and regulations. We expect to fund any future repurchases from cash on hand and future cash flows from operations. We are not obligated to acquire a particular amount of securities, and the 2018 Program may be discontinued at any time at our discretion. The 2018 Program was effective beginning November 2018. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $98.7 million of repurchase authorization under the 2018 Program.
We did not make any repurchases during the year ended December 31, 2020.
2019 Repurchases
In May 2019, we entered into an accelerated share repurchase (“ASR”) agreement with a third-party financial institution to repurchase our common stock pursuant to the 2018 Program. Under the ASR agreement, we made an up-front payment of $30.0 million and received an initial delivery of 626,305 shares of our common stock in the second quarter of 2019. The repurchase was completed in the third quarter of 2019 when we received final delivery of an additional 72,875 shares. A total of 699,180 shares were repurchased under the ASR agreement at a weighted average purchase price of $42.91 per share.
In addition to the repurchase under the ASR agreement, during the year ended December 31, 2019, we utilized $5.9 million of cash on hand to repurchase 85,000 shares of common stock at an average purchase price of $69.85 per share.
See Item 5. “Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity” and Note 20. “Equity” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report for additional information.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations consist of legal commitments requiring us to make fixed or determinable cash payments, regardless of the contractual requirements of the vendor to provide future goods or services. Except as otherwise disclosed, this table does not include information on our recurring purchase of materials for use in production because our raw materials purchase contracts typically do not require fixed or minimum quantities.
The following table summarizes the total amounts due as of December 31, 2020 under all debt agreements at nominal value, undiscounted finance lease commitments and other contractual obligations.
In addition to our contractual obligations and commitments set forth in the table above, we have employment arrangements with certain key executives that provide for continuity of management. These arrangements include payments of multiples of annual salary, certain incentives and continuation of benefits upon the occurrence of specified events in a manner believed to be consistent with comparable companies. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had additional operating leases, primarily for real estate, that have not yet commenced with undiscounted lease payments of approximately $1.4 million.
We also have funding requirements with respect to our pension obligations. We expect to make cash contributions to our U.S. and foreign pension plans of approximately $1.0 million and $4.5 million, respectively, in 2021. Our minimum funding requirements after 2021 will depend on several factors, including the investment performance of our retirement plans and prevailing interest rates. Our funding obligations may also be affected by changes in applicable legal requirements. We also have payments due with respect to our postretirement benefit obligations. We do not prefund our postretirement benefit obligations. Rather, payments are made as costs are incurred by covered retirees. We expect net other postretirement benefit payments to be approximately $2.6 million in 2021.
We may be required to make significant cash outlays due to our unrecognized tax benefits. However, due to the uncertainty of the timing of future cash flows associated with our unrecognized tax benefits, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement, if any, with the respective taxing authorities. Accordingly, unrecognized tax
benefits of $11.3 million as of December 31, 2020 have been excluded from the contractual obligations table above. See Note 17. “Income Taxes” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report for additional information.
Excluded from the contractual obligations table above are open purchase orders as of December 31, 2020 for raw materials, supplies and capital expenditures in the normal course of business, supply contracts with customers, distribution agreements, joint venture agreements and other contracts without express funding requirements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In evaluating our business, management considers EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to be key indicators of our operating performance. Our management also uses EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA:
•because similar measures are utilized in the calculation of the financial covenants and ratios contained in our financing arrangements;
•in developing our internal budgets and forecasts;
•as a significant factor in evaluating our management for compensation purposes;
•in evaluating potential acquisitions;
•in comparing our current operating results with corresponding historical periods and with the operational performance of other companies in our industry; and
•in presentations to the members of our board of directors to enable our board of directors to have the same measurement basis of operating performance as is used by management in their assessments of performance and in forecasting and budgeting for our company.
In addition, we believe EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA and similar measures are widely used by investors, securities analysts and other interested parties in evaluating our performance. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) plus income tax expense (benefit), interest expense, net of interest income, depreciation and amortization (or “EBITDA”), as adjusted for items that management does not consider to be reflective of our core operating performance. These adjustments include, but are not limited to, restructuring costs, impairment charges, non-cash fair value adjustments and acquisition related costs.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not financial measurements recognized under U.S. GAAP, and when analyzing our operating performance, investors should use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a supplement to, and not as alternatives for, net income (loss), operating income, or any other performance measure derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP, nor as an alternative to cash flow from operating activities as a measure of our liquidity. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as analytical tools, and they should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our results of operations as reported under U.S. GAAP. These limitations include the following:
•they do not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditure or contractual commitments;
•they do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•they do not reflect interest expense or cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments under our ABL Facility, Term Loan Facility, Senior Notes, and Senior Secured Notes;
•they do not reflect certain tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated or amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect cash requirements for such replacements; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate these measures differently and, as the number of differences in the way companies calculate these measures increases, the degree of their usefulness as a comparative measure correspondingly decreases.
In addition, in evaluating Adjusted EBITDA, it should be noted that in the future, we may incur expenses similar to the adjustments in the below presentation. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by special items.
The following table provides a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA from net income (loss), which is the most comparable financial measure in accordance with U.S. GAAP:
(1)Gain on sale of business primarily related to divestitures in 2020 and divestiture of AVS product line in 2019. See Note 5. “Divestitures” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report for additional information.
(2)Includes non-cash impairment charges related to restructuring.
(3)Other non-cash impairment charges in 2020 of $17,417 related to fixed assets and right-of-use operating lease assets, net of approximately $476 attributable to our noncontrolling interest. Impairment charges in 2019 related to fixed assets of $23,139. Impairment charges in 2018 related to intangible assets of $791 and fixed assets of $42,915.
(4)Non-cash pension settlement charges and administrative fees incurred related to certain of our U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans.
(5)Project costs recorded in selling, administration and engineering expense related to acquisitions and divestitures.
(6)Lease termination costs no longer recorded as restructuring charges in accordance with ASC 842.
(7)Non-cash goodwill impairment charges in 2018 related to impairments at our Europe and Asia Pacific reporting units, net of approximately $5,463 attributable to our noncontrolling interests.
(8)Gain on sale of land in Europe that was contemplated in conjunction with our restructuring plan. See Note 9. “Property, Plant and Equipment” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report for additional information.
(9)Amortization of write-up of inventory to fair value for the 2018 acquisitions.
(10)Loss on refinancing and extinguishment of debt relating to the March 2018 amendment and May 2017 amendment of the Term Loan Facility.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3. “New Accounting Pronouncements” to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report for additional information.