ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the "Selected Financial Data" and our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including but not limited to those set forth under "Risk Factors" and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Background
CPSI is a leading provider of healthcare solutions and services for community hospitals and other healthcare systems and post-acute care facilities. Founded in 1979, CPSI offers its products and services through four companies - Evident, LLC ("Evident"), American HealthTech, Inc. ("AHT"), TruBridge, LLC ("TruBridge") and iNetXperts, Corp. d/b/a Get Real Health ("Get Real Health"). These combined companies are focused on improving the health of the communities we serve, connecting communities for a better patient care experience, and improving the financial operations of our clients. The individual contributions of each of these companies towards this combined focus are as follows:
•Evident, which makes up our Acute Care EHR reporting segment, provides comprehensive acute care electronic health record ("EHR") solutions, Thrive and Centriq, and related services for community hospitals and their physician clinics.
•AHT, which makes up our Post-acute Care EHR reporting segment, provides a comprehensive post-acute care EHR solution and related services for skilled nursing and assisted living facilities.
•TruBridge, our third reporting segment, focuses on providing business management, consulting, and managed IT services along with its complete revenue cycle management ("RCM") solution for all care settings, regardless of their primary healthcare information solutions provider.
•Get Real Health, included within our TruBridge segment, delivers technology solutions to improve patient outcomes and engagement strategies with care providers.
Our clients primarily consist of community hospitals with fewer than 200 acute care beds, with hospitals having fewer than 100 beds comprising approximately 98% of our acute care EHR client base.
See Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements included herein for additional information on our three reportable segments.
Management Overview
Through much of our history, our strategy has been to achieve meaningful long-term revenue growth through sales of healthcare IT systems and related services to existing and new clients within our target market. Prospectively, our ability to continue to realize long-term revenue growth is largely dependent on our ability to sell new and additional products and services to our existing customer base, including cross-selling opportunities presented between our operating segments, Acute Care EHR, Post-acute Care EHR, and TruBridge. Chief among these cross-selling opportunities is the ability to continue to sell TruBridge services into our Acute Care EHR customer base. As a result, retention of existing Acute Care EHR customers is a key component of our long-term growth strategy by protecting this base of potential TruBridge customers, while at the same time serving as a leading indicator of our market position and stability of revenues and cash flows.
We determine retention rates by reference to the amount of beginning-of-period Acute Care EHR recurring revenues that have not been lost due to customer attrition from our production environment customer base. Production environment customers are those that are using our applications to document live patient encounters, as opposed to legacy environment customers that have view-only access to historical patient records. Historically, these retention rates had consistently remained in the mid-to-high 90th percentile ranges. However, fiscal years 2017 through 2019 saw retention rates decrease to the low 90th percentile ranges due to, among other factors, (i) post-acquisition customer concerns regarding our long-term commitment to the Centriq platform, acquired in January 2016, (ii) an intensified competitive market, primarily due to aggressive pricing and marketing by a highly disruptive new entrant into the Acute Care EHR marketplace, and (iii) the announced sunset of the Classic platform, also acquired in January 2016. During 2020, retention rates have returned to the mid-90th percentile ranges, as (i) the lingering effects of the Centriq acquisition continue to abate, (ii) the competitive environment continues to normalize as the aforementioned disruptive new entrant into this market has since departed the market altogether, and (iii) the Classic platform
was sunset in the fourth quarter of 2019, with all related customers having either changed EHR vendors or migrated to one of our EHR solutions.
As we consider the long-term growth prospects of our business, we are seeking to further stabilize our revenues and cash flows and leverage TruBridge services as a growth agent. As a result, we are placing ever-increasing value in further developing our already significant recurring revenue base. As such, maintaining and growing recurring revenues are key components of our long-term growth strategy, aided by the aforementioned focus on customer retention. This includes a renewed focus on driving demand for subscriptions for our existing technology solutions and expanding the footprint for TruBridge services beyond our EHR customer base.
During 2020, we took pause and engaged a top-tier international consulting firm to assess our company-wide growth strategy. The outcome of this eight-week effort was the confirmation of our current strategy of cross-selling TruBridge into the existing EHR base, expanding TruBridge market share with sales to new community and larger health systems, and pursuing competitive EHR takeaway opportunities in the acute and post-acute market.
Our business model is designed such that, as revenue growth materializes, earnings and profitability growth are naturally bolstered through the increased margin realization afforded us by operating leverage. Once a hospital has installed our solutions, we continue to provide support services to the customer on a continuing basis and make available to the customer our broad portfolio of business management, consulting, and managed IT services, all of which contribute to recurring revenue growth. The provision of these recurring revenue services typically requires fewer resources than the initial system installation, resulting in increased overall gross margins and operating margins. We also look to increase margins through cost containment measures where appropriate as we continue to leverage opportunities for greater operating efficiencies of the combined entity. However, in the immediate future, we anticipate incremental margin pressure from the continued client transition from perpetual license arrangements to “Software as a Service” arrangements as described below.
Turbulence in the U.S. and worldwide economies and financial markets impacts almost all industries. While the domestic healthcare industry is not immune to economic cycles, we believe it is more significantly affected by U.S. regulatory and national health initiatives than by the economic cycles of our economy. Additionally, healthcare organizations with a large dependency on Medicare and Medicaid populations, such as community hospitals, have been affected by the challenging financial condition of the federal government and many state governments and government programs. Accordingly, we recognize that prospective hospital clients often do not have the necessary capital to make investments in information technology. Additionally, in response to these challenges, hospitals have become more selective regarding where they invest capital, resulting in a focus on strategic spending that generates a return on their investment. Despite these challenges, we believe healthcare information technology is often viewed as more strategically beneficial to hospitals than other possible purchases because the technology also plays an important role in healthcare by improving safety and efficiency and reducing costs. Additionally, we believe most hospitals recognize that they must invest in healthcare information technology to meet current and future regulatory, compliance and government reimbursement requirements.
In recent years, there have been significant changes to provider reimbursement by the U.S. federal government, followed by commercial payers and state governments. There is increasing pressure on healthcare organizations to reduce costs and increase quality while replacing fee-for-service in part by enrolling in advanced payment models. This pressure has encouraged further adoption of healthcare IT and increase demand for business management, consulting, and managed IT services, as the future success of these healthcare providers is greatly dependent upon their ability to engage patient populations and to coordinate patient care across a multitude of settings, while optimizing operating efficiency along the way.
Much of the variability in our periodic revenues and profitability has been and will continue to be due to changing demand for different license models for our technology solutions, with variability in operating cash flows further impacted by the financing decisions within those license models. Our technology solutions are generally deployed in one of two license models: (1) perpetual licenses, for which the related revenue is recognized effectively upon installation, and (2) “Software as a Service” or “SaaS” arrangements, including our Cloud Electronic Health Record (“Cloud EHR”) offering, which generally result in revenue being recognized monthly as the services are provided over the term of the arrangement.
Although the overwhelming majority of our historical installations have been under a perpetual license model, the dramatic shift in customer preferences to a SaaS license model continued in 2020, with 68% of the year’s new acute care EHR installations being performed in a SaaS model, compared to 43% in 2019 and only 12% in 2018. These SaaS offerings are becoming increasingly attractive to our clients because this configuration allows them to obtain access to advanced software products without a significant initial capital outlay. We expect this trend to continue for the foreseeable future, with the resulting impact on the Company’s financial statements being reduced system sales revenues in the period of installation in exchange for increased recurring periodic revenues (reflected in system sales and support revenues) over the term of the SaaS
arrangement. This naturally places downward pressure on short-term revenue growth and profitability metrics, but benefits long-term revenue growth and profitability which, in our view, is consistent with our goal of delivering long-term shareholder value.
For customers electing to purchase our technology solutions under a perpetual license, we have historically made financing arrangements available on a case-by-case basis, depending on the various aspects of the proposed contract and customer attributes. These financing arrangements continue to comprise the majority of our perpetual license installations, and include short-term payment plans and longer-term lease financing through us or third-party financing companies. During 2018, total financing receivables increased dramatically and had a significant impact on operating cash flows. This increase in financing arrangements was primarily due to two reasons. First, meaningful use stage 3 (“MU3”) installations were primarily financed through short-term payment plans and demand for such installations increased significantly in late 2017. Second, competitor financing options, primarily through accounts receivable management collections and Cloud EHR arrangements, have applied pressure to reduce initial customer capital investment requirements for new EHR installations, leading to the offering of long-term lease options. In 2019, we experienced a modest reduction in total financing receivables due to the natural exhaustion of the MU3 opportunity and the aforementioned dramatic shift in license preferences towards SaaS arrangements, the former of which also resulted in a positive impact to operating cash flows. We experienced a more substantial reduction in total financing receivables during 2020, with a corresponding beneficial impact to operating cash flows, as the trends related to MU3 purchases and SaaS arrangements continue into 2021.
For those perpetual license clients not seeking a financing arrangement, the payment schedule of the typical contract is structured to provide for a scheduling deposit due at contract signing, with the remainder of the contracted fees due at various stages of the installation process (delivery of hardware, installation of software and commencement of training, and satisfactory completion of a monthly accounting cycle or end-of-month operation by each respective application, as applicable).
In May 2019, the Company closed its acquisition of Get Real Health. Based in Rockville, Maryland, Get Real Health delivers technology solutions to improve patient outcomes and engagement strategies with care providers. Through this acquisition, the Company strengthened its position in community healthcare by offering three new comprehensive patient engagement and empowerment solutions that are offered by Get Real Health.
On February 1, 2021, we committed to a reduction in force that is expected to result in the termination of approximately 1.0% of our workforce (21 employees). The reduction in force is a component of a broader strategic review of the Company’s operations that is intended to more effectively align resources with business priorities. Substantially all of the employees impacted by the reduction in force will exit the Company in the first quarter of 2021. The Company estimates that it will incur expenses of approximately $2.7 million related to the reduction in force, of which approximately $2.4 million is expected to be incurred in the first quarter of 2021, with the remaining expenses to be incurred during the remainder of 2021. These expenses will consist of one-time termination benefits to the affected employees, including but not limited to severance payments, healthcare benefits, and payments for accrued vacation time. The Company expects to pay for the expenses from cash flow from operations and does not expect to incur any debt. After the reduction in force is implemented, the Company expects to realize approximately $3.9 million in annual savings compared to current expense levels.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The continuing impacts of COVID-19 and related economic conditions on the Company's results are highly uncertain and outside the Company's control. The scope, duration and magnitude of the direct and indirect effects of COVID-19 continue to evolve in ways that are difficult or impossible to anticipate.
As a result of COVID-19, community hospital patient volume in the United States and other countries around the world rapidly deteriorated in the second quarter of 2020. Although patient volumes have since improved significantly, the persistence of the pandemic and the unprecedented nature of the resulting challenges it has imposed on national and global healthcare and economic systems are likely to continue to negatively impact patient volumes and make uncertain the path to recovery for community hospitals. These decreased levels of our hospital clients' patient volumes have negatively impacted, and will continue to negatively impact, our revenues, gross margins, and income for our TruBridge service offerings. Additionally, new EHR system installations have been, and will continue to be, negatively impacted by restrictive travel and social distancing protocols. The Company began to experience this impact in March 2020, which increased in significance during the second quarter and showed gradual signs of improvement during the third and fourth quarters of 2020. The Company expects these impacts to continue into 2021, but the degree of impact will depend on the ability of our community hospital clients to return to normal operations and patient volumes. We believe that COVID-19 has impacted, and will continue to impact, our business results in the following additional areas:
•Bookings - A decline in new business and add-on bookings as certain client purchasing decisions and projects are delayed to focus on treating patients, procuring necessary medical supplies, implementing COVID-19 vaccination protocols, and managing their organization through this crisis. This decline in bookings eventually results in reduced backlog and lower subsequent revenue.
•TruBridge revenues - Decreased levels of patient volume within our community hospital client base will negatively impact our revenues for our TruBridge service offerings as the overwhelming majority of TruBridge revenues are directly or indirectly correlated with client patient volumes. This decline in revenues will have a negative impact on gross margins and income.
•Associate productivity - A decline in associate productivity, primarily for our implementation personnel, as a large amount of work is typically done at client sites, which is being impacted by travel restrictions and our clients' focus on the pandemic. Our clients' focus on the pandemic has also led to pauses on existing projects and postponed start dates for others, which translates into lower implementation revenues, gross margin and income. We are mitigating this by doing more work remotely than we have in the past, but we cannot fully offset the negative impact.
•Travel - Associate travel restrictions reduce client-related travel, which reduces reimbursed travel revenues and lowers our cost of sales as a percent of revenues. Such restrictions also reduce non-reimbursable travel, which lowers operating expenses.
•Cash collections - A delay in client cash collections due to COVID-19's impact on national reimbursement processes, and client focus on managing their own organizations' liquidity during this time, could impact our cash collections. The federal government has allocated unprecedented resources specifically designed to assist healthcare providers with their operating and capital needs during the pandemic, allocating a total of $175 billion through the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act Provider Relief Fund. Further, $10 billion has been specifically targeted for rural providers, which is of particular interest to our client base, which is comprised mostly of non-urban community hospitals. Of this $10 billion, the average rural hospital was expected to receive a total of approximately $3.6 million in direct financial relief. While these funds certainly help mitigate the financial pressures our clients face, the clinical and operational challenges remain immense and are likely to cause certain of our customers to more aggressively manage cash resources in order to preserve liquidity, resulting in uncharacteristic aging of our trade accounts receivable. Additionally, the aforementioned decrease in community hospital patient volumes has had, and will continue to have, a negative impact on TruBridge billings for services and resulting revenues. These factors would translate to lower cash flows from operating activities. Lower cash flows from operating activities may impact how we execute under our capital allocation strategy and may adversely affect our financial condition.
2020 Financial Overview
We generated revenues of $264.5 million from the sale of our products and services during 2020, compared to $274.6 million during 2019, a decrease of 4% that is primarily attributed to reduced MU3-related revenue opportunities as the related October 1, 2019 compliance deadline passed and the impact of COVID-19 on client purchasing and implementation plans. This decrease in MU3 and implementation-related revenues was partially offset by continued TruBridge revenue growth. Our net income decreased to $14.2 million in 2020 compared to $20.5 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the decreased sales revenues in 2020 in combination with 2019's $5.0 million gain on contingent consideration resulting from Get Real Health not meeting the purchase agreement earnout during 2019. Our operating income decreased to $21.1 million in 2020 compared to $24.6 million in 2019, primarily as a decrease in operating expenses did not fully offset the decrease in revenue. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $5.5 million, from $43.6 million provided by operations for 2019 to $49.1 million provided by operations for 2020. This increase was primarily due to cash advantageous changes in working capital, particularly in relation to accounts receivable and financing receivables.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain items included in our results of operations for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, expressed as a percentage of our total revenues for these periods:
2020 Compared to 2019
Revenues
Total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $10.1 million, or 4%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
System sales and support revenues, consisting of the Acute Care EHR and Post-acute Care EHR segments, decreased $12.4 million, or 7%, from the year ended December 31, 2019. System sales and support revenues were comprised of the following for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Recurring system sales and support revenues decreased $4.6 million, or 4%, during 2020. Acute Care EHR recurring revenues decreased $3.4 million, or 3%, as attrition from the Thrive and Centriq customer base outweighed new Thrive customer growth and additional support and SaaS fees. Post-acute Care EHR recurring revenues decreased $1.2 million, or 7%, due to attrition resulting from an aggressive competitive environment. We continue to make technological improvements to the AHT product line to compete in this market.
Non-recurring system sales and support revenues decreased $7.8 million, or 20%, primarily due to a $5.9 million, or 17%, decrease in Acute Care EHR non-recurring revenues. The opportunities for MU3-related revenues decreased significantly after the October 1, 2019 deadline and the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic restricted demand for non-strategic information technology purchases by our hospital clients. We installed our Acute Care EHR solutions at twenty-five new hospital clients during 2020 (seventeen under a SaaS arrangement, resulting in revenue being recognized ratably over the contract term; comparatively, revenues related to perpetual license arrangements are recognized when the related installation is complete) compared to twenty-eight new hospital clients during 2019 (twelve under a SaaS arrangement). Non-recurring Post-acute Care EHR revenues decreased $1.9 million, or 50%, in 2020 as compliance cataylsts in place in 2019 have largely abated as Patient Driven Payment Model ("PDMP"), as required by CMS, became effective for post-acute care facilities beginning October 1, 2019.
TruBridge revenues increased $2.3 million, or 2%, compared to 2019 as the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting impact on patient volumes for our community hospital customers offset most of the revenue gains from new client wins over the past twelve months. Most notably, an expanded customer base for our accounts receivable management services resulted in increased revenues of $2.1 million, or 5%, despite the disruption caused by COVID-19. Continued increasing demand for hosting services resulted in an increase of $1.1 million, or 9%, in our IT managed services revenues. Get Real Health, which was acquired during the second quarter of 2019, contributed $4.1 million of revenues during 2020 compared to only $3.4 million during 2019. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in revenues from our private pay services offering of $1.8 million, or 13%, as the aforementioned impact of the pandemic on patient volumes outpaced new client wins for this service offering.
Costs of Sales
Total costs of sales decreased $2.2 million compared to 2019. As a percentage of total revenues, costs of sales remained flat at 48% in both 2020 and 2019.
Costs of Acute Care EHR system sales and support decreased $4.0 million, or 6%, compared to 2019, as hardware costs decreased $1.8 million due to a decline in related revenues and the impact of COVID-19 on associate travel resulted in reduced travel costs of $2.0 million. The gross margin on Acute Care EHR system sales and support remaining flat at 52% in both 2020 and 2019.
Costs of Post-acute Care EHR system sales and support decreased $0.5 million, or 9%, compared to 2019, primarily due to improved personnel efficiency and travel costs savings due to the impact of COVID-19 on associate travel. However, this decrease in costs of sales was outpaced by the decrease in related revenues, resulting in the related gross margin on Post-acute Care EHR system sales and support decreasing from 75% for 2019 to 73% for 2020.
Our costs associated with TruBridge increased $2.3 million, or 4%, in 2020, more than offsetting the related revenue increase, with the primary driver being a $2.9 million, or 7%, increase in payroll costs. At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we notified our employees, including those whose roles were negatively impacted by the declining patient volumes at our community hospital clients, that we would not execute any payroll cost mitigation efforts in response to COVID-19 through July 31, 2020 and have not, to date, executed any such efforts. As a result, we have not executed any reduction-in-force or furlough action plans as a result of the pandemic, which severely limited our ability to offset revenue declines with cost savings. This decision, while socially responsible in providing much needed job security to our employees and their families during a period of unprecedented economic hardship, also serves the long-term interest of our shareholders by strengthening our team, improving customer satisfaction, and better positioning us to capture opportunities as our markets recover. The gross margin on these services decreased to 47% in 2020 compared to 48% in 2019.
Product Development
Product development expenses consist primarily of compensation and other employee-related costs (including stock-based compensation) and infrastructure costs incurred, but not capitalized, for new product development and product enhancements. Product development expenses decreased $3.4 million, or 9%, compared to 2019, as $3.3 million of software development costs were capitalized during 2020 with no such costs capitalized during 2019.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $3.6 million, or 13%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a decrease in travel costs of $1.5 million, or 72%, and a net decrease in other marketing program costs of $1.0 million, or 25%, as travel restrictions and social distancing guideline imposed in 2020 posed challenges to in-person sales efforts. Stock-based compensation expense also decreased $0.9 million, or 37%, as the worsened near-term outlook resulted in reduced expected achievement levels for performance share awards granted to executives and certain key employees in 2018 through 2020.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $2.2 million, or 5%, as the general business climate that our hospital customers operate in was stressed by the pandemic, causing a $2.0 million, or 86%, increase in our credit loss expense. Additionally, worsening employee health claims severity resulted in a $2.0 million, or 20%, increase in costs associated with health benefits we offer to our employees through our self-insured health plans. These increases were partially offset by a $1.1 million decrease in stock-based compensation, as the pandemic has worsened our near-term outlook and reduced expected achievement levels for performance share awards granted to executives and certain key employees in 2018 through 2020. Additionally, costs associated with our annual client conference decreased $1.0 million as the 2020 event was cancelled in response to the pandemic.
Amortization of Acquisition-Related Intangibles
Amortization expense associated with acquisition-related intangible assets increased $0.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to recognition of a full year of amortization expense in 2020 for the addition of Get Real Health intangible assets acquired on May 3, 2019.
Total Operating Expenses
As a percentage of total revenues, total operating expenses remained flat at 44% in both 2020 and 2019.
Total Other Income (Expense)
Total other income (expense) increased from expense of $0.9 million during 2019 to expense of $2.3 million during 2020, primarily as 2019 benefited from a $5.0 million gain on contingent consideration related to the Get Real Health acquisition with no such gains during 2020. The absence of a comparable gain in 2020 was partially offset by a $3.1 million reduction in interest expense resulting from reduced borrowings and decreasing interest rates.
Income Before Taxes
As a result of the foregoing factors, income before taxes decreased to $18.8 million in 2020, compared to $23.7 million in 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective income tax rates for 2020 and 2019 were 24% and 14%, respectively. Our effective tax rate for 2019 was significantly impacted by the non-taxable nature of our recorded gain on contingent consideration, which served to reduce the year's effective tax rate by 4%. Additionally, provisions-to-return adjustments resulted in an incremental 4.9% increase in our effective tax rate for 2020 compared to 2019.
Net Income
Net income for 2020 decreased $6.2 million to a net income of $14.2 million, or $0.98 per basic and diluted share, compared with net income of $20.5 million, or $1.43 per basic and diluted share, for 2019. The gain on contingent consideration included in 2019 resulted in a positive impact to net income of $5.0 million ($0.35 per share).
2019 Compared to 2018
To review the results of operations comparison of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on March 11, 2020 with the Securities and Exchange Commission or follow the link below.
http://www.sec.gov/ix?doc=/Archives/edgar/data/1169445/000116944520000002/cpsi-20191231.htm
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity consisted of cash and cash equivalents of $12.7 million and our remaining borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility of $105.0 million, compared to $7.4 million of cash and cash equivalents and $30.0 million of remaining borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2019. In conjunction with our acquisition of HHI in January 2016, we entered into a syndicated credit agreement which provided for a $125 million term loan facility and a $50 million revolving credit facility. On June 16, 2020, we entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement that increased the aggregate principal amount of our credit facilities to $185 million, which includes a $75 million term loan facility and a $110 million revolving credit facility.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $78.1 million in principal amount of indebtedness outstanding under our credit facilities. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents of $12.7 million as of December 31, 2020, the future operating cash flows of the combined entity, and our remaining borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility of $105.0 million as of December 31, 2020, taken together, provide adequate resources to fund ongoing cash requirements for the next twelve months. We cannot provide assurance that our actual cash requirements will not be greater than we expect as of the date of filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. If sources of liquidity are not available or if we cannot generate sufficient cash flow from operations during the next twelve months, we may be required to obtain additional sources of funds through additional operational improvements, capital market transactions, asset sales or financing from third parties, a combination thereof or otherwise. We cannot provide assurance that these additional sources of funds will be available or, if available, would have reasonable terms.
Operating Cash Flow Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $5.5 million, from $43.6 million provided by operations for 2019 to $49.1 million provided by operations for 2020. The increase in cash flows provided by operations was primarily due to cash-advantageous changes in working capital, most notably as it relates to accounts receivable and financing receivables. During 2019, accounts receivable contracted by $1.7 million, or 4%, driven by a 2% reduction in annual revenues coupled with a slight decrease in days sales outstanding ("DSO") from 53 days to 52 days. During 2020, accounts receivable contracted by $6.4
million, or 16%, driven by a 4% reduction in annual revenues coupled with a significant decrease in DSO from 52 days to 45 days. The resulting impact to operating cash flows was a $0.6 million increase during 2019 compared to a $3.7 million increase during 2020. Additionally, the increasing shift towards a higher mix of SaaS arrangements for our new Acute Care EHR installations resulted in fewer long-term financing arrangements for perpetual license arrangements during 2020. This increasing shift in license mix, coupled with successful collections on past financing receivables, resulted in financing receivables serving as a much greater source of cash during 2020. Financing receivables contributed $3.1 million of operating cash flows during 2019, compared to $6.4 million of operating cash flows during 2020.
Investing Cash Flow Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $5.8 million, with $6.7 million used during 2020 compared to $12.5 million used during 2019. Most notably, we used $10.7 million of cash during 2019 to fund our acquisition of Get Real Health, with no such acquisitions occurring during 2020. Conversely, our investing activities during 2020 included $3.3 million in capitalized software development costs compared to none during 2019. Lastly, cash outflows for purchases of property and equipment increased to $3.3 million during 2020 from $1.8 million during 2019, mostly due to the addition of a West Coast data center to enhance our remote hosting capabilities.
Financing Cash Flow Activities
During 2020, our financing activities used net cash of $37.2 million, as we paid a net $31.6 million in long-term debt principal and declared and paid dividends in the amount of $4.3 million, with another $1.3 million used to fund stock repurchases. Financing cash flow activities used $29.5 million during 2019, primarily due to a net $23.3 million paid in long-term debt principal and $5.7 million cash paid in dividends.
On September 4, 2020, our Board of Directors opted to indefinitely suspend all quarterly dividends. Our Board of Directors will take into account such matters as general business conditions, capital needs, our financial results and such other factors as our Board of Directors may deem relevant in future dividend declarations.
Credit Agreement
As of December 31, 2020, we had $73.1 million in principal amount outstanding under our term loan facility and $5.0 million in principal amount outstanding under our revolving credit facility. Each of our credit facilities continues to bear interest at a rate per annum equal to an applicable margin plus, at our option, either (1) the Adjusted LIBOR rate for the relevant interest period, subject to a floor of 0.50%, (2) an alternate base rate determined by reference to the greater of (a) the prime lending rate of Regions, (b) the federal funds rate for the relevant interest period plus one half of one percent per annum and (c) the one month LIBOR rate, subject to the aforementioned floor, plus one percent per annum, or (3) a combination of (1) and (2). The applicable margin range for LIBOR loans and the letter of credit fee ranges from 1.8% to 3.0%. The applicable margin range for base rate loans ranges from 0.8% to 2.0%, in each case based on the Company's consolidated net leverage ratio.
Principal payments with respect to the term loan facility are due on the last day of each fiscal quarter beginning September 30, 2020, with quarterly principal payments of approximately $0.9 million through June 30, 2022, approximately $1.4 million through June 30, 2024 and approximately $1.9 million through March 31, 2025 with maturity on June 16, 2025 or such earlier date as the obligations under our credit agreement become due and payable pursuant to the terms of our credit agreement. Any principal outstanding under our revolving credit facility is due and payable on the maturity date.
Our credit facilities are secured pursuant to an Amended and Restated Pledge and Security Agreement, dated June 16, 2020, among the parties identified as obligors therein and Regions, as collateral agent, on a first priority basis by a security interest in substantially all of the tangible and intangible assets (subject to certain exceptions) of the Company and certain subsidiaries of the Company, as guarantors (collectively, the “Subsidiary Guarantors”), including certain registered intellectual property and the capital stock of certain of the Company’s direct and indirect subsidiaries. Our obligations under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement are also guaranteed by the Subsidiary Guarantors.
The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement provides incremental facility capacity of $50 million, subject to certain conditions. The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement includes a number of restrictive covenants that, among other things and in each case subject to certain exceptions and baskets, impose operating and financial restrictions on the Company and the Subsidiary Guarantors, including the ability to incur additional debt; incur liens and encumbrances; make certain restricted payments, including paying dividends on the Company's equity securities or payments to redeem, repurchase or retire the Company's equity securities (which are subject to our compliance, on a pro forma basis to give effect to the restricted payment, with the fixed charge coverage ratio and consolidated net leverage ratio described below); enter into certain restrictive agreements; make investments, loans and acquisitions; merge or consolidate with any other person; dispose of assets; enter into
sale and leaseback transactions; engage in transactions with affiliates; and materially alter the business we conduct. The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement requires the Company to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.25:1.00 throughout the duration of such agreement. Under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, the Company is required to comply with a maximum consolidated net leverage ratio of 3.50:1.00. The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement also contains customary representations and warranties, affirmative covenants and events of default. We believe that we were in compliance with the covenants contained in such agreement as of December 31, 2020.
The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement requires the Company to mandatorily prepay our credit facilities with 50% of excess cash flow (minus certain specified other payments). This mandatory prepayment requirement is applicable only if the Company’s consolidated net leverage ratio exceeds 2.50:1.00. The Company is permitted to voluntarily prepay the credit facilities at any time without penalty, subject to customary “breakage” costs with respect to prepayments of LIBOR rate loans made on a day other than the last day of any applicable interest period. During 2019, this mandatory prepayment requirement resulted in a $7.0 million prepayment on the term loan facility during the first quarter of 2019 related to excess cash flow generated by the Company during 2018. An excess cash flow prepayment related to excess cash flow generated during 2019 was not required during 2020.
Bookings
Bookings is a key operational metric used by management to assess the relative success of our sales generation efforts, and were as follows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
Acute Care EHR bookings in 2020 decreased $4.8 million, or 10%, despite a $0.9 million, or 4%, increase in net new bookings as the uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic created a difficult demand environment for non-strategic IT purchases. This difficult demand environment manifested itself in a $3.0 million, or 19%, decrease in non-MU3 add-on bookings from existing customers with MU3-related add-on bookings decreasing $2.2 million, or 81%, as the related compliance deadline of October 1, 2019 has passed.
Bookings for our Post-acute Care EHR segment increased $1.3 million, or 26%, primarily as recent investments in AHT’s technology solutions are driving demand within the existing AHT customer base for additional applications and upgrades.
TruBridge bookings have increased $6.0 million, or 22%, to a record $33.2 million during 2020, mostly due to the combined impacts of (i) our recently-introduced initiative to expand our TruBridge footprint outside of our traditional EHR customer base, resulting in significant client wins, and (ii) a poor sales environment during the first half of 2019 driven by a lack of urgency on the part of prospective customers, impacting the timing of customer decisions for purchasing TruBridge services.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by Item 303(a)(4) of SEC Regulation S-K, as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, our material obligations requiring payments in the future are set forth below to reflect (i) our real estate lease obligations, and (ii) the Company’s debt obligations under our credit facilities in connection with the Company’s acquisition of HHI and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, and related interest payments as follows:
Interest on debt obligations for floating rate instruments, as calculated above, assumes rates in effect at December 31, 2020 remain constant.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
General
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. We are required to make some estimates and judgments that affect the preparation of these financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, but actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products or services to clients in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products and services. We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of products and services, which are generally distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. The Company employs the 5-step revenue recognition model under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, to: (1) identify the contract with the client, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Revenue is recognized net of shipping charges and any taxes collected from clients, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
System Sales and Support
The Company enters into contractual obligations to sell perpetual software licenses, installation, conversion and related training services, hardware and software application support, and hardware maintenance services to acute care and post-acute care community hospitals.
•Non-recurring Revenues
•Perpetual software licenses and installation, conversion, and related training services are not considered separate and distinct performance obligations due to the proprietary nature of our software and are, therefore, accounted for as a single performance obligation on a module-by-module basis. Revenue is recognized as each module's implementation is completed based on the module's stand-alone selling price ("SSP"), net of discounts. Fees for licenses and installation, conversion, and related training services are typically due in three installments: (1) at placement of order, (2) upon installation of software and commencement of training, and (3) upon satisfactory completion of monthly accounting cycle or end-of-month operation by application and as applicable for each application. Often, short-term and/or long-term financing arrangements are provided for software implementations; refer to Note 11 - Financing Receivables for further information. Electronic health records ("EHR") implementations include a system warranty that terminates thirty days from the software go-live date, the date which the client begins using the system in a live environment.
•Hardware revenue is recognized on a gross basis separately from software licenses at the point in time it is delivered to the client. The SSP of hardware is cost plus a reasonable margin. Payment is generally due upon delivery of the hardware to the client. Standard manufacturer warranties apply to hardware.
•Recurring Revenues
•Software application support and hardware maintenance services sold with software licenses and hardware are separate and distinct performance obligations. Revenue for support and maintenance services is recognized based on SSP, which is the renewal price, ratably over the life of the contract, which is generally three to five years. Payment is due monthly for support services provided.
•Subscriptions to third party content revenue is recognized on a gross basis as a separate performance obligation ratably over the subscription term based on SSP, which is cost plus a reasonable margin. Payment is due monthly for subscriptions to third party content.
•Software as a Service ("SaaS") arrangements for EHR software and related conversion and training services are considered a single performance obligation. Revenue is recognized on a monthly basis as the SaaS service is provided to the client over the contract term. Payment is due monthly for SaaS services provided.
TruBridge
TruBridge provides an array of business processing services ("BPS") consisting of accounts receivable management, private pay services, insurance services, medical coding, electronic billing, statement processing, payroll processing, and contract management. Fees are recognized over the period of the client contractual relationship as the services are performed based on the SSP, net of discounts. Fees for many of these services are invoiced, and revenue recognized accordingly, based on the volume of transactions or a percentage of client accounts receivable collections. Payment is due monthly for BPS with certain amounts varying based on utilization and/or volumes.
TruBridge also provides professional IT services. Revenue from professional IT services is recognized as the services are performed based on SSP. Payment is due monthly as services are performed.
Our contracts with clients often include promises to transfer multiple products and services. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment.
Judgment is required to determine SSP for each distinct performance obligation. We use observable SSP for items that are sold on a stand-alone basis to similarly situated clients at unit prices within a sufficiently narrow range. For performance obligations that are sold to different clients for a broad range of amounts, or for performance obligations that are never sold on a stand-alone basis, the residual method in determining SSP is applied and requires significant judgment.
Allocating the transaction price, including estimating SSP of promised goods and services for contracts with discounts or variable consideration, may require significant judgment. Due to the short time frame of the implementation cycle, discount allocation is immaterial as revenue is recognized net of discounts within the same reporting period. In scenarios where the Company enters into a contract that includes both a software license and BPS or other services that are charged based on volume of services rendered, the Company allocates variable amounts entirely to a distinct good or service. The terms of the variable payment relate specifically to the entity’s efforts to satisfy that performance obligation.
Although we believe that our approach to estimates and judgments regarding revenue recognition is reasonable, actual results could differ and we may be exposed to increases or decreases in revenue that could be material.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Trade accounts receivable are stated at the amount the Company expects to collect and do not bear interest. The collectability of trade receivable balances is regularly evaluated based on a combination of factors such as customer credit-worthiness, past transaction history with the customer, current economic industry trends and changes in customer payment patterns, resulting in the establishment of general reserves. Additionally, if it is determined that a customer will be unable to fully meet its financial obligation, such as in the case of a bankruptcy filing or other material event impacting its business, a specific allowance for doubtful accounts may be recorded to reduce the related receivable to the amount expected to be recovered. Refer to Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements included herein for a detailed discussion about our credit loss accounting policy related to trade accounts receivable.
The Company has sold information and patient care systems to certain healthcare providers under short-term payment plans and sales-type leases. The Company establishes an allowance for credit losses for these financing receivables based on the historical level of customer defaults under such financing arrangements. Additionally, if it is determined that a customer will be unable to meet its financial obligation, such as in the case of a bankruptcy filing or other material event impacting its business, a specific allowances may be recorded to reduce the related receivable to the amount expected to be recovered. Refer to Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements for further information about our financing receivables.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326), which requires the measurement of all expected credit losses for financial assets held at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. We adopted the new standard as of January 1, 2020. Adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Although we believe that that our approach to estimates and judgments regarding our allowance for credit losses is reasonable, actual results could differ and we may be exposed to increases or decreases in required allowances that could be material.
Estimates
The Company uses estimates to record certain transactions and liabilities. These estimates are generally based on management’s best judgment, past experience, and utilization of third party services such as actuarial and other expert services. Because these estimates are subjective and variable, actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. Significant estimates included in our financial statements include those for self-insurance reserves under our health insurance plan, reserves for uncertain tax positions, bad debt and credit allowances, legal liability exposure or lack thereof, and accrued expenses.
Business combinations, including purchased intangible assets
The Company accounts for business combinations at fair value. Acquisition costs are expensed as incurred and recorded in general and administrative expenses. Measurement period adjustments relate to adjustments to the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on information that we should have known at the time of acquisition. All changes to purchase accounting that do not qualify as measurement period adjustments are included in current period earnings.
The fair value amount assigned to an intangible asset is based on an exit price from a market participant’s viewpoint, and utilizes data such as discounted cash flow analysis and replacement cost models. We review acquired intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable.
Goodwill is recorded as the difference, if any, between the aggregate consideration paid for an acquisition and the fair value of the identifiable net tangible and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized but is evaluated for impairment annually or more frequently if indicators of impairment are present or changes in circumstances suggest that impairment may exist. We test annually for impairment as of October 1.
As part of our annual goodwill impairment test, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we conduct a quantitative goodwill impairment assessment. The first step of the quantitative goodwill impairment test compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. The Company early adopted Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2017-04, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350), on January 1, 2017, which eliminates the second step of the goodwill impairment analysis. Therefore, if the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value in the first step of the goodwill impairment test, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, the goodwill of the reporting unit is not considered to be impaired.
Critical estimates in valuing certain intangible assets and the fair value of the reporting unit during goodwill impairment tests include, but are not limited to, identifying reporting units, historical and projected customer retention rates, anticipated growth in revenue from the acquired customers, expected future cash outflows, the allocation of those cash flows to identifiable intangible assets, estimated useful lives of these intangible assets, and a probability-weighted income approach based on scenarios in estimating achievement of operating results.
Significant judgments in testing goodwill for impairment also include assigning assets and liabilities to the reporting unit and determining the fair value of each reporting unit based on management’s best estimates and assumptions, as well as other information compiled by management, including valuations that utilize customary valuation procedures and techniques.
Management’s best estimates and assumptions are employed in determining the appropriateness of these assumptions as of the acquisition date and for each subsequent period.
Future business and economic conditions, as well as differences actually related to any of the assumptions, could materially affect the financial statements through impairment of goodwill or intangible assets, and acceleration of the amortization period of the purchased intangible assets, which are finite-lived assets.
As of October 1, 2020, the date of our most recent impairment test, our Post-acute Care EHR and TruBridge reporting units had fair values that were substantially in excess of their respective carrying values. The calculated fair value of our Acute Care EHR reporting unit exceeded the reporting unit’s carrying value by 12% and, as such, poses a heightened risk of impairment if the reporting unit’s operating results were to decline in future periods. During the three months ended December 31, 2020, there were no identified indicators of impairment that required the Company to complete an interim quantitative assessment related to any of the Company’s reporting units or indefinitely-lived intangible assets.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market and Interest Rate Risk
Our exposure to market risk relates primarily to the potential change in the British Bankers Association London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR"). We had $78.1 million of outstanding borrowings under our credit facilities with Regions Bank at December 31, 2020. The term loan facility and revolving credit facility bear interest at a rate per annum equal to an applicable margin plus (1) the Adjusted LIBOR rate for the relevant interest period, subject to a floor of 0.5%, (2) an alternate base rate determined by reference to the greatest of (a) the prime lending rate of Regions, (b) the federal funds rate for the relevant interest period plus one half of one percent per annum and (c) the one month LIBOR rate plus one percent per annum,subject to the aforementioned floor, or (3) a combination of (1) and (2). Accordingly, we are exposed to fluctuations in interest rates on borrowings under our credit facilities. A one hundred basis point change in interest rate on our borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2020 would result in a change in interest expense of approximately $0.8 million annually.
We did not have investments as of December 31, 2020. We do not utilize derivative financial instruments to manage our interest rate risks.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Reference is made to Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of accounting pronouncements that have been recently issued which we have not yet adopted.