ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
The following discussion and analysis presents management’s view of our business, financial condition and overall performance and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes. This information is intended to provide investors with an understanding of our past performance, current financial condition and outlook for the future. Our discussion and analysis includes the following subjects:
•Overview of Business
•Overview of Significant Events
•Impact of COVID-19 and Market Environment
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Contractual Obligations
•Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
•Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates
•Recent Accounting Standards
Overview of Business
We are a publicly traded Delaware limited partnership formed by Cheniere in 2006. We provide clean, secure and affordable LNG to integrated energy companies, utilities and energy trading companies around the world. We aspire to conduct our business in a safe and responsible manner, delivering a reliable, competitive and integrated source of LNG to our customers.
The Sabine Pass LNG terminal is located in Cameron Parish, Louisiana, on the Sabine-Neches Waterway less than four miles from the Gulf Coast. Through our subsidiary, SPL, we are currently operating five natural gas liquefaction Trains and are constructing one additional Train that is expected to be substantially completed in the second half of 2022, for a total production capacity of approximately 30 mtpa of LNG (the “Liquefaction Project”) at the Sabine Pass LNG terminal, one of the largest LNG production facilities in the world. Through our subsidiary, SPLNG, we own and operate regasification facilities at the Sabine Pass LNG terminal, which includes pre-existing infrastructure of five LNG storage tanks with aggregate capacity of approximately 17 Bcfe, two existing marine berths and one under construction that can each accommodate vessels with nominal capacity of up to 266,000 cubic meters and vaporizers with regasification capacity of approximately 4 Bcf/d. We also own a 94-mile pipeline through our subsidiary, CTPL, that interconnects the Sabine Pass LNG terminal with a number of large interstate pipelines.
Overview of Significant Events
Our significant events since January 1, 2020 and through the filing date of this Form 10-K include the following:
Strategic
•In August 2020, SPL entered into an arrangement with subsidiaries of Cheniere to provide the ability, in limited circumstances, to potentially fulfill commitments to LNG buyers in the event operational conditions impact operations at either the Sabine Pass or Corpus Christi liquefaction facilities. The purchase price for such cargoes would be (i) 115% of the applicable natural gas feedstock purchase price or (ii) a free-on-board U.S. Gulf Coast LNG market price, whichever is greater.
Operational
•As of February 19, 2021, more than 1,175 cumulative LNG cargoes totaling over 80 million tonnes of LNG have been produced, loaded and exported from the Liquefaction Project.
Financial
•In February 2021, SPL entered into a note purchase agreement for the sale of approximately $147 million aggregate principal amount of 2.95% Senior Secured Notes due 2037 (the “2.95% SPL 2037 Senior Secured Notes”) on a private placement basis. The 2.95% SPL 2037 Senior Secured Notes are expected to be issued in December 2021, and the net proceeds are expected to be used to refinance a portion of SPL’s outstanding Senior Secured Notes due 2022. The 2.95% SPL 2037 Senior Secured Notes will be fully amortizing, with a weighted average life of over 10 years.
•In July 2020, the board of directors of our general partner confirmed and approved that, following the distribution with respect to the three months ended June 30, 2020, the financial tests required for conversion of our subordinated units were met under the terms of our partnership agreement. Accordingly, effective August 17, 2020, the first business day following the payment of the distribution, all of our subordinated units were automatically converted into common units on a one-for-one basis and the subordination period was terminated.
•In May 2020, SPL issued an aggregate principal amount of $2.0 billion of 4.500% Senior Secured Notes due 2030 (the “2030 SPL Senior Notes”). Net proceeds of the offering, along with available cash, were used to redeem all of SPL’s outstanding 5.625% Senior Secured Notes due 2021 (the “2021 SPL Senior Notes”).
•In March 2020, SPL entered into a $1.2 billion Working Capital Revolving Credit and Letter of Credit Reimbursement Agreement (the “2020 SPL Working Capital Facility”), which refinanced its previous working capital facility, reduced the interest rate and extended the maturity date to March 2025.
•In February 2021, Fitch Ratings upgraded the outlook of SPL’s senior secured notes rating to positive from stable.
Impact of COVID-19 and Market Environment
The LNG business environment in 2020 was impacted by the coronavirus pandemic and its economic ramifications. Lockdown measures across the globe reduced economic activity and resulted in lower energy needs throughout most of the year. However, LNG demand proved relatively resilient as compared to other hydrocarbons, showing an annual gain of approximately 1.4%, or 5 MT, to 364 MT in 2020. While the economic recovery in Asia, and particularly in China, lifted LNG demand in the second half of the year, uncertainty about the pandemic’s track remains the primary near-term risk to LNG trade. A slow return towards normal is expected to occur in the coming months, depending on the speed of vaccine rollout within regions, vaccine effectiveness against mutations and the speed and shape of economic recovery across the LNG importing nations. The continued improvements in global economic indicators seen in the fourth quarter is encouraging especially in China, which represents one of the key countries for LNG demand growth.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, natural gas and LNG spot prices significantly increased in line with the increase in economic activity and with seasonal norms. After falling to all-time lows in the second quarter, global LNG price benchmarks have made an impressive climb and exited the year at the highest levels since March 2019. As an example, the Dutch Title Transfer Facility (“TTF”), a virtual trading point for natural gas in the Netherlands, settled December at $5.08/MMBtu, $3.94/MMBtu higher than its June 2020 settlement. Similarly, the Japan Korea Marker (“JKM”), an LNG benchmark price assessment for spot physical cargoes delivered ex-ship into certain key markets in Asia, settled December at $6.90/MMBtu, which is $4.84/MMBtu higher than its all-time low July 2020 settlement. Record-low winter temperatures, supply outages and transportation bottlenecks contributed to drive JKM prices up to all-time highs by mid-January 2021. In a projection published in July 2020, IHS Markit estimated LNG demand to reach 383 MT in 2021, implying a return to higher growth in 2021.
We have limited exposure to the fluctuations in oil and LNG spot prices as we have contracted a significant portion of our LNG production capacity under long-term sale and purchase agreements linked to a Henry Hub price. For this reason, we do not expect price fluctuations to have a material impact on our forecasted financial results for 2021.
The number of LNG cargoes for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery has reduced from this summer, a sign that the market is continuing to adjust and rebalance toward equilibrium. We do not expect these events to have a material adverse impact on our forecasted financial results for 2021, due to the highly contracted nature of our business and the fact that customers continue to be obligated to pay fixed fees for cargoes with respect to which they have exercised their contractual right to cancel. As such, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $553 million in LNG revenues associated with LNG cargoes for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery. We experienced decreased revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020 associated with LNG cargoes that were scheduled for delivery for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery of such cargoes.
In addition, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Cheniere has modified certain business and workforce practices to protect the safety and welfare of its employees who continue to work at its facilities and offices worldwide, as well as implemented certain mitigation efforts to ensure business continuity. In March 2020, Cheniere began consulting with a medical advisor, and implemented social distancing through revised shift schedules, work from home policies and designated remote work locations where appropriate, restricted non-essential business travel and began requiring self-screening for employees and contractors. In April 2020, Cheniere began providing temporary housing for its workforce for our facilities, implemented temperature testing, incorporated medical and social workers to support employees, implemented prior self-isolation and screening for temporary housing and implemented marine operations with zero contact during loading activities. These measures have resulted in increased costs. While response measures continue to evolve and in most cases have moderated or ceased, we expect Cheniere to incur incremental operating costs associated with business continuity and protection of its workforce until the risks associated with the pandemic diminish. We have incurred approximately $36 million of such costs during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
The following charts summarize the number of Trains that were in operation during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 and total revenues and total LNG volumes loaded (including both operational and commissioning volumes) for the respective periods:
(1) The year ended December 31, 2020 excludes 17 TBtu that was loaded at our affiliate’s facility.
Our consolidated net income was $1.2 billion, or $2.32 per common unit (basic and diluted), for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.2 billion, or $2.25 per common unit (basic and diluted), for the year ended December 31, 2019. Although net income stayed relatively consistent between the periods, there were increased margins due to lower pricing of natural gas feedstock and additional LNG volume available to be sold from an additional Train that has reached substantial completion between the periods, a portion of which the customers elected not to take delivery but were required to pay a fixed fee with respect to the contracted volumes, partially offset by increases in (1) loss on modification or extinguishment of debt incurred in conjunction with the refinancing of the 2021 SPL Senior Notes, (2) interest expense, net of capitalized interest and (3) depreciation and amortization expense.
Our consolidated net income was $1.3 billion, or $2.51 per common unit (basic and diluted), in the year ended December 31, 2018. The $99 million decrease in net income for the year ended December 31, 2019 from the comparable 2018 period was primarily a result of an increase in (1) operating and maintenance expense, (2) interest expense, net of capitalized interest and (3) depreciation and amortization expense, partially offset by increased gross margins due to higher volumes of LNG sold but decreased pricing on LNG.
We enter into derivative instruments to manage our exposure to commodity-related marketing and price risk. Derivative instruments are reported at fair value on our Consolidated Financial Statements. In some cases, the underlying transactions economically hedged receive accrual accounting treatment, whereby revenues and expenses are recognized only upon delivery, receipt or realization of the underlying transaction. Because the recognition of derivative instruments at fair value has the effect of recognizing gains or losses relating to future period exposure, use of derivative instruments may increase the volatility of our results of operations based on changes in market pricing, counterparty credit risk and other relevant factors.
Revenues
(1) Excludes volume associated with cargoes for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery and includes volume that was loaded at our affiliate’s facility.
2020 vs. 2019 and 2019 vs. 2018
Total revenues decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable 2019 period, primarily as a result of decreased volumes recognized as revenues between the periods due to LNG cargoes for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery, although the decrease due to volume was partially offset by the revenues associated with such cargoes. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $553 million in such revenues. LNG revenues-affiliate also decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable periods due to less sales made to Cheniere Marketing at lower pricing. The increase in LNG revenues during the year ended December 31, 2019 from the comparable 2018 period was primarily attributable to the increased volume of LNG sold following the achievement of substantial completion of the Trains, partially offset by decreased revenues per MMBtu. We expect our LNG revenues to increase in the future upon Train 6 of the Liquefaction Project becoming operational.
Prior to substantial completion of a Train, amounts received from the sale of commissioning cargoes from that Train are offset against LNG terminal construction-in-process, because these amounts are earned or loaded during the testing phase for the construction of that Train. During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we realized offsets to LNG terminal costs of $48 million corresponding to 10 TBtu of LNG and $94 million corresponding to 13 TBtu of LNG, respectively, that were related to the sale of commissioning cargoes. We did not realize any offsets to LNG terminal costs during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Also included in LNG revenues are sales of unutilized natural gas procured for the liquefaction process and gains and losses from derivative instruments, which include the realized value associated with a portion of derivative instruments that settle through physical delivery. We recognized revenues of $255 million, $150 million and $151 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to these transactions.
Operating costs and expenses
2020 vs. 2019 and 2019 vs. 2018
Our total operating costs and expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of decreased cost of sales from lower volumes and pricing of natural gas feedstock. Total operating costs and expenses increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 from the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily as a result of additional Trains that were operating between the periods. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we further incurred increased TUA reservation charges paid to SPLNG and to Total Gas & Power North America, Inc. (“Total”) from payments under the partial TUA assignment agreement and increased third-party service and maintenance costs from turnaround and related activities at the Liquefaction Project.
Cost of sales includes costs incurred directly for the production and delivery of LNG from the Liquefaction Project, to the extent those costs are not utilized for the commissioning process. Cost of sales decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable period in 2019 primarily due to decreases in both the volumes and pricing of natural gas feedstock. Partially offsetting these decreases was increased losses from commodity derivatives to secure natural gas feedstock for the Liquefaction Project, primarily due to an unfavorable shift in long-term forward prices relative to our hedged position and increases in costs associated with a portion of derivative instruments that settle through physical delivery. Cost of sales decreased during the year ended December 31, 2019 from the comparable period in 2018 due to increased derivative gains from an increase in fair value of the derivatives associated with economic hedges to secure natural gas feedstock for the Liquefaction Project, primarily due to a favorable shift in long-term forward prices. Partially offsetting this increase was a decrease in pricing of natural gas feedstock between the years, which in turn was partially offset by increased volumes of natural gas feedstock for our LNG sales as a result of substantial completion of Train 5 of the Liquefaction Project. Cost of sales also includes variable transportation and storage costs and other costs to convert natural gas into LNG.
Cost of sales-affiliate increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 for the cost of cargoes procured from our affiliate to fulfill our commitments to our long-term customers during operational interruption, such as the one we experienced during the shutdown of the Liquefaction Project during Hurricane Laura in September 2020.
Operating and maintenance expense (including affiliate) primarily includes costs associated with operating and maintaining the Liquefaction Project. The increase in operating and maintenance expense (including affiliates) during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable 2019 and 2018 periods was primarily related to increased natural gas transportation and storage capacity demand charges paid to third parties from operating Train 5 of the Liquefaction Project following its substantial completion and increased TUA reservation charges due to Total under the partial TUA assignment agreement. In addition, operating and maintenance expense (including affiliate) was higher in 2019 due to increase in third-party service and maintenance costs associated with turnaround activities at the Liquefaction Project during 2019 and higher in 2020 due to costs incurred in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as further described above in Impact of COVID-19 and Market Environment. Operating and maintenance expense (including affiliates) also includes payroll and benefit costs of operations personnel, insurance and regulatory costs and other operating costs.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as a result of an increase in operational Trains, as the related assets began depreciating upon reaching substantial completion.
Other expense
2020 vs. 2019 and 2019 vs. 2018
Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable period in 2019 primarily as a result of higher interest costs as a result of the issuance of the $1.5 billion of 4.500% Senior Notes due 2029 (the “2029 CQP Senior Notes”) in September 2019. This increase was partially offset by an increase in the portion of total interest costs that was eligible for capitalization as the construction of Train 6 commenced in May 2019. Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 from the comparable 2018 period primarily as a result of a decrease in the portion of total interest costs that could be capitalized as additional Trains of the Liquefaction Project completed construction between the periods. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we incurred $1,005 million, $972 million and $936 million of total interest cost, respectively, of which we capitalized $96 million, $87 million and $203 million, respectively, which was primarily related to interest costs incurred to construct the remaining assets of the Liquefaction Project.
Loss on modification or extinguishment of debt increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable 2019 and 2018 periods. The loss on modification or extinguishment of debt recognized in each of the years included the incurrence fees paid to lenders, third party fees and write off of unamortized debt issuance costs recognized upon refinancing our credit facilities with senior notes, refinancing of senior notes or upon amendment and restatement of our credit facilities.
Derivative gain, net decreased during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, as we no longer held interest rate swaps used to hedge a portion of the variable interest payments on our credit facilities, as they were terminated in October 2018.
Other expense, net decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparable periods in 2019 and 2018, due to a decrease in interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table provides a summary of our liquidity position at December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
CQP Senior Notes
The $1.5 billion of 5.250% Senior Notes due 2025 (the “2025 CQP Senior Notes”), $1.1 billion of 5.625% Senior Notes due 2026 (the “2026 CQP Senior Notes”) and the 2029 CQP Senior Notes (collectively, the “CQP Senior Notes”), are jointly and severally guaranteed by each of our subsidiaries other than SPL and, subject to certain conditions governing its guarantee, Sabine Pass LP (each a “Guarantor” and collectively, the “CQP Guarantors”). The CQP Senior Notes are governed by the same base indenture (the “CQP Base Indenture”). The 2025 CQP Senior Notes are further governed by the First Supplemental Indenture, the 2026 CQP Senior Notes are further governed by the Second Supplemental Indenture and the 2029 CQP Senior Notes are further governed by the Third Supplemental Indenture. The indentures governing the CQP Senior Notes contain terms and events of default and certain covenants that, among other things, limit our ability and the CQP Guarantors’ ability to incur liens and sell assets, enter into transactions with affiliates, enter into sale-leaseback transactions and consolidate, merge or sell, lease or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of the applicable entity’s properties or assets.
At any time prior to October 1, 2021 for the 2026 CQP Senior Notes and October 1, 2024 for the 2029 CQP Senior Notes, we may redeem all or a part of the applicable CQP Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount of the CQP Senior Notes redeemed, plus the “applicable premium” set forth in the respective indentures governing the CQP Senior Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption. In addition, at any time prior to October 1, 2021 for the 2026 CQP Senior Notes and October 1, 2024 for the 2029 CQP Senior Notes, we may redeem up to 35% of the aggregate principal amount of the CQP Senior Notes with an amount of cash not greater than the net cash proceeds from certain equity offerings at a redemption price equal to 105.625% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2026 CQP Senior Notes and 104.5% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2029 CQP Senior Notes redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption. We also may at any time through the maturity date of October 1, 2025 for the 2025 CQP Senior Notes, October 1, 2021 through the maturity date of October 1, 2026 for the 2026 CQP Senior Notes and October 1, 2024 through the maturity date of October 1, 2029 for the 2029 CQP Senior Notes, redeem the CQP Senior Notes, in whole or in part, at the redemption prices set forth in the respective indentures governing the CQP Senior Notes.
The CQP Senior Notes are our senior obligations, ranking equally in right of payment with our other existing and future unsubordinated debt and senior to any of our future subordinated debt. In the event that the aggregate amount of our secured indebtedness and the secured indebtedness of the CQP Guarantors (other than the CQP Senior Notes or any other series of notes issued under the CQP Base Indenture) outstanding at any one time exceeds the greater of (1) $1.5 billion and (2) 10% of net tangible assets, the CQP Senior Notes will be secured to the same extent as such obligations under the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities. The obligations under the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities are secured on a first-priority basis (subject to permitted encumbrances) with liens on substantially all our existing and future tangible and intangible assets and our rights and the rights of the CQP Guarantors and equity interests in the CQP Guarantors (except, in each case, for certain excluded properties set forth in the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities). The liens securing the CQP Senior Notes, if applicable, will be shared equally and ratably (subject to permitted liens) with the holders of other senior secured obligations, which include the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities obligations and any future additional senior secured debt obligations.
The CQP Guarantors’ guarantees are full and unconditional, subject to certain release provisions including (1) the sale, disposition or transfer (by merger, consolidation or otherwise) of the capital stock or all or substantially all of the assets of the CQP Guarantors, (2) upon the liquidation or dissolution of a Guarantor, (3) following the release of a Guarantor from its guarantee obligations and (4) upon the legal defeasance or satisfaction and discharge of obligations under the indenture governing the CQP Senior Notes. In the event of a default in payment of the principal or interest by us, whether at maturity of the CQP Senior Notes or by declaration of acceleration, call for redemption or otherwise, legal proceedings may be instituted against the CQP Guarantors to enforce the guarantee.
The rights of holders of the CQP Senior Notes against the CQP Guarantors may be limited under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code or state fraudulent transfer or conveyance law. Each guarantee contains a provision intended to limit the Guarantor’s liability to the maximum amount that it could incur without causing the incurrence of obligations under its guarantee to be a fraudulent conveyance or transfer under U.S. federal or state law. However, there can be no assurance as to what standard a court will apply in making a determination of the maximum liability of the CQP Guarantors. Moreover, this provision may not be effective to protect the guarantee from being voided under fraudulent conveyance laws. There is a possibility that the entire guarantee may be set aside, in which case the entire liability may be extinguished.
The following tables include summarized financial information of Cheniere Partners (“Parent Issuer”), and the CQP Guarantors (together with the Parent Issuer, the “Obligor Group”) on a combined basis. Investments in and equity in the
earnings of SPL and, subject to certain conditions governing its guarantee, Sabine Pass LP (collectively with SPL, the “Non-Guarantors”), which are not currently members of the Obligor Group, have been excluded. Intercompany balances and transactions between entities in the Obligor Group have been eliminated. Although the creditors of the Obligor Group have no claim against the Non-Guarantors, the Obligor Group may gain access to the assets of the Non-Guarantors upon bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization of the Non-Guarantors due to its investment in these entities. However, such claims to the assets of the Non-Guarantors would be subordinated to the any claims by the Non-Guarantors’ creditors, including trade creditors. See Sabine Pass LNG Terminal-SPL Senior Notes for additional detail on restrictions of Non-Guarantor debt.
2019 CQP Credit Facilities
In May 2019, we entered into the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities, which consisted of the $750 million term loan (“CQP Term Facility”), which was prepaid and terminated upon issuance of the 2029 CQP Senior Notes in September 2019, and the $750 million revolving credit facility (“CQP Revolving Facility”). Borrowings under the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities will be used to fund the development and construction of Train 6 of the Liquefaction Project and for general corporate purposes,
subject to a sublimit, and the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities are also available for the issuance of letters of credit. As of both December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $750 million of available commitments and no letters of credit issued or loans outstanding under the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities.
The 2019 CQP Credit Facilities mature on May 29, 2024. Any outstanding balance may be repaid, in whole or in part, at any time without premium or penalty, except for interest rate breakage costs. The 2019 CQP Credit Facilities contain conditions precedent for extensions of credit, as well as customary affirmative and negative covenants, and limit our ability to make restricted payments, including distributions, to once per fiscal quarter and one true-up per fiscal quarter as long as certain conditions are satisfied.
The 2019 CQP Credit Facilities are unconditionally guaranteed and secured by a first priority lien (subject to permitted encumbrances) on substantially all of our and the CQP Guarantors’ existing and future tangible and intangible assets and rights and equity interests in the CQP Guarantors (except, in each case, for certain excluded properties set forth in the 2019 CQP Credit Facilities).
Sabine Pass LNG Terminal
Liquefaction Facilities
The Liquefaction Project is one of the largest LNG production facilities in the world. We are currently operating five Trains and two marine berths at the Liquefaction Project, and are constructing one additional Train that is expected to be substantially completed in the second half of 2022, and a third marine berth. We have received authorization from the FERC to site, construct and operate Trains 1 through 6, as well as for the construction of the third marine berth. We have achieved substantial completion of the first five Trains of the Liquefaction Project and commenced commercial operating activities for each Train at various times starting in May 2016. The following table summarizes the project completion and construction status of Train 6 of the Liquefaction Project as of December 31, 2020:
The following orders have been issued by the DOE authorizing the export of domestically produced LNG by vessel from the Sabine Pass LNG terminal:
•Trains 1 through 4-FTA countries and non-FTA countries through December 31, 2050, in an amount up to a combined total of the equivalent of 16 mtpa (approximately 803 Bcf/yr of natural gas).
•Trains 1 through 4-FTA countries and non-FTA countries through December 31, 2050, in an amount up to a combined total of the equivalent of approximately 203 Bcf/yr of natural gas (approximately 4 mtpa).
•Trains 5 and 6-FTA countries and non-FTA countries through December 31, 2050, in an amount up to a combined total of 503.3 Bcf/yr of natural gas (approximately 10 mtpa).
In December 2020, the DOE announced a new policy in which it would no longer issue short-term export authorizations separately from long-term authorizations. Accordingly, the DOE amended each of SPL’s long-term authorizations to include short-term export authority, and vacated the short-term orders.
An application was filed in September 2019 seeking authorization to make additional exports from the Liquefaction Project to FTA countries for a 25-year term and to non-FTA countries for a 20-year term in an amount up to the equivalent of approximately 153 Bcf/yr of natural gas, for a total Liquefaction Project export capacity of approximately 1,662 Bcf/yr. The terms of the authorizations are requested to commence on the date of first commercial export from the Liquefaction Project of the volumes contemplated in the application. In April 2020, the DOE issued an order authorizing SPL to export to FTA countries related to this application, for which the term was subsequently extended through December 31, 2050, but has not yet
issued an order authorizing SPL to export to non-FTA countries for the corresponding LNG volume. A corresponding application for authorization to increase the total LNG production capacity of the Liquefaction Project from the currently authorized level to approximately 1,662 Bcf/yr was also submitted to the FERC and is currently pending.
Customers
SPL has entered into fixed price long-term SPAs generally with terms of 20 years (plus extension rights) and with a weighted average remaining contract length of approximately 17 years (plus extension rights) with eight third parties for Trains 1 through 6 of the Liquefaction Project to make available an aggregate amount of LNG that is approximately 75% of the total production capacity from these Trains, potentially increasing up to approximately 85% after giving effect to an SPA that Cheniere has committed to provide to us. Under these SPAs, the customers will purchase LNG from SPL for a price consisting of a fixed fee per MMBtu of LNG (a portion of which is subject to annual adjustment for inflation) plus a variable fee per MMBtu of LNG generally equal to approximately 115% of Henry Hub. The customers may elect to cancel or suspend deliveries of LNG cargoes, with advance notice as governed by each respective SPA, in which case the customers would still be required to pay the fixed fee with respect to the contracted volumes that are not delivered as a result of such cancellation or suspension. We refer to the fee component that is applicable regardless of a cancellation or suspension of LNG cargo deliveries under the SPAs as the fixed fee component of the price under SPL’s SPAs. We refer to the fee component that is applicable only in connection with LNG cargo deliveries as the variable fee component of the price under SPL’s SPAs. The variable fees under SPL’s SPAs were generally sized at the time of entry into each SPA with the intent to cover the costs of gas purchases and transportation and liquefaction fuel to produce the LNG to be sold under each such SPA. The SPAs and contracted volumes to be made available under the SPAs are not tied to a specific Train; however, the term of each SPA generally commences upon the date of first commercial delivery of a specified Train.
In aggregate, the annual fixed fee portion to be paid by the third-party SPA customers is approximately $2.9 billion for Trains 1 through 5. After giving effect to an SPA that Cheniere has committed to provide to SPL, the annual fixed fee portion to be paid by the third-party SPA customers would increase to at least $3.3 billion, which is expected to occur upon the date of first commercial delivery of Train 6.
In addition, Cheniere Marketing has agreements with SPL to purchase: (1) at Cheniere Marketing’s option, any LNG produced by SPL in excess of that required for other customers and (2) up to 30 cargoes scheduled for delivery in 2021 at a price of 115% of Henry Hub plus $0.728 per MMBtu.
Natural Gas Transportation, Storage and Supply
To ensure SPL is able to transport adequate natural gas feedstock to the Sabine Pass LNG terminal, it has entered into transportation precedent and other agreements to secure firm pipeline transportation capacity with CTPL and third-party pipeline companies. SPL has entered into firm storage services agreements with third parties to assist in managing variability in natural gas needs for the Liquefaction Project. SPL has also entered into enabling agreements and long-term natural gas supply contracts with third parties in order to secure natural gas feedstock for the Liquefaction Project. As of December 31, 2020, SPL had secured up to approximately 4,950 TBtu of natural gas feedstock through long-term and short-term natural gas supply contracts with remaining terms that range up to 10 years, a portion of which is subject to conditions precedent.
Construction
SPL entered into lump sum turnkey contracts with Bechtel Oil, Gas and Chemicals, Inc. (“Bechtel”) for the engineering, procurement and construction of Trains 1 through 6 of the Liquefaction Project, under which Bechtel charges a lump sum for all work performed and generally bears project cost, schedule and performance risks unless certain specified events occur, in which case Bechtel may cause SPL to enter into a change order, or SPL agrees with Bechtel to a change order.
The total contract price of the EPC contract for Train 6 of the Liquefaction Project is approximately $2.5 billion, including estimated costs for the third marine berth that is currently under construction. As of December 31, 2020, we have incurred $1.9 billion under this contract.
Regasification Facilities
The Sabine Pass LNG terminal has operational regasification capacity of approximately 4 Bcf/d and aggregate LNG storage capacity of approximately 17 Bcfe. Approximately 2 Bcf/d of the regasification capacity at the Sabine Pass LNG terminal has been reserved under two long-term third-party TUAs, under which SPLNG’s customers are required to pay fixed monthly fees, whether or not they use the LNG terminal. Each of Total and Chevron U.S.A. Inc. (“Chevron”) has reserved approximately 1 Bcf/d of regasification capacity and is obligated to make monthly capacity payments to SPLNG aggregating approximately $125 million annually, prior to inflation adjustments, for 20 years that commenced in 2009. Total S.A. has guaranteed Total’s obligations under its TUA up to $2.5 billion, subject to certain exceptions, and Chevron Corporation has guaranteed Chevron’s obligations under its TUA up to 80% of the fees payable by Chevron.
The remaining approximately 2 Bcf/d of capacity has been reserved under a TUA by SPL. SPL is obligated to make monthly capacity payments to SPLNG aggregating approximately $250 million annually, prior to inflation adjustments, continuing until at least May 2036. SPL entered into a partial TUA assignment agreement with Total, whereby upon substantial completion of Train 5 of the Liquefaction Project, SPL gained access to substantially all of Total’s capacity and other services provided under Total’s TUA with SPLNG. This agreement provides SPL with additional berthing and storage capacity at the Sabine Pass LNG terminal that may be used to provide increased flexibility in managing LNG cargo loading and unloading activity, permit SPL to more flexibly manage its LNG storage capacity and accommodate the development of Train 6. Notwithstanding any arrangements between Total and SPL, payments required to be made by Total to SPLNG will continue to be made by Total to SPLNG in accordance with its TUA. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, SPL recorded $129 million, $104 million and $30 million, respectively, as operating and maintenance expense under this partial TUA assignment agreement.
Under each of these TUAs, SPLNG is entitled to retain 2% of the LNG delivered to the Sabine Pass LNG terminal.
Capital Resources
We currently expect that SPL’s capital resources requirements with respect to the Liquefaction Project will be financed through project debt and borrowings, cash flows under the SPAs and equity contributions from us. We believe that with the net proceeds of borrowings, available commitments under the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility, 2019 CQP Credit Facilities, cash flows from operations and equity contributions from us, SPL will have adequate financial resources available to meet its currently anticipated capital, operating and debt service requirements with respect to Trains 1 through 6 of the Liquefaction Project. Additionally, SPLNG generates cash flows from the TUAs, as discussed above.
The following table provides a summary of our capital resources from borrowings and available commitments for the Sabine Pass LNG Terminal, excluding equity contributions to our subsidiaries and cash flows from operations (as described in Sources and Uses of Cash), at December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
(1) Includes SPL’s 2021 SPL Senior Notes, 6.25% Senior Secured Notes due 2022, 5.625% Senior Secured Notes due 2023, 5.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2024, 5.625% Senior Secured Notes due 2025, 5.875% Senior Secured Notes due 2026 (the “2026 SPL Senior Notes”), 5.00% Senior Secured Notes due 2027 (the “2027 SPL Senior Notes”), 4.200% Senior Secured Notes due 2028 (the “2028 SPL Senior Notes”), 2030 SPL Senior Notes and 5.00% Senior Secured Notes due 2037 (the “2037 SPL Senior Notes”) (collectively, the “SPL Senior Notes”) and our CQP Senior Notes.
(2) Includes outstanding balances under the 2015 SPL Working Capital Facility, 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility and 2019 CQP Credit Facilities, inclusive of any portion of the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility and 2019 CQP Credit Facilities that may be used for general corporate purposes.
(3) Consists of 2015 SPL Working Capital Facility, 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility and 2019 CQP Credit Facilities.
(4) Does not include equity contributions that may be available from Cheniere’s borrowings and available cash and cash equivalents.
SPL Senior Notes
The SPL Senior Notes are governed by a common indenture (the “SPL Indenture”) and the terms of the 2037 SPL Senior Notes are governed by a separate indenture (the “2037 SPL Senior Notes Indenture”). Both the SPL Indenture and the 2037 SPL Senior Notes Indenture contain terms and events of default and certain covenants that, among other things, limit SPL’s ability and the ability of SPL’s restricted subsidiaries to incur additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock, make certain investments or pay dividends or distributions on capital stock or subordinated indebtedness or purchase, redeem or retire capital stock, sell or transfer assets, including capital stock of SPL’s restricted subsidiaries, restrict dividends or other payments by restricted subsidiaries, incur liens, enter into transactions with affiliates, dissolve, liquidate, consolidate, merge, sell or lease all or substantially all of SPL’s assets and enter into certain LNG sales contracts. Subject to permitted liens, the SPL Senior Notes are secured on a pari passu first-priority basis by a security interest in all of the membership interests in SPL and substantially all of SPL’s assets. SPL may not make any distributions until, among other requirements, deposits are made into debt service reserve accounts as required and a debt service coverage ratio test of 1.25:1.00 is satisfied.
At any time prior to three months before the respective dates of maturity for each series of the SPL Senior Notes (except for the 2026 SPL Senior Notes, 2027 SPL Senior Notes, 2028 SPL Senior Notes, 2030 SPL Senior Notes and 2037 SPL Senior Notes, in which case the time period is six months before the respective dates of maturity), SPL may redeem all or part of such series of the SPL Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to the ‘make-whole’ price (except for the 2037 SPL Senior Notes, in which case the redemption price is equal to the “optional redemption” price) set forth in the respective indentures governing the SPL Senior Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption. SPL may also, at any time within three months of the respective maturity dates for each series of the SPL Senior Notes (except for the 2026 SPL Senior Notes, 2027 SPL Senior Notes, 2028 SPL Senior Notes, 2030 SPL Senior Notes and 2037 SPL Senior Notes, in which case the time period is within six months of the respective dates of maturity), redeem all or part of such series of the SPL Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of such series of the SPL Senior Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption.
Both the 2037 SPL Senior Notes Indenture and the SPL Indenture include restrictive covenants. SPL may incur additional indebtedness in the future, including by issuing additional notes, and such indebtedness could be at higher interest rates and have different maturity dates and more restrictive covenants than the current outstanding indebtedness of SPL, including the SPL Senior Notes and the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility. Semi-annual principal payments for the 2037 SPL Senior Notes are due on March 15 and September 15 of each year beginning September 15, 2025 and are fully amortizing according to a fixed sculpted amortization schedule.
2015 SPL Working Capital Facility
In March 2020, SPL terminated the remaining commitments under the 2015 SPL Working Capital Facility. As of December 31, 2019, SPL had $786 million of available commitments, $414 million aggregate amount of issued letters of credit and no outstanding borrowings under the 2015 SPL Working Capital Facility.
2020 SPL Working Capital Facility
In March 2020, SPL entered into the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility with aggregate commitments of $1.2 billion, which replaced the 2015 SPL Working Capital Facility. The 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility is intended to be used for loans to SPL, swing line loans to SPL and the issuance of letters of credit on behalf of SPL, primarily for (1) the refinancing of the 2015 SPL Working Capital Facility, (2) fees and expenses related to the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility, (3) SPL and its future subsidiaries’ gas purchase obligations and (4) SPL and certain of its future subsidiaries’ general corporate purposes. SPL may, from time to time, request increases in the commitments under the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility of up to $800 million. As of December 31, 2020, SPL had $787 million of available commitments, $413 million aggregate amount of issued letters of credit and no outstanding borrowings under the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility.
The 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility matures on March 19, 2025, but may be extended with consent of the lenders. The 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility provides for mandatory prepayments under customary circumstances.
The 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility contains customary conditions precedent for extensions of credit, as well as customary affirmative and negative covenants. SPL is restricted from making certain distributions under agreements governing its indebtedness generally until, among other requirements, satisfaction of a 12-month forward-looking and backward-looking 1.25:1.00 debt service reserve ratio test. The obligations of SPL under the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility are secured by substantially all of the assets of SPL as well as a pledge of all of the membership interests in SPL and certain future subsidiaries of SPL on a pari passu basis by a first priority lien with the SPL Senior Notes.
Restrictive Debt Covenants
As of December 31, 2020, we and SPL were in compliance with all covenants related to our respective debt agreements.
LIBOR
The use of LIBOR is expected to be phased out by the end of 2021. It is currently unclear whether LIBOR will be utilized beyond that date or whether it will be replaced by a particular rate. We intend to continue working with our lenders to pursue any amendments to our debt agreements that are currently subject to LIBOR and will continue to monitor, assess and plan for the phase out of LIBOR.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following table summarizes the sources and uses of our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in millions). The table presents capital expenditures on a cash basis; therefore, these amounts differ from the amounts of capital expenditures, including accruals, which are referred to elsewhere in this report. Additional discussion of these items follows the table.
Operating Cash Flows
Our operating cash net inflows during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $1,751 million, $1,547 million and $1,874 million, respectively. The $204 million increase in operating cash inflows in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily related to decreased operating costs and expenses. The $327 million decrease in operating cash inflows in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily related to increased operating costs and expenses, which were partially offset by increased cash receipts from the sale of LNG cargoes, as a result of an additional Train that was operating at the Liquefaction Project in 2019.
Proceeds from Issuance of Debt, Repayments of Debt, Debt Issuance and Other Financing Costs and Debt Extinguishment Costs
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued an aggregate principal amount of $2.0 billion of the 2030 SPL Senior Notes, which was used to redeem all of the outstanding 2021 SPL Senior Notes. We incurred $35 million of debt issuance costs primarily related to up-front fees paid and $39 million of debt extinguishment costs upon the closing of this transaction.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we issued an aggregate principal amount of $1.5 billion in senior notes to prepay the outstanding indebtedness under our credit facilities. Borrowings of $730 million under our credit facilities were used for funding future capital expenditures in connection with the construction costs for the Liquefaction Project. We incurred $35 million of debt issuance costs primarily related to up-front fees paid and $4 million of debt extinguishment costs upon the closing of these transactions.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we issued an aggregate principal amount of $1.1 billion in senior notes to prepay the outstanding indebtedness under our credit facilities. We incurred $8 million of debt issuance costs primarily related to up-front fees paid and $7 million of debt extinguishment costs upon the closing of this transaction.
Property, Plant and Equipment, net
Cash outflows for property, plant and equipment were primarily for the construction costs for the Liquefaction Project. These costs are capitalized as construction-in-process until achievement of substantial completion.
Cash Distributions to Unitholders
Our partnership agreement requires that, within 45 days after the end of each quarter, we distribute all of our available cash (as defined in our partnership agreement). Our available cash is our cash on hand at the end of a quarter less the amount of any reserves established by our general partner. All distributions paid to date have been made from accumulated operating surplus. The following provides a summary of distributions paid by us during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
On January 27, 2021, we declared a $0.655 distribution per common unit and the related distribution to our general partner and incentive distribution right holders that was paid on February 12, 2021 to unitholders of record as of February 8, 2021 for the period from October 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020.
In July 2020, the board of directors of our general partner confirmed and approved that, following the distribution with respect to the three months ended June 30, 2020, the financial tests required for conversion of our subordinated units were met under the terms of our partnership agreement. Accordingly, effective August 17, 2020, the first business day following the
payment of the distribution, all of our subordinated units were automatically converted into common units on a one-for-one basis and the subordination period was terminated.
Contractual Obligations
We are committed to make cash payments in the future pursuant to certain of our contracts. The following table summarizes certain contractual obligations in place as of December 31, 2020 (in millions):
(1)Agreements in force as of December 31, 2020 that have terms dependent on project milestone dates are based on the estimated dates as of December 31, 2020.
(2)Based on the total debt balance, scheduled maturities and interest rates in effect at December 31, 2020. A discussion of our debt obligations can be found in Note 11-Debt of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(3)Operating lease obligations primarily consist of land sites related to the Sabine Pass LNG terminal as further discussed in Note 12-Leases of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(4)Purchase obligations consist of agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding that specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased. We include only contracts for which conditions precedent have been met. As project milestones and other conditions precedent are achieved, our obligations are expected to increase accordingly. We include contracts for which we have an early termination option if the option is not expected to be exercised.
(5)Construction obligations primarily consist of the estimated remaining cost pursuant to our EPC contracts as of December 31, 2020 for projects with respect to which we have made an FID to commence construction. A discussion of these obligations can be found at Note 16-Commitments and Contingencies of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(6)Pricing of natural gas supply agreements is based on estimated forward prices and basis spreads as of December 31, 2020. Natural gas transportation and storage service agreements includes $366 million in payments under agreements with a related party as discussed in Note 14-Related Party Transactions of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(7)Other purchase obligations primarily relate to payments under SPL’s partial TUA assignment agreement with Total as discussed in Note 13-Revenues from Contracts with Customers of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(8)Other non-current liabilities-affiliate primarily relate to obligations to Cheniere Marketing related to the Cooperative Endeavor Agreement, as discussed in Note 14-Related Party Transactions of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
In addition, as of December 31, 2020, we had $413 million aggregate amount of issued letters of credit under our credit facilities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no transactions that met the definition of off-balance sheet arrangements that may have a current or future material effect on our consolidated financial position or operating results.
Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes. Management evaluates its estimates and related assumptions regularly, including those related to the valuation of derivative instruments. Changes in facts and circumstances or additional information may result in revised estimates, and actual results may differ from these estimates. Management considers the following to be its most critical accounting estimates that involve significant judgment.
Fair Value of Derivative Instruments
All derivative instruments, other than those that satisfy specific exceptions, are recorded at fair value. We record changes in the fair value of our derivative positions based on the value for which the derivative instrument could be exchanged between willing parties. If market quotes are not available to estimate fair value, management’s best estimate of fair value is based on the quoted market price of derivatives with similar characteristics or determined through industry-standard valuation approaches. Such evaluations may involve significant judgment and the results are based on expected future events or conditions, particularly for those valuations using inputs unobservable in the market.
Our derivative instruments consist of financial commodity derivative contracts transacted in an over-the-counter market and physical commodity contracts. Valuation of our financial commodity derivative contracts is determined using observable commodity price curves and other relevant data.
Valuation of our physical commodity contracts is predominantly driven by observable and unobservable market commodity prices and, as applicable to our natural gas supply contracts, our assessment of the associated events deriving fair value, including evaluating whether the respective market is available as pipeline infrastructure is developed. The fair value of our physical commodity contracts incorporates risk premiums related to the satisfaction of conditions precedent, such as completion and placement into service of relevant pipeline infrastructure to accommodate marketable physical gas flow. A portion of our physical commodity contracts require us to make critical accounting estimates that involve significant judgment, as the fair value is developed through the use of internal models which incorporate significant unobservable inputs. In instances where observable data is unavailable, consideration is given to the assumptions that market participants would use in valuing the asset or liability. This includes assumptions about market risks, such as future Henry Hub basis spread for unobservable periods, liquidity, volatility and contract duration.
Gains and losses on derivative instruments are recognized in earnings. The ultimate fair value of our derivative instruments is uncertain, and we believe that it is reasonably possible that a change in the estimated fair value could occur in the near future as interest rates and commodity prices change.
Recent Accounting Standards
For descriptions of recently issued accounting standards, see Note 3-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.