Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and the related notes and the other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly those under “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a Phase 3, clinical-stage pharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of novel therapeutics that target the endocannabinoid system in the fields of autoimmunity, fibrosis, and cancer. We are developing a diverse pipeline of drug candidates across several distinct programs, including small molecules as well as biologics, as well as evaluating potential external candidates complimentary to our existing programs.
Our pipeline includes the following programs:
1. Lenabasum, a novel, synthetic, oral, CB2 agonist designed to resolve chronic inflammation, limit fibrosis and support tissue repair. Lenabasum is in clinical development for treatment of autoimmune diseases. We are currently evaluating lenabasum for safety and efficacy in a Phase 3 study in dermatomyositis, as well as a Phase 2 study in SLE”.
2. Peripherally-restricted CB1 inverse agonists that are designed to normalize metabolic abnormalities or limit inflammation and fibrosis. We are currently evaluating these compounds in pre-clinical studies for the treatment of metabolic disorders and for fibrotic disorders. We are evaluating certain compounds as potential candidates for further clinical development.
3. Novel CB2 agonists that are designed to limit cancer cell growth directly and reduce the fibrosis and immunosuppression in the tumor microenvironment that are associated with tumor growth, metastasis, and resistance to treatment with drugs such as checkpoint inhibitors. We are currently evaluating these compounds in pre-clinical studies for the treatment of cancer, in combination with other cancer therapies such as checkpoint inhibitors. We are evaluating certain compounds as potential candidates for further clinical development.
Lenabasum selectively binds to CB2, which is preferentially expressed on activated immune cells, fibroblasts and other cell types, including muscle and bone cells. Lenabasum reduces inflammation and limits fibrosis, without immunosuppression. Lenabasum inhibits production of inflammatory cytokines and eicosanoids and stimulates the production of mediators (Specialized Pro-resolving Lipid Mediators) that resolve inflammation. It inhibits transformation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts and production of fibrotic growth factors and collagen. These biologic effects have been demonstrated in cells, animal models, and humans.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, has granted lenabasum Orphan Drug Designation as well as Fast Track Status for systemic sclerosis and cystic fibrosis, and Orphan Drug Designation for dermatomyositis. The European Medicines Authority, or EMA, has granted lenabasum Orphan Drug Designation for systemic sclerosis, cystic fibrosis, and dermatomyositis.
In 2020, we announced that lenabasum did not meet the primary endpoints in our RESOLVE-1 Phase 3 study of lenabasum for the treatment of systemic sclerosis or our Phase 2b study of lenabasum for the treatment of cystic fibrosis. Currently, no patients with systemic sclerosis or cystic fibrosis are being treated with lenabasum. We are preparing the data from our RESOLVE-1 Study for publication and will decide on the next steps in the development process for systemic sclerosis pending the outcome of our Phase 3 study of lenabasum for the treatment of dermatomyositis (the “DETERMINE Study”). We are preparing the data from our Phase 2b study of lenabasum for the treatment of cystic fibrosis for publication, but currently we do not have plans for additional clinical studies in cystic fibrosis.
In December 2018, we initiated the DETERMINE Study, our Phase 3 double-blind placebo-controlled multi-center international clinical study. The DETERMINE Study is fully enrolled with 176 patients. In January, 2021, we submitted a protocol amendment to the FDA to shorten the duration of the DETERMINE Study from 52 weeks to 28 weeks. Subjects in the DETERMINE Study are randomized to receive lenabasum 20 mg twice per day, lenabasum 5 mg twice per day, or placebo twice per day in a 2:1:2 ratio. The primary efficacy outcome, which will be measured at week 28, is the American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism 2016 Total Improvement Score, which is a weighted composite measure of improvement from baseline in six endpoints, including Physician Global Assessment of Disease Activity, Physician Global Assessment of Extramuscular Disease Activity, Patient Global Assessment of Disease Activity, Health Assessment Questionnaire (patient-reported disability), Manual Muscle Testing, and muscle enzymes. Change from Baseline in the Cutaneous Dermatomyositis Activity and Severity index activity (CDASI) score is one of several secondary efficacy outcomes in the Phase 3 study. Last subject, last dose in the placebo-controlled part of the DETERMINE Study has been completed in the first fiscal quarter of 2021, with topline data expected in the second fiscal quarter of 2021.
Since our inception, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts to business planning, research and development, recruiting management and technical staff, acquiring operating assets and raising capital. Our research and development activities have included conducting pre-clinical studies, developing manufacturing methods and the manufacturing of our drug lenabasum for clinical trials and conducting clinical studies in patients.
In September 2018, pursuant to a license agreement (the ‘Jenrin Agreement”) with Jenrin Discovery LLC (“Jenrin”) we acquired an exclusive worldwide license to develop, manufacture and market drug candidates from more than 600 compounds targeting the endocannabinoid system. The portfolio of compounds includes cannabinoid candidates targeting liver, lung, heart and kidney fibrotic diseases.
On January 3, 2019, we entered into a strategic collaboration with Kaken Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (“Kaken”) for the development and commercialization in Japan of our investigational drug lenabasum for the treatment of systemic sclerosis and dermatomyositis. Under the terms of the agreement, Kaken receives an exclusive license to commercialize and market lenabasum in Japan for systemic sclerosis and dermatomyositis. In March 2019, Kaken made an upfront payment to us of $27 million. We are also eligible to receive up to $173 million upon achievement of certain regulatory, development and sales milestones as well as double- digit royalties from Kaken.
On January 30, 2019, we consummated an underwritten public offering of shares of our common stock pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 6,198,500 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $6.50 per share with gross proceeds to us totaling approximately $40.3 million, less estimated issuance costs incurred of approximately $2.6 million.
On February 11, 2020, we consummated an underwritten public offering of shares of our common stock pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 7,666,667 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $6.00 per share with gross proceeds to us totaling approximately $46.0 million, less estimated issuance costs incurred of approximately $3.0 million.
On April 7, 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM (“April 2020 Sale Agreement”) with Jefferies LLC (“Jefferies”) pursuant to which Jefferies is serving as our sales agent to sell up to $75,000,000 of shares of the Company’s common stock through an “at the market offering”. As of December 31, 2020 we sold 10,539,374 shares of our common stock under the April 2020 Sale Agreement for gross proceeds to us totaling $75,000,000, less issuance costs incurred of approximately $2,250,000.
On July 28, 2020, we entered into the Loan Agreement with our subsidiary, Corbus Pharmaceuticals, Inc., as borrower, us, as guarantor, each lender party thereto (the “Lenders”), K2 HealthVentures LLC (“K2HV”), an unrelated third party, as administrative agent for the Lenders, and Ankura Trust Company, LLC, an unrelated third party, as collateral agent for the Lenders, pursuant to which K2HV may provide us with term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to a $50,000,000.
On August 7, 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM (the “August 2020 Sale Agreement”) with Jefferies, as sales agent, pursuant to which we may issue and sell, from time to time, through Jefferies, shares of our common stock. As of August 7, 2020, we are authorized to offer and sell up to $150 million of our common stock pursuant to the August 2020 Sale Agreement. As of December 31, 2020 we have sold 15,546,151 shares of our common stock under the August 2020 Sale Agreement for gross proceeds totaling $21,404,000, less issuance costs incurred of approximately $642,000.
We expect the cash and cash equivalents of approximately $85.4 million at December 31, 2020, $58.9 million of proceeds raised from the August 2020 Sale Agreement from January 1, 2021 through March 15, 2021, and the remaining $2.5 million of proceeds that we expect to receive under the 2018 CFF Award before the end of the first half of 2021 to be sufficient to meet our operating and capital requirements into 2024, based on planned expenditures.
Financial Operations Overview
We are a clinical stage pharmaceutical company and have not generated any revenues from the sale of products. We have never been profitable and at December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $304.1 million. Our net losses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were approximately $111,269,000 and $71,454,000, respectively.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses for the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses to decline in 2021 due to the completion of our clinical studies in systemic sclerosis and cystic fibrosis in 2020 and dermatomyositis in 2021. While we expect expenses to decline in 2021, we will still incur significant operating losses and accordingly we will need additional financing to support our continuing operations. We will seek to fund our operations through public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, which may include government grants and collaborations with third parties. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. We will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
We expect to continue to incur operating losses for at least the next several years in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
● conduct preclinical and clinical trials for our product candidates in DM, systemic lupus erythematosus and other indications;
● continue our research and development efforts; and
● manufacture clinical study materials.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments for all assets and liabilities, including those related to stock-based compensation expense. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, current economic and industry conditions and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. This forms the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that full consideration has been given to all relevant circumstances that we may be subject to, and the consolidated financial statements accurately reflect our best estimate of the results of operations, financial position and cash flows for the periods presented.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from awards for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $3,937,000 and $9,144,000, respectively, and pertains only to the 2018 CFF Award. No revenue from licenses was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue from licenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 included the recognition of the $27,000,000 upfront payment received from Kaken in March 2019 for which we satisfied the combined performance obligation by June 30, 2019, upon which we recognized the $27,000,000 as revenue in the second quarter of 2019.
We will assess any new agreements we enter into under GAAP, including whether such agreements fall under the scope of such standard. This standard applies to all contracts with customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards, such as leases, insurance, collaboration arrangements and financial instruments. Under GAAP, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with customers, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The five-step model is applied to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations, and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Revenue associated with the performance obligation is being recognized as revenue as the research and development services are provided using an input method, according to the costs incurred as related to the research and development activities and the costs expected to be incurred in the future to satisfy the performance obligation. The transfer of control occurs over this time period and, in management’s judgment, is the best measure of progress towards satisfying the performance obligation. The research and development services related to this performance obligation are expected to be performed over an approximately three-year period expected to be completed in the first half of 2021. Amounts received prior to revenue recognition are recorded as deferred revenue. Amounts expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as current portion of deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Amounts not expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as deferred revenue, net of current portion. Amounts recognized as revenue, but not yet received or invoiced are generally recognized as contract assets.
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenues from the sales of products. We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for the marketing of lenabasum or other of our product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years and is subject to significant uncertainty.
We recognized approximately $3,937,000 and $9,144,000 of revenue from awards in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Amounts recognized in revenue from awards for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were in connection with our entry on January 26, 2018 into the Cystic Fibrosis Program Related Investment Agreement (“Investment Agreement) with the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (“CFF”), a non-profit drug discovery and development corporation, pursuant to which we received a development award for up to $25 million in funding (the “2018 CFF Award”) to support a Phase 2b Clinical Trial (the “Phase 2b Clinical Trial”) of lenabasum in patients with cystic fibrosis of which we received $6.25 million in the first quarter of 2018, $6.25 million in the second quarter of 2018, $5.0 million in the second quarter of 2019, and $5.0 million in the third quarter of 2020 upon our achievement of a milestone related to the progress of the Phase 2b Clinical Trial, as set forth in the Investment Agreement. The $2.5 million remainder of the 2018 CFF Award is payable to us incrementally upon the achievement of the remaining milestones related to the progress of the Phase 2b Clinical Trial, as set forth in the Investment Agreement and we expect to receive the remainder before the end of the first half of 2021.
Additionally, no revenue from licenses was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue from licenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 included the recognition of the $27,000,000 upfront payment received from Kaken in March 2019 for which we satisfied the combined performance obligation by June 30, 2019, upon which we recognized the $27,000,000 as revenue in the second quarter of 2019.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses are incurred for the development of lenabasum and other cannabinoid compounds and consist primarily of payroll and payments to contract research and development companies. To date, these costs are related to generating pre-clinical data and the cost of manufacturing drug product for clinical trials and conducting clinical trials. These costs are expected to decrease in 2021 as our RESOLVE-1 Study and our Phase 2b Study of lenabasum for the treatment of cystic fibrosis have completed. The reduction in workforce announced in October 2020 will also contribute to reduction of future operating expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll, rent and professional services such as accounting and legal services. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will decrease in the future as a result of the reduction in workforce announced in October 2020.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists primarily refundable research and development tax credits that were earned on certain research and development expenses we incurred primarily outside of the United States. Other income, net also consists of interest income we earn on interest-bearing accounts, interest expense incurred on our outstanding debt, and realized and unrealized foreign currency exchange gains and losses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments for all assets and liabilities, including those related to stock-based compensation expense, accrued research and development expense, and operating lease right of use assets and liabilities. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, current economic and industry conditions and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. This forms the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that full consideration has been given to all relevant circumstances that we may be subject to, and the consolidated financial statements accurately reflect our best estimate of the results of operations, financial position and cash flows for the periods presented.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing financial statements, we are required to estimate and accrue expenses, the largest of which are research and development expenses. This process involves: communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost; estimating and accruing expenses in our financial statements as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at the time; and periodically confirming the accuracy of our estimates with selected service providers and making adjustments, if necessary.
Examples of estimated research and development expenses that we accrue include:
● fees paid to CROs in connection with nonclinical studies;
● fees paid to contract manufacturers in connection with the production of lenabasum for clinical trials;
● fees paid to CRO and research institutions in connection with conducting of clinical studies; and
● professional service fees for consulting and related services.
We base our expense accruals related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services performed pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and clinical research organizations that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors, such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical study milestones. Our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates.
To date, we have not experienced significant changes in our estimates of accrued research and development expenses following each applicable reporting period. However, due to the nature of estimates, we cannot assure you that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information regarding the status or conduct of our clinical studies and other research activities.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock options are granted with an exercise price at no less than fair market value at the date of the grant. The stock options normally expire ten years from the date of grant. Stock option awards vest upon terms determined by our board of directors.
We recognize compensation costs resulting from the issuance of stock-based awards to employees, members of our Board of directors and consultants. The fair value of each option grant was estimated as of the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value is amortized as compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards, which is generally the vesting period. We estimate volatility by analyzing the volatility of the trading price of our common stock. We use historical data, as well as subsequent events occurring prior to the issuance of the consolidated financial statements, to estimate option exercise and employee forfeitures within the valuation model. The expected term of options granted to employees under our stock plans is based on the average of the contractual term (generally 10 years) and the vesting period (generally 48 months). The expected term of options granted under the 2014 Plan, all of which qualify as “plain vanilla” per SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin 107, is based on the average of the 6.25 years. For non-employee options, the expected term is the contractual term. The risk-free rate is based on the yield of a U.S. Treasury security with a term consistent with the option. We estimate the forfeiture rate at the time of grant and revise it, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. Forfeitures were estimated based on management’s expectation through industry knowledge and historical data. We have never paid dividends on our common stock and do not anticipate paying dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. Accordingly, we have assumed no dividend yield for purposes of estimating the fair value of our share-based compensation.
The following assumptions were used to estimate the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes option pricing model for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
Results of Operations
Comparison of Year Ended 2020 to 2019
Revenue from Awards and Licenses. We have recognized approximately $3,937,000 and $36,144,000 of revenue from awards and licenses in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Revenue from awards for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $3,937,000 and $9,144,000, respectively, recognized in accordance with ASC 606 and pertains only to the 2018 CFF Award. We received an aggregate of $12,500,000 during the year ended December 31, 2018 and an additional $5,000,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019, and $5,000,000 in the third quarter of 2020 upon our achievement of a milestone related to the progress of the Phase 2b Clinical Trial, as set forth in the Investment Agreement. The $2,500,000 remainder of the 2018 CFF Award is payable to us incrementally upon the achievement of the remaining milestones related to the progress of the Phase 2b Clinical Trial, as set forth in the Investment Agreement and we expect to receive the remainder before the end of the first half of 2021.
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 also included the recognition of revenue from licenses for the $27,000,000 upfront payment received from Kaken in March 2019 for which we satisfied the combined performance obligation by June 30, 2019, upon which we recognized the $27,000,000 as revenue in the second quarter of 2019.
We assessed the 2018 CFF Award and the Kaken collaboration agreement for accounting under ASC 606. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $98,267,000, an increase of $8,662,000 over the $89,605,000 recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily attributable to increases of approximately $3,561,000 in clinical trial costs and $5,638,000 in compensation costs. These increases were partially offset by an approximate $537,000 decrease in stock-based compensation expense.
During 2018, the Company formed a subsidiary in each of the United Kingdom and Australia and approximately 44% and 46% of research and development expenses recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 respectively was recorded in these entities.
General and Administrative. General and Administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $28,480,000, an increase of $4,837,000 over the $23,643,000 recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily attributable to increases of approximately $3,119,000 in compensation costs, $1,014,000 stock-based compensation, $473,000 in insurance costs, and $376,000 in temporary help and recruiting costs.
Other Income, Net. Other income, net for 2020 was approximately $11,541,000 as compared to approximately $5,651,000 recorded for 2019. The increase of $5,890,000 in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to approximately $9,574,000 increase in cash paid to us in 2020 from taxing authorities for refundable research and development tax credits that were earned on certain research and development expenses we incurred primarily outside of the United States, offset by $251,000 related to the derivative liability valuation associated with the Loan Agreement with K2HV and $850,000 related to a return of a state of Massachusetts research and development tax credit. In prior year we received approximately $472,000 for a refundable research and development tax credit and in 2020 approximately $378,000 became due back to the state of Massachusetts. The net increase was also offset by a $2,256,000 decrease to interest income. This was the result of approximately $1,100,000 lower interest income on excess cash and cash equivalents and $1,127,000 higher interest expense in 2020 as a result of entering into K2HV security and loan agreement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have experienced negative cash flows from operations. We have financed our operations primarily through sales of equity-related securities. In addition, the majority of the costs of the SLE clinical trial has been or is expected to be funded by NIH grants, and our phase 2b cystic fibrosis trial was supported by the 2018 CFF Award. At December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit since inception was approximately $304,093,000.
At December 31, 2020, we had total current assets of approximately $92,075,000 and current liabilities of approximately $31,898,000 resulting in working capital of approximately $60,177,000. Of our total cash and cash equivalents of $85.4 million at December 31, 2020, $84.4 million was held within the United States.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $99,686,000 which includes a net loss of approximately $111,269,000, adjusted for non-cash expenses of approximately $14,789,000, principally related to stock-based compensation expense of $12,458,000, depreciation and amortization expense of $1,124,000 and operating lease right of use asset amortization of $570,000, and approximately $3,205,000 of cash used by net working capital items, principally related to the decrease in accounts payable.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $484,000, which was largely related to payments for furniture and fixtures utilized in the build out of our office space in 2019.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $154,875,000.
On February 11, 2020, we consummated an underwritten public offering of shares of our common stock pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 7,666,667 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $6.00 per share with gross proceeds to us totaling $46,000,000, less estimated issuance costs incurred of approximately $3,147,000.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 we sold an aggregate of 26,085,525 shares of our common stock under the April 2020 Sale Agreement and August 2020 Sale Agreement for gross proceeds of approximately $96,404,000, less issuance costs incurred of approximately $2,892,000.
On July 28, 2020, we entered into the Loan Agreement with K2HV pursuant to which K2HV may provide us with term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to a $50,000,000 and we received the first tranche for $20,000,000 at closing. The second tranche for $20,000,000 and the third tranche for $10,000,000 will be made available at our option subject to the achievement of certain clinical and regulatory milestones. The loan matures on August 1, 2024 and we are obligated to make interest only payments for the first 24 months and then interest and equal principal payments for the next 24 months. Interest accrues at a variable annual rate equal to the greater of (i) 8.5% and (ii) the rate of interest noted in The Wall Street Journal, Money Rates section, as the “Prime Rate” plus 5.25%, in each case, subject to a step-down of 25 basis points upon the funding of the second tranche. K2HV may elect to convert up to $5,000,000 of the outstanding loan into common stock at a conversion price of $9.40 per share. At closing, we issued a Warrant to K2HV exercisable for 86,206 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $6.96 per share. We granted registration rights to the lenders in connection with the Loan Agreement and the Warrant.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we also received proceeds of approximately $756,000 from the issuance of 427,611 shares of our common stock upon the exercise of stock options to purchase common stock. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 included proceeds from issuances of notes payable of approximately $909,000, offset by principal payments on notes payable of approximately $952,000 in connection with our loan agreements with financing companies to fund D&O insurance premiums. The terms of the loan that we entered into in November 2019 stipulated equal monthly payments of principal and interest payments of $109,413 over a nine-month period. Interest accrued on this loan at an annual rate of 5.25% and the loan was paid in full in August 2020. In November 2020, the Company entered into a loan agreement with a financing company for $909,375 to finance one of the Company’s insurance policies. The terms of the loan stipulate equal monthly payments of principal and interest payments of $103,112 over a nine-month period. Interest accrues on this loan at an annual rate of 4.89%.
We expect our cash and cash equivalents of approximately $85.4 million at December 31, 2020, combined with the $58.9 million of proceeds from the August 2020 Sale Agreement subsequent to December 31, 2020, and the expected final $2.5 million milestone payment from the CFF award will be sufficient to meet our operating and capital requirements into 2024 based on current planned expenditures.
We will need to raise significant additional capital to continue to fund operations and the clinical trials for lenabasum. If we are unable to raise sufficient capital in the future, we may be required to undertake cost-cutting measures, including delaying or discontinuing certain clinical activities. We may seek to sell common stock, preferred stock or convertible debt securities, enter into a credit facility or another form of third-party funding or seek other debt financing. In addition, we may seek to raise cash through collaborative agreements or from government grants. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and certain of those securities may have rights senior to those of our common shares. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of preferred stock, convertible debt securities or other debt financing, these securities or other debt could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Any other third-party funding arrangement could require us to relinquish valuable rights.
The source, timing and availability of any future financing will depend principally upon market conditions, and, more specifically, on the progress of our clinical development programs.
Funding may not be available when needed, at all, or on terms acceptable to us. Lack of necessary funds may require us, among other things, to delay, scale back or eliminate expenses including some or all of our planned clinical trials.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table presents information about our known contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020. It does not reflect contractual obligations that may have arisen or may arise after that date. Except for historical facts, the information in this section is forward-looking information.
On February 26, 2019, we amended our lease (“February 2019 Lease Agreement”) pursuant to which an additional 30,023 square feet of office space (“New Premises”) will be leased by us in the same building for an aggregate total of 62,756 square feet of leased office space (“Total Premises”). The February 2019 Lease Agreement constitutes a modification as it extends the original lease term and increases the scope of the lease (additional space provided under the amendment), which requires evaluation of the remeasurement of the lease liability and corresponding right-of-use (“ROU”) asset. Accordingly, we reassessed the classification of the Leased Premises and remeasured the lease liability on the basis of the extended lease term using the 20 additional monthly rent payments and the incremental borrowing rate at the effective date of the modification of 9%. The remeasurement for the modification resulted in an increase to the lease liability and the ROU asset of approximately $855,000. We determined that the New Premises will be treated as a new standalone operating lease under U.S. GAAP and recorded a lease liability and a right-of-use asset of approximately $2.7 million for this lease.
Per the terms of the February 2019 Lease Agreement, the landlord agreed to reimburse us for $990,759 of leasehold improvements. The reimbursements are being recognized as a reduction of rent expense over the term of the lease. Additionally, the February 2019 Lease Agreement required a standby irrevocable letter of credit of $369,900, which may be reduced, if we are not in default under the February 2019 Lease Agreement, to $277,425 and $184,950 on the third and fourth anniversary of the commencement date, respectively.
On October 25, 2019, we amended our lease (“October 2019 Lease Amendment”) pursuant to which the term of the lease was extended through November 30, 2026 and the existing office space under lease was expanded by 500 square feet for an aggregate total of 63,256 square feet of leased office space (“Amended Total Premises”). The October 2019 Lease Amendment constitutes a modification as it extends the original lease term and increases the scope of the lease (additional space provided under the amendment), which requires evaluation of the remeasurement of the lease liability and corresponding ROU asset. The additional space did not result in a separate contract as the rent increase was determined not to be commensurate with the standalone price for the additional right of use. Accordingly, we reassessed the classification of the Amended Total Premises, which resulted in operating classification, and remeasured the lease liability on the basis of the extended lease term using the additional monthly rent payments and the incremental borrowing rate at the effective date of the modification of 8%. The remeasurement for the modification resulted in an increase to the lease liability and the ROU asset of approximately $381,000 that was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Pursuant to the terms of our non-cancelable lease agreements in effect at December 31, 2020, the following table summarizes our maturities of operating lease liabilities as of December 31, 2020:
We may enter into contracts in the normal course of business with clinical research organizations for clinical trials and clinical supply manufacturing and with vendors for pre-clinical research studies, research supplies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice, and therefore, we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material. As of December 31, 2020, other than our leases in the table above, we had no material Contractual Obligations or Commitments that will affect our future liquidity.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors, other than future royalty payments under development award agreements discussed as follows:
Collaboration Agreement with Kaken
Pursuant to the terms of the Kaken Agreement, we will bear the cost of, and be responsible for, among other things, conducting the clinical studies and other developmental activities for the Licensed Products in the Initial Indications in the Territory, and Kaken will bear the cost of, and be responsible for, among other things, preparing and filing applications for regulatory approval in the Territory and for commercializing Licensed Products in the Territory, and will use commercially reasonable efforts to commercialize Licensed Products and obtain pricing approval for Licensed Products in the Territory.
In consideration of the license and other rights granted by us, Kaken paid us a $27,000,000 upfront cash payment in March 2019 and is obligated to pay potential milestone payments to us totaling up to approximately $173,000,000 for the achievement of certain development, sales and regulatory milestones. In addition, during the Royalty Term (as defined below), Kaken is obligated to pay us royalties on sales of Licensed Products in the Territory, under certain conditions, in the double digits, which royalty shall be reduced in certain circumstances. In particular, for so long as we supply Licensed Products to Kaken pursuant to a supply agreement to be entered into by the parties, royalty payments shall be payable for each unit of Licensed Product that we supply as a percentage of the Japanese National Health Insurance price of the Licensed Product. During any time in which a supply agreement is not in effect, royalty payments shall be changed to a rate to be agreed upon by the parties in good faith.
The Kaken Agreement will remain in effect on a Licensed Product-by-Licensed product basis and will expire upon the expiration of the Royalty Term for the final Licensed Product. The “Royalty Term” means the period beginning on the date of the first commercial sale of the Licensed Product in Japan and ends on the latest of (i) the expiration of the last valid claim of the royalty patents covering such Licensed Product in Japan, (ii) the expiration of regulatory exclusivity for such Licensed Product for such Initial Indication in Japan, or (iii) ten (10) years after the first commercial sale of such Licensed Product for such Initial Indication in Japan. The Agreement may be terminated by either party for material breach, upon a party’s insolvency or bankruptcy or upon a challenge by one party of any patents of the other party, and Kaken may terminate in specified situations, including for a safety concern or clinical failure, or at its convenience following the second anniversary of the first commercial sale of a Licensed Product in either of the Initial Indications in the Territory, with 180 days’ notice.
License Agreement with Jenrin
Pursuant to the terms of the Jenrin Agreement, we are obligated to pay potential milestone payments to Jenrin totaling up to $18.4 million for each compound we elect to develop based upon the achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones. In addition, we are obligated to pay Jenrin royalties in the mid, single digits based on net sales of any Licensed Products, as defined in the Jenrin Agreement, subject to specified reductions.
The Jenrin Agreement terminates on a country-by-country basis and product-by-product basis upon the expiration of the royalty term for such product in such country. Each royalty term begins on the date of the first commercial sale of the licensed product in the applicable country and ends on the later of seven years from such first commercial sale or the expiration of the last to expire of the applicable patents in that country. The Jenrin Agreement may be terminated earlier in specified situations, including termination for uncured material breach of the Jenrin Agreement by either party, termination by Jenrin in specified circumstances, termination by Corbus with advance notice and termination upon a party’s insolvency or bankruptcy.
CFF Award
Pursuant to the terms of the Investment Agreement, we are obligated to make certain royalty payments to CFF, including a royalty payment of one and one-half times the amount of the 2018 CFF Award, payable in cash within sixty days upon the first receipt of approval of lenabasum in the United States and a second royalty payment of one and one-half times the amount of the 2018 CFF Award upon approval in another major market, as set forth in the Investment Agreement (the “Approval Royalty”). At our election, we may satisfy the first of the two Approval Royalties in registered shares of our common stock. Additionally, we will owe to CFF a royalty payment equal to 10% of any amounts we receive as payment under the collaboration agreement with Kaken, provided that the total royalties that we will be required to pay under the Investment Agreement resulting from income from licenses or sales subject to the Investment Agreement are capped at five times the total amount of the 2018 CFF Award, and we may credit such royalties against any royalties on net sales otherwise owed to CFF under the Investment Agreement. Accordingly, we were required to pay CFF $2,700,000 in May 2019, which is within 60 days of our receipt of the $27,000,000 upfront cash payment from Kaken described below.
Additionally, we are obligated to make (i) royalty payments to CFF of two and one-half percent of net sales from lenabasum due within sixty days after any quarter in which such net sales occur in the Field, as defined in the Investment Agreement, (ii) royalty payments to CFF of one percent of net sales of Non-Field Products, as defined in the Investment Agreement due within sixty days after any quarter in which such net sales occur, and (iii) royalty payments to CFF of ten percent of any amount that we and our stockholders receive in connection with the license, sale, or other transfer to a third party of lenabasum, if indicated for the treatment or prevention of CF, or a change of control transaction, except that such payment shall not exceed five times the amount of the 2018 CFF Award, with such payments to be credited against any other net sales royalty payments due. Either CFF or we may terminate the Investment Agreement for cause, which includes our material failure to achieve certain commercialization and development milestones. Our payment obligations survive the termination of the Investment Agreement.
CFFT Award
Pursuant to the terms of the 2015 CFFT Award agreement, we are obligated to make royalty payments to CFFT contingent upon commercialization of lenabasum in the Field of Use (as defined in the 2015 CFFT Award Agreement) as follows: (i) a royalty payment equal to five times the amount we receive under the 2015 CFFT Award Agreement, up to $25 million, payable in three equal annual installments following the first commercial sale of lenabasum, the first of which is due within 90 days following the first commercial sale of lenabasum, (ii) a royalty payment to CFFT equal to the amount we receive under the 2015 CFFT Award Agreement, up to $5 million, due in the first calendar year in which the aggregate cumulative net sales of lenabasum in the Field of Use exceed $500 million, and (iii) royalty payment(s) to CFFT of up to approximately $15 million if we transfer, sell or license lenabasum in the Field of Use other than for certain clinical or development purposes, or if we enter into a change of control transaction, with such payment(s) to be credited against the royalty payments due upon commercialization. The Field of Use is defined in the CFFT Award Agreement as the treatment in humans of CF, asbestosis, bronchiectasis, byssinosis, chronic bronchitis/COPD hypersensitivity pneumonitis, pneumoconiosis, primary ciliary dyskinesis, sarcoidosis and silicosis. Either CFFT or we may terminate the 2015 CFFT Award Agreement for cause, which includes our material failure to achieve certain commercialization and development milestones. Our payment obligations, if any, would survive the termination of the 2015 CFFT Award Agreement.