Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We make statements in this section that are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. All of such forward-looking statements are expressly qualified by reference to the cautionary statements provided under the caption “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included on page 1 in Part I of this report. Furthermore, a number of known and unknown factors may cause our actual results, performance, or achievements to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the following discussion.
We are engaged in the business of providing consulting services and education for blockchain, for the building of technological infrastructure and enterprise blockchain technology solutions. We currently generate revenues through these consulting and education operations. We have disposed of our entire ownership interest in CoinTracking GmbH and also divested substantially all of our cryptocurrency assets owned by our former cryptocurrency investment segment, which has ceased operations.
Recent Events
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) declared the COVID-19 outbreak to be a global pandemic. In addition to the devastating effects on human life, the pandemic is having a negative ripple effect on the global economy, leading to disruptions and volatility in the global financial markets. Many countries, including the United States, reacted by instituting a wide variety of control measures including states of emergency, mandatory quarantines, required business and school closures, implementing state-wide “shelter in place” orders, and restricting travel. The United States government has taken a number of actions to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the U.S. economy, including the passage of multiple stimulus packages which provided payments to individuals, additional health-care funding, loans, and grants to certain businesses, temporary amendments to the Internal Revenue Code, and strengthened unemployment insurance.
On December 11, 2020, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”) issued the first emergency use authorization for the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for the prevention of COVID-19 for individuals 16 years of age and older. On December 18, 2020, the FDA issued a second emergency use authorization for the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine. On February 27 2021, Johnson & Johnson received an emergency use authorization for their single-shot vaccine with other companies expected to follow. Distribution of the vaccines has commenced, initially with front-line health-care workers receiving vaccinations followed by individuals deemed at high-risk of contracting COVID-19 or for severe illness from COVID-19. Vaccination distributions continue to become available to a wider group of people with multiple states now distributing to the general public. During these initial phases of the vaccine distribution, vaccine shortages and delays have been caused by high demand outstripping supply and challenging distribution logistics. With vaccine production ramping up and improvements to distribution logistics, vaccine shortages and distribution challenges will continue to improve making the vaccine more available.
The extent to which COVID-19 impacts the Company’s financial results remains fluid and will continue to depend on a number of things, including the extent of the spread of the virus, the rate of infection, possible resurgence of the virus, the emergence of new strains of variants of the virus, the severity of illness and the degree of lethality, the relative effect on various portions of the population, the measures taken to combat the virus and their effectiveness, including the development and availability of vaccines and therapeutics and the prevalence of adoption barriers or resistance to them, the impact of control measures such as states of emergency, mandatory quarantines, and required business and school closures, the effect on international trade of any measures taken to combat the virus, including the reinstitution of travel restrictions, any action taken (such as the lowering of interest rates) by government entities to combat the negative macroeconomic effects of these measures, and other factors.
Management continues to actively work to minimize the current and future impact of this unprecedented situation, making adjustments to operations where appropriate or necessary to try and minimize the impact of COVID-19. This has not, however, caused a significant disruption to the Company operations. Management continues to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s financial results.
Discontinued Operations
As a result of the sale of CoinTracking’s entire equity ownership stake in CoinTracking GmbH, and a strategic shift in our business in the fourth quarter of 2018 away from cryptocurrency investing to blockchain consulting and education, the operating results associated with these assets and liabilities have been reclassified to give effect to these changes and are reported as discontinued operations in the Consolidated Statements of Operations for all periods presented. Loss from discontinued operations was $84,849 and $16,376,131 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively. The 2018 loss includes an impairment of goodwill of $9,356,105, and impairment of other intangible assets of $3,743,480 related to CoinTracking GmbH. The loss from discontinued operations attributable to the Crypto Company was $9,859,271 for the year ended December 31, 2018, which includes our 50.1% ownership of CoinTracking GmbH. CoinTracking GmbH was acquired in 2018, and therefore, there was no impact on the Company’s prior year results.
There were no losses from discontinued operations recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020.
See Note 15- Discontinued Operations to our Consolidated Financial Statements
Results of Continuing Operations
Comparison of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenues relating to consulting services were $14,400, compared to $65,743 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is attributable to lower level of activity in generating consulting services with one of our clients.
Operating Activities
We have incurred, and expect to continue to incur, significant expenses in the areas of professional fees and contracting services.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $302,812 compared to $1,155,304 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $852,492 was primarily due to a decrease in our general and administrative expenses to $749,930 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1,750,668 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Also, prepaid expenses and accounts payable decreased to $358,667 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $557,767 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Finally, our non-cash share-based compensation increased to $2,321,673 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $-0- for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $209,935, compared to $1,079,467 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The prior-year period included the sale of CoinTracking GmbH for $2,200,000, net of acquired cash of $1,000,000.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $117,592, compared to $75,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $42,592 was primarily the result of a decrease in aggregate proceeds from issuance of convertible notes for $25,000, offset by the issuance of $67,592 in loans payable in 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Stock-Based Compensation
In accordance with ASC No. 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”), the Company measures the compensation costs of stock-based compensation arrangements based on the grant date fair value of granted instruments and recognizes the costs in financial statements over the period during which employees are required to provide services. Stock-based compensation arrangements include stock options.
Equity instruments (“instruments”) issued to non-employees are recorded on the basis of the fair value of the instruments, as required by ASC 718. ASC No. 505, Equity Based Payments to Non-Employees (“ASC 505”), defines the measurement date and recognition period for such instruments. In general, the measurement date is (a) when a performance commitment, as defined, is reached or (b) when the earlier of (i) the non-employee performance is complete and (ii) the instruments are vested. The compensation cost is remeasured at fair value at each reporting period when the award vests. As a result, stock option-based payments to non-employees can result in significant volatility in compensation expense.
The Company accounts for its stock-based compensation using the Black-Scholes model to estimate the fair value of stock option awards. Using this model, fair value is calculated based on assumptions with respect to the (i) expected volatility of the Company’s common stock price, (ii) expected life of the award, which for options is the period of time over which employees and non-employees are expected to hold their options prior to exercise, and (iii) risk-free interest rate.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company recognizes and discloses the fair value of its assets and liabilities using a hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to valuations based upon unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to valuations based upon unobservable inputs that are significant to the valuation (Level 3 measurements). Each level of input has different levels of subjectivity and difficulty involved in determining fair value.
Level Inputs are unadjusted, quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets at the measurable date.
Level Inputs, other than quoted prices included in Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability through corroboration with market data at the measurement date.
Level Unobservable inputs that reflect management’s best estimate of what participants would use in pricing the asset or liability at the measurement date.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities, including cash, accounts payable, and accrued liabilities approximate fair value because of the short maturity of these instruments.
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived intangible Assets
We test for the impairment of our goodwill and indefinite-lived assets at least annually and whenever events or circumstances occur indicating that a possible impairment has been incurred.
We perform our annual goodwill impairment test on the first day of our fourth quarter based on the income approach, also known as the discounted cash flow (“DCF”) method, which utilizes the present value of future cash flows to estimate fair value. We also use the market approach, which utilizes market price data of companies engaged in the same or a similar line of business as that of our company, to estimate fair value. A reconciliation of the two methods is performed to assess the reasonableness of fair value of each of the reporting units.
The future cash flows used under the DCF method are derived from estimates of future revenues, operating income, working capital requirements and capital expenditures, which in turn reflect specific global, industry and market conditions. The discount rate developed is based on data and factors relevant to the economies in which the business operates and other risks associated with those cash flows, including the potential variability in the amount and timing of the cash flows. A terminal growth rate is applied to the final year of the projected period and reflects our estimate of stable growth to perpetuity. We then calculate the present value of the respective cash flows for each reporting unit to arrive at the fair value using the income approach and then determine the appropriate weighting between the fair value estimated using the income approach and the fair value estimated using the market approach. Finally, we compare the estimated fair value of our goodwill and indefinite-lived assets to its respective carrying value in order to determine if the goodwill assigned to each reporting unit is potentially impaired. In January 2017, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2017-04, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Accounting for Goodwill Impairment”, which eliminated Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. If the fair value of the asset exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is not impaired and no further testing is required. If the fair value of the asset is less than the carrying value, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the asset’s fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that asset. This update is effective for annual or any interim goodwill impairment tests in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 with early adoption permitted for interim or annual goodwill impairment tests performed on testing dates after January 1, 2017.
Significant assumptions used include management’s estimates of future growth rates, the amount and timing of future operating cash flows, capital expenditures, discount rates, as well as market and industry conditions and relevant comparable company multiples for the market approach. Assumptions utilized are highly judgmental, especially given the role technology plays in driving the demand for consulting services in the blockchain technology space.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes consulting revenue when the service is rendered, the fee for arrangement is fixed or determinable, and collectability is reasonably assured.
Prior to January 2, 2019, CoinTracking GmbH accounted for a contract when it had approval and commitment from all parties, the rights of the parties and payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised services is transferred to the Company’s customers over time, and in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company was contractually due in exchange for those services. Most of the Company’s contracts with customers were single, or had few distinct performance obligations, and the transaction price was allocated to each performance obligation using the stand-alone selling price.
CoinTracking GmbH’s revenue in 2018 and prior periods was primarily derived directly from users in the form of subscriptions. Subscription revenue is presented net of credits and credit card chargebacks. Subscribers pay in advance, primarily by PayPal or cryptocurrencies, subject to certain conditions identified in our terms and conditions. Revenue is initially deferred and recognized using the straight-line method over the term of the applicable subscription period, which primarily range from annual to perpetual.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for expected future consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under the asset and liability method, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the currently enacted tax rates and laws. A valuation allowance is provided for the amount of deferred tax assets that, based on available evidence, are not expected to be realized. The provision for income taxes represents the tax payable for the period and the change during the period in deferred tax assets and liabilities. The Income-tax payable of $800 reflects the minimum franchise tax for the State of California.
When tax returns are filed, it is highly certain that some positions taken would be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities, while others are subject to uncertainty about the merits of the position taken or the amount of the position that would be ultimately sustained. The benefit of a tax position is recognized in the financial statements in the period during which, based on all available evidence, management believes it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of appeals or litigation processes, if any. Tax positions taken are not offset or aggregated with other positions. Tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold are measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement with the applicable taxing authority. The portion of the benefits associated with tax positions taken that exceeds the amount measured as described above is reflected as a liability for unrecognized tax benefits along with any associated interest and penalties that would be payable to the taxing authorities upon examination.
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions
We do not have any off-balance sheet transactions.
Trends, Events and Uncertainties
COVID-19 Pandemic
Other than as discussed above and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are not aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on our financial condition.