ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this annual report, including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this annual report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this annual report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
Community Redevelopment Inc. was incorporated in the State of Oklahoma on August 16th, 2010. At the time of its creation, the Company had been engaged in marketing renewable energy, sales and marketing of turbines, lighting and solar energy sources. On July 6th, 2020, the company completed a transaction whereby the core business of the Company is now that of the new merged business. Community Redevelopment, Inc. operates as a community oriented real estate redeveloper targeting economic growth and opportunity zones in secondary and tertiary value-added markets. Our name was formally changed to Community Redevelopment Inc. on June 24th, 2020 as part of the overall transaction The Company is primarily focused on opportunity zones in an effort to bring commerce and affordable housing to underserved areas. Community Redevelopment plans to provide numerous opportunities to improve low-income neighborhoods for residential, commercial, and industrial opportunities through government incentives, long term public and private partnerships and agreements. Our mission is to rebuild depressed communities, change the direction of youth and improve the quality of life in those communities, and provide our investors with an opportunity to profit. We intend to accomplish this by focusing on partnerships between the public and private sector to generate both business interest and business activity in low-income neighborhoods that have gone unnoticed by the development community at large, while repairing and amending relationships in these underserved communities.
Community Redevelopment, Inc. is not an opportunity zone fund, or a real estate investment trust. Community Redevelopment, Inc. is a real estate developer offering potential investors an opportunity to participate in the process of investing in real estate projects that could improve the quality of life for residents of low-income neighborhoods, via a publicly traded company. The Company intends to work with other real estate developers, as well as local and state government agencies to complete its projects in these communities.
The Company is not a “shell company,” as it has formal operations, emplaced Board, and several executed Memorandums of Understanding with current projects, in spite of having no significant cash on hand since the change in control of July 6th, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $8,518 in cash and its auditors have issued an opinion raising substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. The Company intends to comply with the periodic reporting requirements of the Exchange Act for so long as it is subject to those requirements.
The Company’s current management believes the advantages of being a publicly held corporation will enable it to project further and faster growth during this market down-turn. The Company’s principal business objective for the next 12 months and beyond such time will be to achieve long-term growth potential through community-private partnerships within different US jurisdictions.
During the remainder of the fiscal year and beyond such time, we anticipate incurring costs related to the filing of Exchange Act reports, and investigating, analyzing and consummating further local partnerships. We believe we will be able to meet these costs through the use of funds to be loaned by or invested in us by our stockholders, management or other investors. Our management and stockholders have indicated their intent to advance funds on behalf of the Company as needed in order to accomplish its business plan and comply with its Exchange Act reporting requirements; however, there are no agreements in effect between the Company and our management and stockholders specifically requiring that they provide any funds to the Company. As a result, there are no assurances that such funds will be advanced or that the Company will be able to secure any additional funding as needed.
As of the date of this filing, the Company has entered into preliminary discussions with several potential parties, though no definitive agreements have been executed to date.
While the Company has limited assets and no revenues, the Company has an exceptionally experienced management in finance, politics and business and have unrestricted flexibility in seeking, analyzing and participating in potential urban renewal opportunities in the area of community redevelopment. In its efforts to analyze potential ventures, the Company will consider the following kinds of factors:
(a) potential for growth, indicated by local need and assigned local, state or Federal funding and incentives towards urban renewal in that given locale.
(b) competitive position as compared to other firms of similar size and experience within the industry segment as well as within the industry as a whole;
(c) strength and diversity of current management;
(d) capital requirements and anticipated availability of required funds, to be provided by the Company or from operations, through joint ventures or similar arrangements, sales of securities, or from other sources;
(e) the extent to which the business opportunity can be advanced; and
In applying the foregoing criteria, not one of which will be definitive, management will attempt to analyze all factors and circumstances and make a determination based upon reasonable investigative measures and available data. Potentially available urban renewal opportunities may occur in many different locales, and at various stages of development, all of which will make the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such urban renewal opportunities extremely difficult and complex. Due to the Registrant’s limited capital available for investigation, the Registrant may not discover or adequately evaluate adverse facts about the opportunity to be engaged. In addition, we will be competing against other entities that possess greater financial, technical and managerial capabilities for identifying and completing new projects.
In evaluating a prospective new project, we will conduct as extensive a due diligence review of potential targets as possible given our dependence upon the ever-changing city, state and federal funding initiatives for urban redevelopment and our limited financial resources. We expect that our due diligence will encompass, among other things, meetings with the local government officials and inspection of its neighborhoods and infrastructure, as necessary, as well as a review of financial, government statistical data and other information which is made available to us. This due diligence review will be conducted primarily by our management or by unaffiliated third parties we may engage, including but not limited to attorneys, accountants, consultants or other such professionals. The costs associated with hiring third parties as required to complete a new project may be significant and are difficult to determine as such costs may vary depending on a variety of factors, including the locale, amount of time it takes to complete a new project, the location of the project, and the size and complexity of the business of the project. As of the date of this filing, the Company has identified several potential business opportunities. The Company is currently in discussions with several but not limited to developers, real estate owners, property management company in California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Ohio and Texas to either acquire, design and or redevelop properties.
Our limited funds will likely make it difficult to conduct a complete and exhaustive investigation and analysis of a target project at this early stage without bringing on strategic local partners, which is part of our business plan, see infra. As a general rule, it normally requires approximately 3-6 months to carry out due diligence and meeting with local and state officials, and approximately 9-12 months to follow through to completion. The estimated costs for this period and need are anywhere from approximately $750,000 to $1,500,000.
The time and costs required to select and evaluate a target project and to structure and complete a new project cannot presently be ascertained with any degree of certainty. The amount of time it takes to complete a new project, the location of the project, and the size and complexity of the project neighborhood, the scope of city, state and federal regulations, and whether funds may be raised contemporaneously with the transaction are all factors that determine the costs associated with completing a new project transaction. The time and costs required to complete a new project can be estimated once a new project target has been identified. Any costs incurred with respect to the evaluation of a prospective new project that is not ultimately completed will result in a loss to us.
Through information obtained from industry professionals including attorneys, architects, developers, appraisers, accountants, commercial and residential real estate brokers, builders, engineers as well as other consultants with experience in the urban redevelopment sphere, there are literally thousands of new potential projects, and the aim of the management is to filter through these for the most reasonably achievable urban renewal projects.
We are, and will continue for the foreseeable future to be, an insignificant participant on the national level of public-private urban renewal.
Nearly all similar companies have significantly greater financial resources; consequently, we will be at a competitive disadvantage in identifying possible urban renewal opportunities and successfully completing a new project. These competitive factors may reduce the likelihood of our identifying and consummating a successful new project.
We presently have no employees. Our officers and directors are engaged in outside business activities and are employed on a full-time basis by other companies. Our officers and directors will be dividing their time amongst these entities and anticipate that they will devote less than full time to our business until the successful project has been identified. The specific amount of time that management will devote to the Company may vary from week to week or even day to day, and therefore the specific amount of time that management will devote to the Company on a weekly basis cannot be ascertained with any level of certainty. In all cases, management intends to spend as much time as is necessary to exercise their fiduciary duties as an officer and/or director of the Company and believes that they will be able to devote the time required to consummate a new project transaction as necessary. We expect no significant changes in the number of our employees other than such changes, if any, incident to a new project.
It is likely that the Registrant will engage its participation in a business opportunity through the issuance of its Common Stock or other securities of the Registrant, which could result in substantial dilution to the equity of stockholders of the Registrant immediately prior to the consummation of a transaction. Although the terms of any such transaction have not been identified and cannot be predicted, it is expected that any new project transaction the Company may enter into would be structured as a “tax free” reorganization. It should be noted that the criteria for determining whether or not an acquisition is a so-called “tax free” reorganization under Section 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) depends upon the transaction meeting certain statutory and non-statutory requirements. There are different types of statutory requirements for each type of tax-free reorganization and thus each transaction must be reviewed carefully to determine its eligibility for a tax-free reorganization. One of the statutory requirements in a tax-free reorganization is that at least a certain percentage of the total consideration in the transaction must be voting stock of the engager corporation. This could result in substantial dilution to the equity of those who were stockholders of the Registrant prior to such reorganization. In addition, post-transaction dispositions of Registrant’s stock received as consideration could have implications for the tax-free nature of the transaction in question.
Acquisition by RCK Development LLC
Community Redevelopment, Inc. operates as a community oriented real estate redeveloper targeting economic growth and opportunity zones in secondary and tertiary value-added markets. The Company is primarily focused on opportunity zones in an effort to bring commerce and affordable housing to underserved areas. Community Redevelopment plans to provide numerous opportunities to improve low-income neighborhoods for residential, commercial, and industrial opportunities through government incentives, long term partnerships and agreements. Our mission is to rebuild depressed communities, change the direction of youth and improve the quality of life in those communities, and provide our investors with an opportunity to profit. We intend to accomplish this by focusing on partnerships between the public and private sector to generate both business interest and business activity in low-income neighborhoods that have gone unnoticed by the development community at large, while repairing and amending relationships in these underserved communities.
Community Redevelopment, Inc. is not an opportunity zone fund, or a real estate investment trust. Community Redevelopment, Inc. is a real estate developer offering potential investors an opportunity to participate in the process of investing in real estate projects that could improve the quality of life for residents of low-income neighborhoods, via a publicly traded company. The Company intends to work with other real estate developers, as well as local and state government agencies to complete its projects in these communities.
The present stockholders of the Registrant representing management control approximately 57% of the company and are the largest shareholders of the voting securities of the Registrant. As part of said merger, the past Director resigned and the majority shareholders elected our current Board.
It is anticipated that the investigation of specific urban renewal opportunities and the negotiation, drafting and execution of relevant agreements, disclosure documents and other instruments will require substantial management time and attention and substantial cost for accountants, attorneys and others. The costs that will be incurred are difficult to determine with any degree of specificity at this time as such costs are expected to be dependent on factors such as the amount of time it takes to identify and complete a new project transaction, the location, size and complexity of the business of the project, the local, state and federal laws and/or matching funds, the scope of the due diligence investigation required, possible changes in the Company’s capital structure in connection with the transaction, and whether funds may be raised contemporaneously with the transaction. If a decision is made not to participate in a specific business opportunity, the costs theretofore incurred in the related investigation might not be recoverable. Furthermore, even if an agreement is reached for the participation in a specific project opportunity, the failure to consummate that transaction may result in the loss to the Registrant of the related costs incurred. The Company is currently in discussions with several qualified developers, real estate owners, and property management companies in California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Ohio and Texas to either acquire, design and or redevelop properties.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $(46,154) from $(40,762) for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to increase in Operational Expenses.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $46,154, as compared to $40,762 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The variances were as follows. As part of the general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded public relations, investor relations or business development expenses of $46,154 and $40,762, respectively.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $46,154 as compared to $40,762 for the for the year ended December 31, 2019 for the reasons discussed above.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern, which requires that management evaluate whether there are relevant conditions and events that, in the aggregate, raise substantial doubt about the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern and to meet its obligations as they become due within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern. While the Company is attempting to generate additional revenues, the Company’s cash position may not be significant enough to support the Company’s daily operations. Management intends to raise additional funds by way of a public or private offering. Management believes that the actions presently being taken to further implement its business plan and generate revenues provide the opportunity for the Company to continue as a going concern. While the Company believes in the viability of its strategy to generate revenues and in its ability to raise additional funds, there can be no assurances to that effect. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to further implement its business plan and generate revenues. We will require additional cash funding to fund operations. Therefore, we concluded there was substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
To fund further operations, we will need to raise additional capital. We may obtain additional financing in the future through the issuance of its common stock, or through other equity or debt financings. Our ability to continue as a going concern or meet the minimum liquidity requirements in the future is dependent on its ability to raise significant additional capital, of which there can be no assurance. If the necessary financing is not obtained or achieved, we will likely be required to reduce its planned expenditures, which could have an adverse impact on the results of operations, financial condition and our ability to achieve its strategic objective. There can be no assurance that financing will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. The financial statements contain no adjustments for the outcome of these uncertainties. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and have a material adverse effect on our future financial results, financial position and cash flows.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $41,849. This amount was primarily related to a net loss of $46,154, (i) net working capital increase of $3,305 and increase in committed to be issued shares of $1,000.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $40,762. This amount was primarily related to a net loss of $40,762.
Investment Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $0 and $0, respectively.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $ 50,367 and $ 40,762, respectively. The 2020 amount related to proceeds from our chief executive officer and chairman of the Board of $38,041 and convertible notes payable of $12,326. The 2019 amount related to $40,762 borrowing from the former chief executive officer, who resigned after change of control in July 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
In preparing the consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), management makes estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the dates of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates and assumptions made by management include, but are not limited to, revenue recognition, the allowance for bad debt, useful life of fixed assets, income taxes and unrecognized tax benefits, valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, and assumptions used in assessing impairment of long-lived assets. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Lease
On January 2, 2020, the Company adopted FASB ASC Topic 842, Leases, or ASC 842, using the modified retrospective transition method with a cumulative effect adjustment to accumulated deficit as of January 1, 2019, and accordingly, modified its policy on accounting for leases as stated below. As described under “Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements,” below, the primary impact of adopting ASC 842 for the Company was the recognition in the consolidated balance sheet of certain lease-related assets and liabilities for operating leases with terms longer than 12 months. The Company elected to use the short-term exception and does not records assets/liabilities for short term leases as of December 31, 2020.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014 the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), which supersedes all existing revenue recognition requirements, including most industry specific guidance. This new standard requires a company to recognize revenues when it transfers goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that the company expects to receive for those goods or services. The FASB subsequently issued the following amendments to ASU No. 2014-09 that have the same effective date and transition date: ASU No. 2016-08, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Principal versus Agent Considerations; ASU No. 2016-10, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Identifying Performance Obligations and Licensing; ASU No. 2016-12, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Narrow-Scope Improvements and Practical Expedients; and ASU No. 2016-20, Technical Corrections and Improvements to Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The Company adopted these amendments with ASU 2014-09 (collectively, the new revenue standards).
Under the new revenue standards, the Company recognizes revenues when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which it expects to receive in exchange for those goods. The Company recognizes revenues following the five step model prescribed under ASU No. 2014-09: (i) identify contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenues when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligation. The Company recognized revenue from providing temporary and permanent staffing solutions and sale of consumer products. Service revenues are recognized as the services are performed in proportion to the transfer of control to the customer and real estate revenues are recognized at the time of sale when consideration has been exchanged and title has been conveyed to the buyer. At this time, we have not identified specific planned revenue streams. During the period from August 16, 2010 (Inception) to December 31, 2020, we did not recognize any revenue.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the Company’s financial statements or tax returns. In estimating future tax consequences, the Company generally considers all expected future events other than enactments of changes in the tax law. For deferred tax assets, management evaluates the probability of realizing the future benefits of such assets. The Company establishes valuation allowances for its deferred tax assets when evidence suggests it is unlikely that the assets will be fully realized.
The Company recognizes the tax effects of an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not to be sustained based solely on its technical merits as of the reporting date and then only in an amount more likely than not to be sustained upon review by the tax authorities. Income tax positions that previously failed to meet the more likely than not threshold are recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is met. Previously recognized tax positions that no longer meet the more likely than not threshold are derecognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is no longer met. The Company classifies potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss) as income tax expense.
Stock based Compensation
Stock based compensation cost to employees is measured at the date of grant, based on the calculated fair value of the stock-based award, and will be recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the award). Share-based compensation awards issued to non-employees for services rendered are recorded at either the fair value of the services rendered or the fair value of the share-based payment, whichever is more readily determinable.
Derivative instruments
The fair value of derivative instruments is recorded and shown separately under liabilities. Changes in the fair value of derivatives liability are recorded in the consolidated statement of operations under other (income) expense.
Our Company evaluates all of its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the consolidated statements of operations. For stock-based derivative financial instruments, the Company uses binomial option-pricing model to value the derivative instruments at inception and on subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Related Parties
The Company follows subtopic 850-10 of the FASB ASC for the identification of related parties and disclosure of related party transactions. Pursuant to Section 850-10-20 related parties include:
a. affiliates of the Company;
b. entities for which investments in their equity securities would be required, absent the election of the FV option under the FV Option Subsection of Section 825-10-15, to be accounted for by the equity method by the investing entity;
c. trusts for the benefit of employees, such as pension and profit-sharing trusts that are managed by or under the trusteeship of management;
d. principal owners of the Company;
e. management of the Company;
f. other parties with which the Company may deal if one party controls or can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the other to an extent that one of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests; and
g. other parties that can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the transacting parties or that have an ownership interest in one of the transacting parties and can significantly influence the other to an extent that one or more of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests.
The financial statements shall include disclosures of material related party transactions, other than compensation arrangements, expense allowances, and other similar items in the ordinary course of business. However, disclosure of transactions that are eliminated in the preparation of financial statements is not required in those statements.
The disclosures shall include: a. the nature of the relationship(s) involved; b. a description of the transactions, including transactions to which no amounts or nominal amounts were ascribed, for each of the periods for which income statements are presented, and such other information deemed necessary to an understanding of the effects of the transactions on the financial statements; c. the dollar amounts of transactions for each of the periods for which income statements are presented and the effects of any change in the method of establishing the terms from that used in the preceding period; and d. amounts due from or to related parties as of the date of each balance sheet presented and, if not otherwise apparent, the terms and manner of settlement.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”). ASU 2016-13 requires companies to measure credit losses utilizing a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires a consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. ASU 2016-13 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including those interim periods within those fiscal years. We did not expect the adoption of this guidance have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.