ITEM 7 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(All currency is rounded to the nearest thousands, except share and per share amounts.)
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion contains various forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Exchange Act. Although we believe that, in making any such statement, our expectations are based on reasonable assumptions, any such statement may be influenced by factors that could cause actual outcomes and results to be materially different from those projected. When used in the following discussion, the words “anticipates,” “believes,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “estimates” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated. Factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated, certain of which are beyond our control, are set forth in Item 1A under the caption “Risk Factors.”
Our actual results, performance or achievements could differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, forward-looking statements. Accordingly, we cannot be certain that any of the events anticipated by forward-looking statements will occur or, if any of them do occur, what impact they will have on us. We caution you to keep in mind the cautions and risks described in this document and to refrain from attributing undue certainty to any forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of the document in which they appear. We do not undertake to update any forward-looking statement.
Overview
Creative Realities, Inc. is a Minnesota corporation that provides innovative digital marketing technology solutions to a broad range of companies, individual brands, enterprises, and organizations throughout the United States and in certain international markets. We have expertise in a broad range of existing and emerging digital marketing technologies across approximately fifteen (15) vertical markets, as well as the related media management and distribution software platforms and networks, device and content management, product management, customized software service layers, systems, experiences, workflows, and integrated solutions. Our technology and solutions include: digital merchandising systems and omni-channel customer engagement systems; content creation, production and scheduling programs and systems; a comprehensive series of recurring maintenance, support, and field service offerings; interactive digital shopping assistants, advisors and kiosks; and, other interactive marketing technologies such as mobile, social media, point-of-sale transactions, beaconing and web-based media that enable our customers to transform how they engage with consumers.
Our main operations are conducted directly through Creative Realities, Inc. and our wholly owned subsidiary Creative Realities Canada, Inc., a Canadian corporation. Our other wholly owned subsidiaries are effectively dormant: Creative Realities, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, ConeXus World Global, LLC, a Kentucky limited liability company, and Allure Global Solutions, Inc., a Georgia corporation.
We generate revenue by:
● consulting with our customers to determine the technologies and solutions required to achieve their specific goals, strategies and objectives;
● designing our customers’ digital marketing experiences, content and interfaces;
● engineering the systems architecture delivering the digital marketing experiences we design - both software and hardware - and integrating those systems into a customized, reliable and effective digital marketing experience;
● managing the efficient, timely and cost-effective deployment of our digital marketing technology solutions for our customers;
● delivering and updating the content of our digital marketing technology solutions using a suite of advanced media, content and network management software products; and
● maintaining our customers’ digital marketing technology solutions by: providing content production and related services; creating additional software-based features and functionality; hosting the solutions; monitoring solution service levels; and responding to and/or managing remote or onsite field service maintenance, troubleshooting and support calls.
These activities generate revenue through: bundled-solution sales; consulting services, experience design, content development and production, software development, engineering, implementation, and field services; software license fees; and maintenance and support services related to our software, managed systems and solutions.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Pandemic
In January 2020, an outbreak of a new strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, was identified in Wuhan, China. Through the first quarter of 2020, the disease became widespread around the world, and on March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared a pandemic. Thereafter, state and local authorities in the United States and worldwide have forced many businesses to temporarily reduce or cease operations to slow the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced rapid and immediate deterioration in our business in each of our key vertical markets. The elective and forced closures of, and implementation of social distancing policies on, businesses across the United States has resulted in materially reduced demand for our services by our customers, as our customers purchase our products and services to engage with their end customers in a physical space through digital technology, particularly in our theater, sports arena and large entertainment markets. The reduced demand has resulted in customer orders being delayed. These conditions resulted in downward revisions of our internal forecasts on current and future projected earnings and cash flows, resulting in a non-cash impairment loss of $10,646 recording during the period, and reduced liquidity as described below.
While we are experiencing an intense curtail in current customer demand, our long-term outlook for the digital signage industry remains strong. We believe that the digital signage industry will experience rapid consolidation, adding scale and enhancing profitability to those companies that emerge as the enterprise-level providers within our industry after the COVID-19 pandemic and consolidations. We believe that one byproduct of the COVID-19 pandemic may be the acceleration of industry consolidation as smaller providers may be unwilling or unable to continue business over the course of 2021.
Given the uncertainty around the extent and timing of the potential future spread or mitigation of the COVID-19 pandemic and around the imposition or relaxation of protective measures, we cannot reasonably estimate the impact to our future results of operations, cash flows, or financial condition at this time.
See “Employee Related Expenses” within Note 9 Commitments and Contingencies for a discussion of the Company’s cost-control measures, including employment compensation reductions designed to achieve preliminary cost savings in light of the significant economic uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Safe Space Solutions
On April 28, 2020, we announced the joint launch of an AI-integrated non-contact temperature inspection kiosk known as the Thermal Mirror with our partner, InReality, LLC (“InReality”), for use by businesses as COVID-19 related workplace restrictions are reduced or eliminated. Although we have experience in providing customers digital integration solutions, our launch of the Thermal Mirror involves the development, marketing and sale of a new product to new customers involving a joint effort with InReality. The product also uses hardware and technologies that have not been used with our other customers. Throughout the course of the remainder of 2020, the Company and InReality have continued to develop incremental use cases and have launched a suite of Safe Space Solutions products addressing this market, each of which operate consistently with our primary business model in that they represent a sale of hardware and a SaaS-based subscription license services contract.
Although we believe these products and our launch will be successful, there are a number of risks involved in such launch, including investing significant time and resources in the launch, which may ultimately not be successful. While market response has been encouraging, we may not ultimately recover our investment into the launch of these products.
At-the-market offering
On June 19, 2020, the Company entered into a Sales Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Roth Capital Partners, LLC (“Roth”) under which the Company may offer and sell, from time to time at its sole discretion, shares of its common stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Common Stock”), having an aggregate offering price of up to $8,000,000 through Roth as the Company’s sales agent. Roth may sell the Common Stock by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415 of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. Subject to the terms of the Agreement, Roth will use its commercially reasonable efforts to sell the Common Stock from time to time, based upon instructions from the Company (including any price, time or size limits or other customary parameters or conditions the Company may impose). The Company or Roth may suspend the offering of the Common Stock being made through Roth under the Agreement upon proper notice to the other party. The Company will pay Roth a commission of 3.0% of the gross sales proceeds of any Common Stock sold through Roth under the Agreement, and also has provided Roth with customary indemnification rights. The sale of Common Stock under the Agreement is registered on a Form S-3 registration statement (Registration No. 333-238275) and related prospectus supplement filed with the SEC on June 19, 2020. Pursuant to the “baby shelf” rules that apply to such registration statement, we cannot sell our common stock in a public primary offering (including under the Agreement) with a value exceeding more than one-third of our public float in any 12 calendar month period so long as our public float remains below $75.0 million.
The Company is not obligated to make any sales of Common Stock under the Agreement. The offering of shares of Common Stock pursuant to the Agreement will terminate upon the earlier of (i) the sale of all Common Stock subject to the Agreement or (ii) termination of the Agreement in accordance with its terms.
Through March 8, 2021, the Company received gross proceeds under the Agreement of $1,831 from the issuance of 1,034,068 shares of our Common Stock, and paid an aggregate of $53 to Roth in commissions, yielding net proceeds of $1,778 after commissions, and net proceeds of $1,636 after other offering-related expenses.
Registered Direct Offering
On February 18, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with an institutional investor which provided for the issuance and sale by the Company of 800,000 shares of the Company’s common stock (the “Shares”), in a registered direct offering (the “Offering”) at a purchase price of $2.50 per Share, for gross proceeds of $2,000. The net proceeds from the Offering after paying estimated offering expenses were approximately $1,835, which the Company intends to use for general corporate purposes. The closing of the Offering occurred on February 22, 2021.
Amended and Restated Credit Agreement
On March 7, 2021, the Company and its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Borrowers”) refinanced their current debt facilities with Slipstream Communications, LLC (“Slipstream”), pursuant to an Amended and Restated Credit and Security Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”). The debt facilities continue to be fully secured by all assets of the Borrowers. The maturity date (“Maturity Date”) on the outstanding debt and new debt is extended to March 31, 2023. The Credit Agreement (i) provides a $1,000 of availability under a line of credit (the “Line of Credit”), (ii) consolidates our existing term and revolving line of credit facilities into a new term loan (the “New Term Loan”) having an aggregate principal balance of approximately $4,550 (including a 3.0% issuance fee capitalized into the principal balance), (iii) increases the outstanding special convertible term loan (the “Convertible Loan”) to approximately $2,280 (including a 3.0% issuance fee capitalized into the principal balance), and (iv) extinguishes the outstanding obligations owed with respect to a $264 existing disbursed escrow loan in exchange for shares of the Company’s common stock (the “Disbursed Escrow Conversion Shares”), valued at $2.718 per share (the trailing 10-day VWAP as reported on the Nasdaq Capital Market as of the date of execution of the Credit Agreement). The Line of Credit and Convertible Loan accrue interest at 10% per year, and the New Term Loan accrues interest at 8% per year. See Note 8 Loans Payable for additional information with respect to the Credit Agreement.
Our Sources of Revenue
We generate revenue through digital marketing solution sales, which include system hardware, professional and implementation services, software design and development, software licensing, deployment, and maintenance and support services.
We currently market and sell our technology and solutions primarily through our sales and business development personnel, but we also utilize agents, strategic partners, and lead generators who provide us with access to additional sales, business development and licensing opportunities.
Our Expenses
Our expenses are primarily comprised of three categories: sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative. Sales and marketing expenses include salaries and benefits for our sales, business development solution management and marketing personnel, and commissions paid on sales. This category also includes amounts spent on marketing networking events, promotional materials, hardware and software to prospective new customers, including those expenses incurred in trade shows and product demonstrations, and other related expenses. Our research and development expenses represent the salaries and benefits of those individuals who develop and maintain our proprietary software platforms and other software applications we design and sell to our customers. Our general and administrative expenses consist of corporate overhead, including administrative salaries, real property lease payments, salaries and benefits for our corporate officers and other expenses such as legal and accounting fees.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management is responsible for our financial statements and has evaluated the accounting policies to be used in their preparation. Our management believes these policies are reasonable and appropriate. The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II, ITEM 8 of this Report. The following discussion identifies those accounting policies that we believe are critical in the preparation of our financial statements, the judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies and the possibility that materially different amounts will be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires that management make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of commitments and contingencies at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Our actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We recognized revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, we account for revenue using the following steps:
● Identify the contract, or contracts, with a customer
● Identify the performance obligations in the contract
● Determine the transaction price
● Allocate the transaction price to the identified performance obligations
● Recognize revenue when, or as, we satisfy our performance obligations
See Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 4 Revenue Recognition in our Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, ITEM 8 of this Report, for a complete discussion of our revenue recognition policies.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology we use to measure the estimated liability for doubtful accounts during the past two fiscal years. The Company’s methodology for calculating the allowance for doubtful accounts consists of (1) reserving for specific receivables which (a) are known to be facing serious financial problems, (b) have a trade dispute with the Company, or (c) are significantly aged and/or unresponsive, and (2) a general reserve for unaged accounts receivable based on a percentage of revenue each period. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions we use to establish the liability for doubtful accounts. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to losses or gains that could be material.
Goodwill
Goodwill is evaluated for impairment annually as of September 30 and whenever events or circumstances make it more likely than not that impairment may have occurred. We have no indefinite-lived intangible assets. We test goodwill for impairment by comparing the book value to the fair value at the reporting unit level. We have only one reporting unit, and therefore the entire goodwill is allocated to that reporting unit. The fair value of the reporting unit is determined by using a discounted cash flow analyses consisting of various assumptions, including expectations of future cash flows based on projections or forecasts derived from analysis of business prospects and economic or market trends that may occur. We use these same expectations in other valuation models throughout the business. In addition to the discounted cash flow analysis, we utilize a leveraged buy-out model, trading comps and market capitalization to ultimately determine an estimated fair value of our reporting unit based on weighted average calculations from these models. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but that are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. If the carrying amount exceeds the fair value, further analysis is performed to measure the impairment loss.
In addition, our market capitalization could fluctuate from time to time. Such fluctuation may be an indicator of possible impairment of goodwill if our market capitalization falls below its book value. If this situation occurs, we perform the required detailed analysis to determine if there is impairment.
During the first quarter of 2020, we determined that the reduced cash flow projections and the significant decline in our market capitalization as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic during the three months ended March 31, 2020 indicated that an impairment loss may have been incurred during the period. We qualitatively assessed and concluded that it was more likely than not that goodwill was impaired as of March 31, 2020. We reviewed our previous forecasts and assumptions based on our updated projections that were subject to various risks and uncertainties, including: (1) forecasted revenues, expenses and cash flows, including the duration and extent of impact to our business and our alliance partners from the COVID-19 pandemic, (2) current discount rates, (3) the reduction in our market capitalization, (4) changes to the regulatory environment and (5) the nature and amount of government support that will be provided. As a result of this qualitative assessment, we concluded that indicators of impairment were present. The subsequent quantitative interim impairment assessment of our goodwill as of March 31, 2020 resulted in recording an impairment of $10,646 as of March 31, 2020. No additional impairment was recorded during the remainder of 2020, including as a result of our annual assessment completed as of September 30, 2020.
We have not made any material changes in our reporting units or the accounting methodology we used to assess impairment of goodwill since September 30, 2020. The valuation of goodwill is subject to a high degree of judgment, uncertainty and complexity. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions we use to test for impairment losses on goodwill. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to an impairment charge that could be material.
There were no indicators of impairment identified in or recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Taxes
Accounting for income taxes requires recognition of deferred tax liabilities and assets for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities. These deferred taxes are measured by applying the provisions of tax laws in effect at the balance sheet date, including the impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”) enacted on December 22, 2017.
We recognize in income the effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities in the period that includes the enactment date.
As of December 31, 2020, a full valuation allowance is recorded against our deferred tax. The valuation allowance is based, in part, on our estimate of future taxable income, the expected utilization of federal and state tax loss carryforwards, and credits and the expiration dates of such tax loss carryforwards. Significant assumptions are used in developing the analysis of future taxable income for purposes of determining the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets which, in our opinion, are reasonable under the circumstances.
Impact of Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 3 Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements in our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, ITEM 8 of this Report, for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on results of operations and financial condition, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Results of Operations
Note: All dollar amounts reported in Results of Operations are in thousands, except per-share information.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The tables presented below compare our results of operations from one period to another, and present the results for each period and the change in those results from one period to another in both dollars and percentage change.
Sales
Sales decreased by $14,141, or 45% in 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 driven by reductions in (1) installation services of $4,962 following a significant increase in suspended, delayed, and cancelled customer projects, initiatives, and capital expenditures as a direct result of the COVID-19 pandemic, (2) software development services of $8,754 which included nonrecurrence of approximately $7,937 of 2019 revenue related to software development and licensing arrangements, and (3) management services of $1,186 related to contracts with customers which were partially or permanently closed during the year. Reductions in year over year core digital signage business were partially offset by $3,535 of revenue generated from our Safe Space Solutions products and services during the year ended December 31, 2020 following launch of the suite of products at the end of April 2020.
Gross Profit
Gross profit decreased $5,618 in absolute dollars to $8,121 in 2020 from $13,739 in 2019, or 41% driven by reductions in revenue which were partially offset by an increase in gross margin to 46.5% in 2020 from 43.5% in 2019. The increase in gross margin relates to the sales of Safe Space Solutions products and a higher percentage of managed services revenue to consolidated revenue.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses generally include the salaries, taxes, and benefits of our sales and marketing personnel, as well as trade show activities, travel, and other related sales and marketing costs. Sales and marketing expenses decreased by $668, or 28%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 driven by a $662 reduction in personnel costs as the result of reduced headcount and salary reductions in March 2020, combined with reduced spend on trade show activity and related travel costs following the cancellation of several key industry events as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We anticipate that our sales and marketing expenses will continue to be significantly lower than those incurred in 2019 as trade shows and industry events planned for throughout 2021 have been suspended, delayed, or completely cancelled. We further anticipate our sales personnel will continue to incur reduced travel costs during the extended pandemic period and utilize virtual meeting technology more commonly moving forward.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $330, or 23%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 as the result of a reduction in personnel costs during the period following reduced headcount and salary reductions in March 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
Total general and administrative expenses increased by $201, or 2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 from $9,092 to $9,293. Personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, and travel-related expenses, decreased by $1,109 in 2020, partially offset by an increase in stock compensation amortization expense of $273 related to incremental employee and directors’ awards during 2020 which are being amortized over the thirty-six (36) month vesting period based on the grant date fair value calculated using the Black Scholes method. Personnel costs were reduced following completion of a reduction-in-force and salary reductions for remaining personnel in March 2020. The reductions in personnel costs were offset by increases in (1) incremental reserve for bad debts of $616 primarily driven by a customer bankruptcy, (2) legal and deal costs of approximately $500 related to our offering process and ongoing litigation efforts discussed in Note 9 Commitments and Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial Statements, and (3) insurance costs, including director and officer related coverage which is experiencing significant tightening in the most recent twenty-four months.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased by $224, or 18%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 driven by a combination of an increased intangible asset base and increased capitalized costs related to the continued development of our software products since the acquisition of Allure.
Lease Termination Expense
On December 31, 2020, we exited our office facilities located in Dallas, TX. In ceasing use of these facilities, we recorded a one-time non-cash charge of $18. There were no such lease terminations during 2019.
Goodwill impairment
See Note 7 Intangible Assets, Including Goodwill to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of the Company’s interim impairment test and the non-cash impairment charge recorded.
Gain on Earnout Liability
The Company completed an updated fair value analysis at December 31, 2019 of the contingent consideration earnout liability initially recorded at $250 in the opening balance sheet at the time of the Allure Acquisition on November 20, 2018. As a result of that analysis, the Company concluded the fair value of the liability was $0, resulting in a gain of $250 in 2019.
Interest Expense
See Note 8 Loans Payable to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of the Company’s debt and related interest expense obligations.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
All of the Company’s outstanding warrants classified as liabilities expired during 2019. See Note 5 Fair Value Measurement to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of the Company’s non-cash change in Warrant Liability.
Gain on Settlement of Obligations
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company settled and/or wrote off obligations of $348 for aggregate cash payments of $139 and recognized a gain of $209 related to legacy accounts payable deemed to no longer be legal obligations to vendors.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company settled and/or wrote off obligations of $3,178 for $1,132 cash payment and recognized a gain of $2,046. $1,619 of this gain related to settlement of legacy sales commissions due to a third party vendor which were settled with a cash payment of $1,100 during the three-months ended December 31, 2019. The remaining settlements related to legacy accounts payable deemed to no longer be legal obligations to vendors.
Supplemental Operating Results on a Non-GAAP Basis
The following non-GAAP data, which adjusts for the categories of expenses described below, is a non-GAAP financial measure. Our management believes that this non-GAAP financial measure is useful information for investors, shareholders and other stakeholders of our Company in gauging our results of operations on an ongoing basis. We believe that EBITDA is a performance measure and not a liquidity measure, and therefore a reconciliation between net loss/income and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA has been provided. EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net loss/income as an indicator of performance or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as an indicator of cash flows, in each case as determined in accordance with GAAP, or as a measure of liquidity. In addition, EBITDA does not take into account changes in certain assets and liabilities as well as interest and income taxes that can affect cash flows. We do not intend the presentation of these non-GAAP measures to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for results prepared in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP measures should be read only in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We produced net income for the year ended December 31, 2019 but incurred a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 and have negative cash flows from operating activities for both periods. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $1,826 and a working capital deficit of $306.
On January 11, 2021, Creative Realities, Inc. received a notice from Old National Bank regarding forgiveness of the loan in the principal amount of $1,552 (the “PPP Loan”) that was made pursuant to the Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program under the Coronavirus Air, Relief and Economic Security Act of 2020. According to such notice, the full principal amount of the PPP Loan and the accrued interest have been forgiven. Accounting for the forgiveness will be recognized in the first quarter of 2021.
On February 18, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with an institutional investor which provided for the issuance and sale by the Company of 800,000 shares of the Company’s common stock (the “Shares”), in a registered direct offering (the “Offering”) at a purchase price of $2.50 per Share, for gross proceeds of $2,000. The net proceeds from the Offering after paying estimated offering expenses were approximately $1,835, which the Company intends to use for general corporate purposes. The closing of the Offering occurred on February 22, 2021.
On March 7, 2021, the Company and Slipstream entered into an agreement to refinance the Company’s Loan and Security Agreement, including (1) the extension of all maturity dates therein to March 31, 2023, (2) the conversion of the Disbursed Escrow Promissory Note into equity, (3) access to an additional $1,000 via a multi-advance line of credit facility, and (4) the removal of the three times liquidation preference with respect to the Company’s Secured Convertible Special Loan Promissory Note.
Management believes that, based on (i) the forgiveness of our PPP Loan, (ii) the execution of a registered direct offering and remaining availability for incremental offerings under our previously registered Form S-3, (iii) the refinancing of our debt, including extension of the maturity date on our term and convertible loans, as well as access to incremental borrowings under the new multi-advance line of credit, and (iv) our operational forecast through 2021, we can continue as a going concern through at least March 31, 2022. However, given our net losses, cash used in operating activities and working capital deficit, we obtained a continued support letter from Slipstream through March 31, 2022. We can provide no assurance that our ongoing operational efforts will be successful which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and cash flows.
See Note 8 Loans Payable to the Consolidated Financial Statements for an additional discussion of the Company’s debt obligations and further discussion of the Company’s refinancing activities subsequent to December 31, 2020.
Operating Activities
The cash flows used in operating activities were $3,530 and $970 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The majority of the cash consumed by operations for both periods was attributed to our net losses. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our net loss was $17,053 and $1,008 when adjusted for gain on settlements of obligations, respectively. The cash flows used in operating activities were further driven by the Company’s increase in inventory on hand as a result of the launch of our Safe Space Solutions product suite, partially offset by non-cash charges of $93, $2,531, and $10,646 related to (1) fair value of our Special Loan, (2) depreciation and amortization expenses, and (3) impairment charge related to goodwill, respectively, combined with an increase of $613 in our allowance for doubtful accounts primarily as a result of a customer bankruptcy.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $657 as compared to $687 for the same period in 2019. Uses of cash in the current and prior period relate primarily to internal and external costs associated with software development. We currently do not have any material commitments for capital expenditures as of December 31, 2020, nor do we anticipate any significantly expanding our expenditures for investing in 2021.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $3,479 and $1,473, respectively. The increase was driven by our receipt of a PPP Loan of $1,552 and proceeds from our at-the-market offering of $1,832, partially offset by no debt proceeds during the year.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not engage in any off-balance sheet arrangements set forth in Item 303(a) (4) of Regulation S-K.