ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this report.
Management’s plans and basis of presentation:
The Company was incorporated in the State of Delaware on April 20, 2015. Effective January 14, 2016, the Company’s name was changed to 3D Nanocolor Corp. (“3D Nanocolor”) from 2D Nanocolor Corp. Subsequently, effective October 6, 2017, the Company’s name was changed to Crown Electrokinetics Corp. from 3D Nanocolor Corp.
The Company is commercializing technology for smart or dynamic glass. The Company’s electrokinetic glass technology is an advancement on microfluidic technology that was originally developed by Hewlett-Packard Company.
On January 26, 2021, the Company completed its public offering and its common stock began trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market (Nasdaq) under the symbol CRKN.
On January 22, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a reverse stock split at an exchange ratio of one (1) share of common stock for every three (3) shares of common stock. The reverse stock split was effective on January 25, 2021, such that every three (3) shares of common stock have been automatically converted into one (1) share of common stock. The Company will not issue fractional certificates for post-reverse split shares in connection with the reverse stock split. Rather, all shares of common stock that are held by a stockholder will be aggregated and each stockholder shall be entitled to receive the number of whole shares resulting from the combination of the shares so aggregated. Any fractions resulting from the reverse stock split computation shall be rounded up to the next whole share.
On January 26, 2021, the Company entered into an underwriting agreement relating to the Company’s public offering of its common stock, par value $0.0001 per share. The Company agreed to sell 4,150,000 shares of its common stock to the underwriters, at a purchase price per share of $4.14 (the offering price to the public of $4.50 per share minus the underwriters’ discount), pursuant to the Company’s registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-249833), as amended, under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and the related registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-252418) that was filed by the Company under Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act. The Company has also granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to 622,500 additional shares of common stock to cover over-allotments. On January 28, 2021, the Company received net proceeds from its public offering of approximately $19.3 million, net of underwriter fees and commissions of approximately $1.7 million, and offering costs of $0.4 million.
Additionally, there were 251 shares of our Series A Preferred Stock issued and outstanding, 1,443 shares of our Series B Preferred Stock issued and 500,756 shares of our Series C Preferred Stock issued, with one shareholder of record of each such series of our preferred stock.
Crown’s Research & Development Operation currently occupies 1,700 square feet of space, located on the HP Inc. campus in Corvallis, Oregon in the Advanced Technology and Manufacturing Institute (ATAMI). ATAMI is an academic-industrial research center and business incubator designed to provide an advanced materials development environment to private sector partner tenants performing research and development. The facility includes access to shared state-of-the-art tooling capabilities. ATAMI has grown to 80,000 square feet since its inception in 2004.
On March 4, 2021, the Company entered into a standard office lease with Hudson 11601 Wilshire, LLC, to lease 3,500 square feet of office space located at 11601 Wilshire Boulevard, Los Angeles, California 90025. The base monthly rent for the first year of the lease is $18,375 per month, which increases to $19,018.13 per month for the second year, $19,683.76 for the third year and $20,372.69 for the final three months of the lease. The lease expires on June 30, 2024. We believe that our facilities are adequate to meet our needs for the immediate future and that, should it be needed, we will be able to secure additional space to accommodate the expansion of our operations. This office space, along with ATAMI, offers Crown all the space requirements it needs for the foreseeable future.
On November 15, 2017, the Company entered into a license agreement with Glass Manufacturer. The Glass Manufacturer agreement provides that the Company will provide samples to be used by Glass Manufacturer for the sole purpose of determining the feasibility of integrating the Company’s film technology in Glass Manufacturer’s auto and train glass products. The Company began performing development activities in April of 2018. On February 1, 2019, the Company and Glass Manufacturer entered into a new license agreement, terminating the prior agreement, which was further extended on November 14, 2019. Under such new license agreement, the Company will provide samples to be used by Glass Manufacturer to evaluate the appearance of and measure optical properties of the Company’s film technology. At Glass Manufacturer’s option, the Company will provide additional samples to be used by Glass Manufacturer to measure the durability of such sample for the purpose of determining the feasibility of integrating the Company’s film technology in Glass Manufacturer’s auto and train glass products. The performance related to the new agreement is a continuation of the work being performed as of April 2018. On November 14, 2019, the Company entered into a new agreement with Glass Manufacturer, which terminates the February 1, 2019 agreement as of June 16, 2019, (the “Effective Date”) of the new agreement. Under the terms of the new agreement, Glass Manufacturer will pay the Company $0.1 million within 60 days of the Effective Date. On December 10, 2019, the Company received the $0.1 million payment from Glass Manufacturer and the Company delivered three pieces of updated samples to Glass Manufacturer on September 28, 2020.
On August 23, 2017, the Company entered into a collaborative agreement with Film Manufacturer. The Film Manufacturer agreement provides that the Company and Film Manufacturer will jointly develop electrokinetic films and determine their suitability for commercial use in applied films and interlayers for automobile windows. The Company and Film Manufacturer will be exchanging IP for the development of the films. The Company began performing development activities in April of 2018.
Results of Operations for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
The Company did not recognize revenue for the year ended March 31, 2021 and recognized $0.1 million of revenue for the year ended March 31, 2020. The revenue recognized during the year ended March 31, 2020 was related to our new agreement with Glass Manufacturer and represents the cash received for our continuing development activities. We are not able to estimate the total amount of development service under an efforts-based perspective and, therefore, the amount of performance that will be required in our contracts cannot be reliably estimated under the proportional performance revenue recognition model. Accordingly, we recognize revenue up to the amount of costs incurred.
Cost of Revenue
There was no cost of revenue recognized during the year ended March 31, 2021. The cost of revenue for the year ended March 31, 2020, was $0.6 million and consists of approximately $0.5 million related to the costs incurred with respect to our contract with Film Manufacturer and approximately $0.1 million with respect to our contract with Glass Manufacturer.
Research and Development (including licenses acquired)
Research and development expenses were $3.5 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to $1.8 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase of $1.7 million is primarily related to increased stock-based compensation expenses of approximately $1.8 million recognized for stock options granted to our employees and officers, offset by lower stock-based compensation expenses of approximately $0.7 million related to canceled shares of restricted stock in December 2020 which were exchange for stock options, increased payroll and related expenses of approximately $0.3 million for new hires, and increased costs of approximately $0.1 million for the purchase of lab supplies used in our development activities.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses were $15.8 million and $5.5 million for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $10.3 million increase in SG&A expenses is primarily due to increased stock-based compensation expense of approximately $8.7 million. The increase in stock-based compensation consisted primarily of $0.8 million related to 1.1 million restricted stock units granted to the Company’s chief executive officer in connection with the Company’s public offering in January 2021, $4.8 million related to stock options granted to officers and employees of the Company, and increased stock-based compensation expense of approximately $3.1 million related to our restricted stock, primarily comprised of $3.6 million of stock-based compensation recognized for 1.6 million shares of restricted stock issued to our chief executive officer, offset by $0.7 million of lower stock-based compensation due to shares of restricted stock exchanged for stock options in December 2020, increased payroll and related expenses of approximately $1.0 million for the Company’s officers and new hires, increased legal and professional fees of approximately $0.4 million and increased insurance expenses of $0.2 million.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense was $21.4 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared with other expense of $1.8 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. The $19.6 million increase is primarily due to increases to loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $14.0 million, primarily related to our note exchange agreements entered into during the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2021, increased interest expense of $1.7 million related to our convertible notes, loss on exchange of our convertible notes for common stock and warrants of $1.5 million and the change in fair value of our warrant liability of $2.4 million.
Liquidity
The Company has incurred substantial operating losses since its inception, and expects to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future and may never become profitable. As reflected in the financial statements, the Company had an accumulated deficit of approximately $57.2 million at March 31, 2021, a net loss of approximately $40.8 million, and approximately $6.6 million of net cash used in operating activities for the year ended March 31, 2021. The Company expects to continue to incur ongoing administrative and other expenses, including public company expenses.
Although it is difficult to predict the Company’s liquidity requirements as of March 31, 2021, based upon the Company’s current operating plan and completion of its public offering, management believes that the Company will have sufficient cash to meet its projected operating requirements for at least the next 12 months following the issuance of these financial statements.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $6.6 million, which primarily consisted of our net loss of $40.8 million, adjusted for non-cash expenses of $35.5 million including, $14.4 million of stock-based compensation expenses, $14.3 million for the loss on extinguishment of debt, $2.7 million of amortization related to the debt discount recognized for our convertible notes payable, $1.5 million recognized for the loss on exchange of our convertible notes for common stock and warrants, $2.4 million for the change in fair value of our warrant liability and $0.2 million of other expenses. The net change in operating assets and liabilities was $1.3 million and was primarily due to decreases in accounts payable and accrued expenses totaling $1.4 million, offset by a $0.4 million increase in accrued interest related to our convertible notes and a $0.4 million increase to prepaid expenses and other current assets.
For the year ended March 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $1.0 million, which primarily consisted of our net loss of $9.6 million, adjusted for non-cash expenses of $6.8 million including, $5.1 million of stock-based compensation expenses, $1.2 million of amortization related to the debt discount recognized for our convertible notes payable, $0.3 million of loss on extinguishment of debt related to the issuance of our common stock in connection with our note amendments and $0.2 million of expenses related to our public offering. The net change in operating assets and liabilities was $1.7 million and was primarily due to increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses totaling $1.3 million and increased accrued interest of $0.3 million related to our convertible notes.
Investing Activities
For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was approximately $1.6 million. The net cash used is primarily related to the purchases of the HP patents and related license fees of $1.5 million, and the purchase of lab equipment totaling $0.1 million.
For the year ended March 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was approximately $27,000, related to the purchase of computer equipment and computer software.
Financing Activities
For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $23.5 million. The net cash provided is primarily related to $20.9 million related to the net proceeds received from the issuance of the Company’s common stock and warrants, $2.7 million of proceeds received from the issuance of our senior secured convertible notes and the related stock warrants, $0.2 million received from the exercise of common stock warrants, and $0.4 million of proceeds received from our PPP loan, offset by $0.5 million for the repurchase of shares of our common stock and $0.2 million for the repayment of our senior secured promissory note.
For the year ended March 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $1.0 million. The net cash provided is primarily related to $1.0 million of proceeds received from the issuance of our senior secured convertible notes and the related stock warrants.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements during the periods presented, and we do not currently have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the SEC rules and regulations.
Revenue Recognition
We adopted the new revenue standard, ASC 606, on March 31, 2019 using the full retrospective approach. The adoption did not have an effect on 2020 or 2019 revenue recognition or a cumulative effect on opening equity, as the timing and measurement of revenue recognition is materially the same as under ASC 605. The core principle of the new revenue standard is that a company should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The following five steps are applied to achieve that core principle:
● Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer
● Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract
● Step 3: Determine the transaction price
● Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
● Step 5: Recognize revenue when the company satisfies a performance obligation
For contracts where the period between when we transfer a promised good or service to the customer and when the customer pays is one year or less, we have elected the practical expedient to not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component.
Our performance obligation is to provide a development service that enhances an asset that the customer controls. We receive upfront payments in advance of providing services and payment upon reaching milestones.
We are not able to reasonably measure the outcome of our performance obligations that are satisfied over time because we are in the early stages of the contracts. Therefore, the amount of performance that will be required in our contracts cannot be reliably estimated and we recognize revenue up to the amount of costs incurred.
Stock-based compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all options based on the estimated fair value of the award on the grant date. We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of option awards. The fair value is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We account for forfeitures as they occur. We recognize expense for awards where vesting is subject to a market or performance condition based on the derived service period. Expense for awards with performance conditions would be estimated and adjusted on a quarterly basis based upon our assessment of the probability that the performance condition will be met.
The determination of the grant date fair value of options using an option pricing model is affected principally by our estimated fair value of shares of our common stock and requires management to make a number of other assumptions, including the expected life of the option, the volatility of the underlying shares, the risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. The assumptions used in our Black-Scholes option-pricing model represent management’s best estimates at the time of measurement. These estimates are complex, involve a number of variables, uncertainties and assumptions and the application of management’s judgment, as they are inherently subjective. If any assumptions change, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions are estimated as follows:
● Expected Term. The expected term of options represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding based on the simplified method, which is the half-life from vesting to the end of its contractual term. The simplified method was used because we do not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis for an estimate of expected term.
● Expected Volatility. We historically have lacked company-specific historical and implied volatility information. Therefore, we estimate our expected stock volatility based on the historical volatility of a publicly traded set of peer companies and expect to continue to do so until such time as we have adequate historical data regarding the volatility of our own traded stock price.
● Risk-Free Interest Rate. We base the risk-free interest rate on the implied yield available on U. S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with an equivalent remaining term.
● Expected Dividend Yield. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common shares and do not plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future, and, therefore, we use an expected dividend yield of zero in our valuation models.
We account for forfeited awards as they occur.
Fair Value of Common Stock
Historically, for all periods prior to this offering, the fair values of the shares of common stock underlying our options were estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. In order to determine the fair value, our board of directors considered, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of our common stock and preferred stock prepared by unrelated third-party valuation firms in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held- Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, or the Practice Aid. Given the absence of a public trading market of our capital stock, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock, including:
● contemporaneous third-party valuations of our common stock;
● the prices, rights, preferences and privileges of our preferred stock relative to our common stock;
● our business, financial condition and results of operations, including related industry trends affecting our operations;
● the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or sale of our company, given prevailing market conditions;
● the lack of marketability of our common stock;
● the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
● U.S. and global economic and capital market conditions and outlook.
Critical accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates. Our most critical accounting policies are summarized below. See Note 3 to our financial statements for a description of our other significant accounting policies.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See Note 3 to our financial statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our financial statements.
JOBS Act Transition Period
As an “emerging growth company” under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, we can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We are electing to delay our adoption of such new or revised accounting standards. As a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to the financial statements of other public companies.