Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
THE FOLLOWING DISCUSSION OF OUR PLAN OF OPERATION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS SHOULD BE READ IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND RELATED NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS INCLUDED ELSEWHERE IN THIS REPORT. THIS DISCUSSION CONTAINS FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS THAT RELATE TO FUTURE EVENTS OR OUR FUTURE FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE. THESE STATEMENTS INVOLVE KNOWN AND UNKNOWN RISKS, UNCERTAINTIES AND OTHER FACTORS THAT MAY CAUSE OUR ACTUAL RESULTS, LEVELS OF ACTIVITY, PERFORMANCE OR ACHIEVEMENTS TO BE MATERIALLY DIFFERENT FROM ANY FUTURE RESULTS, LEVELS OF ACTIVITY, PERFORMANCE OR ACHIEVEMENTS EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED BY THESE FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS. THESE RISKS AND OTHER FACTORS INCLUDE, AMONG OTHERS, THOSE LISTED UNDER “FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS” AND “RISK FACTORS” AND THOSE INCLUDED ELSEWHERE IN THIS REPORT.
We intend that this discussion will provide information that will assist in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles affect our financial statements. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, included elsewhere in this report.
Prior to the onset of the age of Covid-19 the Company produced live pop culture conventions (“Comic Conventions”) across the United States providing a social networking and entertainment venue for enthusiasts of movies, TV shows, video games, technology, toys, social networking, gaming, comic books, and graphic novels. Our Comic Conventions have provided an opportunity for companies in the entertainment, toy, gaming, publishing and retail business to carry out sales, marketing, product promotion, public relations, advertising, and sponsorship efforts. However, at present, because of the substantial uncertainties concerning the course and scope of the current situation with the Covid-19 virus, it is currently clear that no live events will be produced by the Company during Q4 of 2020. It is presently unknowable how long the current situation with Covid-19 will continue and what impact the Covid-19 situation will ultimately have upon the Company. Because of the Covid-19 situation, the Company has not been able to produce a live event since March 8, 2020 in Cleveland, Ohio. Events that had been planned for 2020 have been postponed into 2021. Currently no live events are scheduled for the remainder of 2020. Live events are scheduled for New Orleans and Philadelphia in January 2021. However, at this point it is unknowable if such scheduled events can take place or not, with the determination being solely dependent on the progression of the Covid-19 virus, and the imposition of governmental authority either allowing or disallowing the mounting of live events.
Despite the unprecedented challenges experienced by the global economy this past year, the Company’s businesses, specifically the live events and hospitality industries (in which the Jevo machine plays), weathered the seismic shift in March when live events and many hospitality venues shut down due to COVID. Despite the decimation of these sectors, we successfully pivoted our business models to continue to bring in steady revenue while expanding our consumer base. The businesses of the Company currently consist of: (i) Live Event Comic Conventions, (ii) Virtual pop-culture events, (iii) Sales of memorabilia and collectibles; and, (iii) Manufacturing and sale of the Jevo appliance.
As we move into 2021, our strategies continue to evolve. The Company is repositioning its approach: after completing over 200 streaming virtual online events, Wizard Virtual will continue to create and build global interactive online communities for affinity groups by sourcing, producing, marketing, and streaming exclusive proprietary events and Signature Series content. At Jevo, we’re introducing the machine into new verticals - all actions that should help us thrive in a still-uncertain marketplace.
Strategy
There has recently been considerable interest in a consumer category of digital products known as NFTs (Non-Fungible Tokens). NFTs are collectibles where various objects (including pictures, music and video) are digitized. The digital version of the object is sold as a unique, blockchain-authenticated collectible.
In recent months many companies have entered this space. However, Wizard Brands, Inc., because of its existing enterprises, is perhaps uniquely situated to enter the NFT marketplace on a scale at which no other new market entrant into this space can achieve.
Although the NFT market is currently gaining considerable attention in the press, and is achieving traction with consumers, it is impossible to know the ultimate size and significance of the NFT marketplace.
Wizard Brands, Inc., having captured thousands of hours of video elements, consisting of millions of desirable frames of content, and possessing an extensive collection of celebrity collectables and its current market position in the pop-culture consumer products, is likely very favorably-positioned to attract attention and market share as it enters this sector. Additionally, the fan base that comprises Wizard’s largest constituency is already active in the digital space and the brand extension into digital collectibles is a natural progression into a new and vibrant marketplace. Because Wizard already owns content, and has the marketing and distribution apparatus already in place, the potential for the Company to realize impressive margins in the NFT space is manifest.
Due largely to the enormous changes in society during the past year, online activity and connection through virtual communities are more important than ever. We see great opportunity to build on our established equity as the online destination for like-minded affinity groups.
Through its digital initiatives Wizard Brands desires to become the online destination for affinity groups to gain behind-the-scenes and unique experiences they can’t otherwise access.
As we continue to grow of Subscription Series, subjects that we are currently sourcing and looking to produce as Signatures Series will include:
● Hunting and Fishing;
● Self Defense;
● Sports Teams (professional and collegiate);
● Football, Basketball, Baseball, Hockey, etc.;
● Musicians;
● Authors;
● Baking / Cooking;
● Home and Garden;
● Auto racing and enthusiasts;
● Mainstream television; and
● Comics / Comic series / CosPlay.
Everyone who participates in the Signature Series will benefit: from the fans who gain direct, personal, and interactive access to talent and influencers, to the talent and influencers who will realize vast opportunities (including financial) to connect and expand their fan bases. Wizard Virtual, which will own content, collect live and residual income and constantly generate new merchandising opportunities, will see its affinity communities continue to grow as we expand our offerings.
The opportunities these Signature Series will open up to monetization are highly compelling. From collectors’ items to limited release products, from insider access to early release products to retail tie-ins, sponsorships and advertising - the possibilities are exponential.
As we continue to develop our subscription-based series model for our intensely engaged and loyal communities, we aim to achieve five objectives:
● Increased and residual revenue;
● Digital product sales and cross-promotions with other businesses;
● Platform for influencers to increase their base, earn money, and amplify their message;
● Further grow our base of consumers to whom we can market content, merchandise, and experiences; and
● Enrich content library across a wide swath of interests.
Our objective is to continue to create an expanded and qualitatively enhanced digital presence to leverage the Company’s digital extensions to become a dominant voice and destination for pop culture enthusiasts across multiple media platforms. Key elements of our strategy include:
● producing high quality Comic Conventions events across the United States to entertain fans and to allow for promotion of consumer products and entertainment;
● produce rich content and leveraging the content created at the Comic Conventions through digital media outlets such as websites, apps, emails, newsletters, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and YouTube, among others, and producing new virtual experiences; and
● obtaining sponsorships and promotions from media and entertainment companies for our Comic Conventions, including: (i) expanding our relationships with entertainment and media companies; and (ii) Continue efforts to control all costs including corporate overhead and convention production costs.
Finally, during 2019 and 2020, the Company has utilized internal controls, operating procedures and techniques to control costs. These operating changes have included staff cuts and the realignment of various operating functions within the Company.
Results of Operations
Summary of Statements of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenue
Revenue was $10,578,316 for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $4,518,163 for the comparable period ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $6,060,153. The decrease is revenue was a result of the impact of Covid-19 on the ability of Company to produce live events. Of the total revenue for the year, $2,610,123 was derived from the live events we were able to hold during the first fiscal quarter and $1,915,744 was derived from other sources of revenue we were able to develop during the balance of the year.
Because of the Covid-19 situation the Company produced no live events during the Second, Third, and Fourth Quarters of 2020. Rather, the Company, commencing on March 31, 2020 commenced the production of virtual events. Between March 31, 2020 and December 31, 2020 present, the Company has produced approximately 200 virtual events. For the year revenue from the virtual events was $1,466,714.
In addition to the virtual events that were produced, the Company also engaged in e-commerce through the Wizard World Vault and on the eBay platform. During the year, the revenue contributed by e-commerce was $412,325.
Convention revenue was $2,610,123 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $10,578,316 for the comparable period a decrease of $7,968,193. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company produced a total of 3 shows compared to 14 events in the year ended December 31, 2019. As noted above, the Company produced no live shows during the Second, Third and Fourth Quarters.
Gross Profit
Gross profit percentage, after considering cost of revenues, increased to 33.5% during the year ended December 31, 2020, up from 8.6% during the year ended December 31, 2019. The gross profit percentage increase was attributable in part to the significantly lower operating costs of operating virtual events and e-commerce versus live events.
Other Income
Paycheck Protection Program
On March 27, 2020 the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted and included a provision for the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) to implement its Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The PPP provides small businesses with funds to pay payroll costs, including some benefits over a covered period of up to 24 weeks. Funds received under the PPP may also be used to pay interest on mortgages, rent, and utilities. Subject to certain criteria being met, all or a portion of the loan may be forgiven. The loans bear interest at an annual rate of one percent (1%), are due two (2) years from the date of issuance, and all payments are deferred for the first six (6) months of the loan. Any unforgiven balance of loan principal and accrued interest at the end of the six (6) month loan deferral period is amortized in equal monthly installments over the remaining 18-months of the loan term. On April 30, 2020, the Company closed a $197,600 SBA guaranteed PPP loan. The Company expects to use the loan proceeds as permitted and apply for and receive forgiveness for the entire loan amount. As of September 30, 2020, the outstanding balance under the loan was $197,600.
Small Business Administration Loan
On June 9, 2020, the Company executed a loan agreement with the SBA. The Company received aggregate proceeds of $149,900 under the loan which shall accrue interest at a rate of 3.75% and will mature in June 2050. As of September 30, 2020, the outstanding balance under the loan was $149,900.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019, were $2,762,037, as compared to $2,828,606 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily attributable to the integration of the Jevo operations which increased the consulting fees and general and administrative expenses in addition to an increase of stock-based compensation. These increases were offset by a decrease in employee salaries and benefits. General and administrative expenses increased by $183,044 from the comparative period of the prior year.
Loss from Operations
Loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, was $1,857,406 as compared to a loss from operations of $1,317,018 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The positive variance was primarily attributable to the transition from producing live events to producing virtual events and establishing the e-commerce operations, as well as costs associated with the acquisition of the Jevo operating unit and the assimilation of the Jevo unit into the Company.
Other Expenses
Other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $623,383, as compared to $304,449 for the year ended December 31, 2019. In each case, the expense was interest expense related to convertible notes and corresponding debt discount.
Net Loss Attributable to Common Stockholder
Net loss attributable to common stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $1,854,609 or loss per basic share of $0.53, compared to a net loss of $2,161,855 or loss per basic share of $0.62, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Inflation did not have a material impact on the Company’s operations for the applicable period. Other than the foregoing, management knows of no trends, demands, or uncertainties that are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes total current assets, liabilities and working capital at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019:
At December 31, 2020, we had a working capital deficit of $4,848,375 as compared to working capital deficit of $4,485,857, at December 31, 2019, a change of $362,518. The change in working capital is primarily attributable to a decrease in cash and cash equivalents and prepaid convention expenses and an increase in inventory, accounts payable and accrued expenses offset by a decrease in unearned revenue.
Net Cash
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $1,070,718 and $705,603, respectively. The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $1,940,401 and $2,161,855, respectively.
Going Concern Analysis
The Company had a loss from operations of $1,317,018 and $1,857,406 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. On December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $1.9 million and a working capital deficit of $4.8 million. We have evaluated the significance of these conditions in relation to our ability to meet our obligations, which had previously raised doubts about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through March 2022. However, the Company believes that the effects of its cost savings efforts with regard to corporate overhead and show production expenses together with the initiation of virtual activities and e-commerce, will guide the Company in a positive direction as we continue to strive to attain profitability.
However, because of the current situation with the Covid-19 virus, the Company was unable to produce any live events after the First Quarter of 2020. At present it is unclear how many live events will actually be produced by the Company in 2021. It is presently unknowable how long the current situation with Covid-19 will continue and what impact the Covid-19 situation will ultimately have upon the Company in 2020 and 2021. At this point, the Company has postponed all of the live shows that it has scheduled for 2020. In the face of the impact of Covid-19 on live events generally, the Company has focused on producing virtual events. The first such virtual event was an interactive fan experience which took place on March 31, 2020 and since that time the Company has produced approximately 150 virtual events. In addition, the Company has moved into e-commerce with online sales of collectables and the creation of the “Wizard World Vault” as a site for consumers to purchase pop-culture memorabilia and collectables.
In addition to its cost containment strategies, the Company identified opportunities to rapidly move into the areas of (I) retailing collectables, (ii) providing virtual opportunities to fans to interact with celebrities, (iii) creating live and virtual events and conferences focused on new subject matter and affinities, and (iv) engaging in M&A opportunities.
On December 19, 2019, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Barlock 2019 Fund, LP (the “Purchaser”), for the sale of the Company’s securities, comprised of (I) a $2,500,000 convertible debenture, convertible at a price of $2.50 per share, and (ii) warrants to acquire 300,000 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $2.50 per share. The warrants are now exercisable at $0.25 per share due to anti-dilution protections contained in the securities. As a condition to Purchaser entering into the Purchase Agreement, the Company entered into a security agreement in favor of the Purchaser, granting a security interest in substantially all of the property of the Company, whether presently owned or existing or hereafter acquired or coming into existence, including but not limited to, its ownership interests in its subsidiaries, to secure the prompt payment, performance and discharge in full of all of the Company’s obligations under the debenture. The security interest is on equal footing with certain other creditors of the Company. The Company received $2,500,000 in cash from the offering of the securities but was required to pay out of the closing proceeds Purchaser’s attorney’s fees in the amount of $25,000. The Company has agreed with the Purchaser that the funds received will be restricted and utilized only for M&A opportunities, new business ventures, brand extensions and the creation of new vertical opportunities by the Company. The subject debenture contains a “ratchet” provision that adjusts the conversion rates of the notes to the lowest rate the Company has agreed to issue stock. The effect of repricing board and employee options to $0.25 reset the conversion rates the note to $0.25. In light of the financial stress Covid-19 has placed on the Company the holder of the note has agreed to not require payment due under the outstanding notes until December 31, 2022. The debenture contains a “ratchet” provisions that adjusts the conversion rate of the debenture to the lowest rate the Company has agreed to issue stock. The effect of repricing board and employee options to $0.25 reset the conversion rates of the debenture to $0.25. In light of the financial stress Covid-19 has placed on the Company the holder of the debenture has agreed to not require payment due under each of the outstanding debenture until December 31, 2022.
Additionally, if necessary, management believes that both related parties (management and members of the Board of Directors of the Company) and potential external sources of debt and/or equity financing may be obtained based on management’s history of being able to raise capital from both internal and external sources coupled with current favorable market conditions, It is understood however, that although there is a recent history of related-parties providing a source of financing, there is no absolute certainty that any such related-party financing can be obtained on a going-forward basis. Therefore, the accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern.
The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the matters discussed herein. While the Company believes in the viability of management’s strategy to generate sufficient revenue, control costs and the ability to raise additional funds if necessary, there can be no assurances to that effect. The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the ability to further implement the business plan, generate sufficient revenues and to control operating expenses.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.” Critical accounting policies and practices are those that are both most important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and results and require management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. The Company’s significant and critical accounting policies and practices are disclosed below as required by generally accepted accounting principles.
Basis of Presentation
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”).
Use of Estimates and Assumptions and Critical Accounting Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include all accounts of the entities as of the reporting period ending date(s) and for the reporting period(s).
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment is stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization is computed on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets, varying from 2 to 7 years or, when applicable, the life of the lease, whichever is shorter.
The impairment charges, if any, are included in operating expenses in the accompanying statements of operations.
Intangible assets
Intangible assets represent intangible assets acquired in connection with the Company’s purchase of Jevo patents and technology. The transaction was not a business combination or acquisition of a business.
The intangible assets are expected to be amortized using a straight-line method consistent with the expected future cash flows related to the intangible asset. Amortized intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances exist that indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. When indicators of impairment exist, an estimate of undiscounted net cash flows is used in measuring whether the carrying amount of the asset or related asset group is recoverable.
Measurement of the amount of impairment, if any, is based upon the difference between the asset or asset group’s carrying value and fair value. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques, including market and income approaches as considered necessary.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are comprised of intangible assets and property and equipment. Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. An estimate of undiscounted future cash flows produced by the asset, or the appropriate grouping of assets, is compared to the carrying value to determine whether an impairment exists, pursuant to the provisions of FASB ASC 360-10 “Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and for Long-Lived Assets to Be Disposed Of”. If an asset is determined to be impaired, the loss is measured based on quoted market prices in active markets, if available. If quoted market prices are not available, the estimate of fair value is based on various valuation techniques, including a discounted value of estimated future cash flows and fundamental analysis. The Company reports an asset to be disposed of at the lower of its carrying value or its estimated net realizable value. The Company did not record any impairment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, as there were no triggering events or changes in circumstances that indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.
Leases
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASC 842 using the modified retrospective approach and recognized a right of use (“ROU”) asset and liability in the consolidated balance sheet in the amount of $252,980 related to the operating lease for office space. Results for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are presented under ASC 842, while prior period amounts were not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with the legacy accounting guidance under ASC Topic 840, Leases.
As part of the adoption, we elected the practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard, which among other things, allowed us to:
1. Continue applying our current policy for accounting for land easements that existed as of, or expired before, January 1, 2019.
2. Not separate non-lease components from lease components and instead to account for each separate lease component and the non-lease components associated with that lease component as a single lease component.
3. Not to apply the recognition requirements in ASC 842 to short-term leases.
4. Not record a right of use asset or right of use liability for leases with an asset or liability balance that would be considered immaterial.
Revenue Recognition
The Company follows the FASB Accounting Standards Codification ASC 606 for revenue recognition. The Company will recognize revenue when it is realized or realizable and earned. The Company considers revenue realized or realizable and earned when all of the following criteria are met:
1) Identify the contract with a customer
A contract with a customer exists when (i) the Company enters into an enforceable contract with a customer that defines each party’s rights regarding the services to be transferred and identifies the payment terms related to these services, (ii) the contract has commercial substance and, (iii) the Company determines that collection of substantially all consideration for services that are transferred is probable based on the customer’s intent and ability to pay the promised consideration. The Company applies judgment in determining the customer’s ability and intention to pay, which is based on a variety of factors including the customer’s historical payment experience or, in the case of a new customer, published credit and financial information pertaining to the customer.
2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract
Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified based on the services that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct, whereby the customer can benefit from the service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available from third parties or from the Company, and are distinct in the context of the contract, whereby the transfer of the services is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. To the extent a contract includes multiple promised services, the Company must apply judgment to determine whether promised services are capable of being distinct and distinct in the context of the contract. If these criteria are not met the promised services are accounted for as a combined performance obligation.
3) Determine the transaction price
The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which the Company will be entitled in exchange for transferring services to the customer. To the extent the transaction price includes variable consideration, the Company estimates the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing either the expected value method or the most likely amount method depending on the nature of the variable consideration. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in the Company’s judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. None of the Company’s contracts as of December 31, 2019 contained a significant financing component.
4) Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract
If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. However, if a series of distinct services that are substantially the same qualifies as a single performance obligation in a contract with variable consideration, the Company must determine if the variable consideration is attributable to the entire contract or to a specific part of the contract. For example, a bonus or penalty may be associated with one or more, but not all, distinct services promised in a series of distinct services that forms part of a single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on a relative standalone selling price basis unless the transaction price is variable and meets the criteria to be allocated entirely to a performance obligation or to a distinct service that forms part of a single performance obligation. The Company determines standalone selling price based on the price at which the performance obligation is sold separately. If the standalone selling price is not observable through past transactions, the Company estimates the standalone selling price taking into account available information such as market conditions and internally approved pricing guidelines related to the performance obligations.
5) Recognize revenue when or as the Company satisfies a performance obligation
The Company satisfies performance obligations either over time or at a point in time. Revenue is recognized at the time the related performance obligation is satisfied by transferring a promised service to a customer.
Convention revenue is generally earned upon completion of the convention. Unearned convention revenue is deposits received for conventions that have not yet taken place, which are fully or partially refundable depending upon the terms and conditions of the agreements.
The Company recognizes cost of revenues in the period in which the revenues was earned. In the event the Company incurs cost of revenues for conventions that are yet to occur, the Company records such amounts as prepaid expenses and such prepaid expenses are expensed during the period the convention takes place.
Equity-based compensation
The Company recognizes compensation expense for all equity-based payments in accordance with ASC 718 “Compensation - Stock Compensation”. Under fair value recognition provisions, the Company recognizes equity-based compensation net of an estimated forfeiture rate and recognizes compensation cost only for those shares expected to vest over the requisite service period of the award.
Restricted stock awards are granted at the discretion of the Company. These awards are restricted as to the transfer of ownership and generally vest over the requisite service periods, typically over a four-year period (vesting on a straight-line basis). The fair value of a stock award is equal to the fair market value of a share of Company stock on the grant date.
The fair value of option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the development of assumptions that are input into the model. These assumptions are the expected stock volatility, the risk-free interest rate, the expected life of the option, the dividend yield on the underlying stock and the expected forfeiture rate. Expected volatility is calculated based on the historical volatility of the Company’s Common stock over the expected option life and other appropriate factors. Risk-free interest rates are calculated based on continuously compounded risk-free rates for the appropriate term. The dividend yield is assumed to be zero as the Company has never paid or declared any cash dividends on our Common stock and does not intend to pay dividends on our Common stock in the foreseeable future. The expected forfeiture rate is estimated based on historical experience.
Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards requires the input of the subjective assumptions described above. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if factors change and the Company uses different assumptions, our equity-based compensation could be materially different in the future. In addition, the Company is required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, the equity-based compensation could be significantly different from what the Company has recorded in the current period.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company follows ASC 820-10 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification to measure the fair value of its financial instruments and disclosures about fair value of its financial instruments. ASC 820-10 establishes a framework for measuring fair value in accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (U.S. GAAP), and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. To increase consistency and comparability in fair value measurements and related disclosures, ASC 820-10 establishes a fair value hierarchy which prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value into three (3) broad levels. The three (3) levels of fair value hierarchy defined by ASC 820-10 are described below:
Level
Quoted market prices available in active markets for identical assets or liabilities as of the reporting date.
Level
Pricing inputs other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1, which are either directly or indirectly observable as of the reporting date.
Level
Pricing inputs that are generally unobservable inputs and not corroborated by market data.
Financial assets are considered Level 3 when their fair values are determined using pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies or similar techniques and at least one significant model assumption or input is unobservable.
The fair value hierarchy gives the highest priority to quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs. If the inputs used to measure the financial assets and liabilities fall within more than one level described above, the categorization is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement of the instrument.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities, such as cash, accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid expenses and other current assets, accounts payable and accrued expenses approximate their fair values because of the short maturity of these instruments.
Transactions involving related parties typically cannot be presumed to be carried out on an arm’s-length basis, as the requisite conditions of competitive, free-market dealings may not exist. However, in the case of the convertible promissory note discussed in Note 5, the Company obtained a fairness opinion from an independent third party which supports that the transaction was carried out at an arm’s length basis.
Income Taxes
The Company follows the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes under FASB ASC 740, “Income Taxes.” Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that included the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
FASB ASC 740 prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. There were no unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2019 and 2018. The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. No amounts were accrued for the payment of interest and penalties at December 31, 2019 and 2018. The Company is currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments, accruals or material deviation from its position. The Company is subject to income tax examinations by major taxing authorities since inception.
The Company may be subject to potential examination by federal, state, and city taxing authorities in the areas of income taxes. These potential examinations may include questioning the timing and amount of deductions, the nexus of income among various tax jurisdictions, and compliance with federal, state, and city tax laws. The Company’s management does not expect that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits will materially change over the next twelve months.
The Company is no longer subject to tax examinations by tax authorities for years prior to 2017.
Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance
In October 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-16, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Intra-Entity Transfers of Assets Other than Inventory”, which eliminates the exception that prohibits the recognition of current and deferred income tax effects for intra-entity transfers of assets other than inventory until the asset has been sold to an outside party. The updated guidance is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption of the update is permitted. The adoption of ASU 2018-16 did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statement presentation or disclosures.
In August 2018, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2018-13, “Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement”, which changes the fair value measurement disclosure requirements of ASC 820. This update is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and for interim periods within those fiscal years. The adoption of ASU 2018-13 did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statement presentation or disclosures.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02 “Leases” (Topic 842) which amended guidance for lease arrangements to increase transparency and comparability by providing additional information to users of financial statements regarding an entity’s leasing activities. Subsequent to the issuance of Topic 842, the FASB clarified the guidance through several ASUs; hereinafter the collection of lease guidance is referred to as ASC 842. The revised guidance seeks to achieve this objective by requiring reporting entities to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet for substantially all lease arrangements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-04, “Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting.” ASU 2020-04 provides optional expedients and exceptions to account for contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions that reference LIBOR or another reference rate if certain criteria are met. The amendments of ASU No. 2020-04 are effective immediately, as of March 12, 2020, and may be applied prospectively to contract modifications made and hedging relationships entered into on or before December 31, 2022. The Company is evaluating the impact that the amendments of this standard would have on the Company’s consolidated financial statements
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes(Topic 740): “Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes”, which is intended to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and by clarifying and amending existing guidance to improve consistent application. This ASU is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. Early adoption is permitted. Certain amendments within this ASU are required to be applied on a retrospective basis, certain other amendments are required to be applied on a modified retrospective basis and all other amendments on a prospective basis. The Company is currently evaluating the impact the adoption of this standard will have on the consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt-”Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity”. This ASU amends the guidance on convertible instruments and the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity, and also improves and amends the related EPS guidance for both Subtopics. The ASU will be effective for annual reporting periods after December 15, 2021 and interim periods within those annual periods and early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the new guidance on its consolidated financial statements.
Management has evaluated all recent accounting pronouncements as issued by the FASB in the form of Accounting Standards Updates (“ASU”) through the date these financial statements were available to be issued and found no recent accounting pronouncements issued, but not yet effective accounting pronouncements, when adopted, will have a material impact on the financial statements of the Company.