Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto appearing in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
America’s Car-Mart, Inc., a Texas corporation (the “Company”), is one of the largest publicly held automotive retailers in the United States focused exclusively on the “Integrated Auto Sales and Finance” segment of the used car market. References to the Company include the Company’s consolidated subsidiaries. The Company’s operations are principally conducted through its two operating subsidiaries, America’s Car Mart, Inc., an Arkansas corporation (“Car-Mart of Arkansas”), and Colonial Auto Finance, Inc., an Arkansas corporation (“Colonial”). Collectively, Car-Mart of Arkansas and Colonial are referred to herein as “Car-Mart.” The Company primarily sells older model used vehicles and provides financing for substantially all of its customers. Many of the Company’s customers have limited financial resources and would not qualify for conventional financing as a result of limited credit histories or past credit problems. As of April 30, 2021, the Company operated 151 dealerships located primarily in small cities throughout the South-Central United States.
Car-Mart has been operating since 1981. Car-Mart has grown its revenues between approximately 4% and 23% per year over the last ten years (average 9%). Growth results from same dealership revenue growth and the addition of new dealerships. Revenue increased 23.4% for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to a 15.5% increase in average retail sales price, a 7.4% increase in units sold and a 20.7% increase in interest income. The Company added three new dealerships in fiscal 2021.
The Company earns revenue from the sale of used vehicles, and in most cases a related service contract and an accident protection plan product, as well as interest income and late fees from the related financing. The Company’s cost structure is more fixed in nature and is sensitive to volume changes. Revenues can be affected by our level of competition, which is influenced to a large extent by the availability of funding to the sub-prime automobile industry, together with the availability and resulting purchase cost of the types of vehicles the Company purchases for resale. Revenues can also be affected by the macro-economic environment. Down payments, contract term lengths and proprietary credit scoring are critical to helping customers succeed and are monitored closely by corporate management at the point of sale. After the sale, collections, delinquencies and charge-offs are crucial elements of the Company’s evaluation of its financial condition and results of operations and are monitored and reviewed on a continuous basis. Management believes that developing and maintaining a relationship with its customers and earning their repeat business is critical to the success and growth of the Company and can serve to offset the effects of increased competition and negative macro-economic factors.
A challenging competitive environment puts pressure on sales volumes especially at older dealerships which tend to have higher overall sales volumes and more repeat customers. Additionally, as the Company attempts to attract and retain target customers, increased competition can contribute to lower down payments and longer contract terms which can have a negative effect on collection percentages, liquidity and credit losses. Management believes that the ultra-low interest rate environment combined with a lack of other investment alternatives has been attracting excess capital into the sub-prime automobile market and increasing competition. In an effort to combat the increased competition the Company will continue to focus on the benefits of excellent customer service and its “local” face-to-face offering in an effort to help customers succeed, while continuing to enhance the Company’s digital services and offerings to meet growing demands for an online sales experience. The Company, over recent years, has focused on providing a good mix of vehicles in various price ranges to increase affordability for customers, to address sales volume challenges and to improve credit performance in the future by improving the equity position of customers who may be tempted to default on their contracts, especially when competition on the lending side is elevated.
The purchase price the Company pays for its vehicles can also have a significant effect on revenues, liquidity and capital resources. Because the Company bases its selling price on the purchase cost of the vehicle, increases in purchase costs result in increased selling prices. As the selling price increases, it becomes more difficult to keep the gross margin percentage and contract term in line with historical results because the Company’s customers have limited incomes and their car payments must remain affordable within their individual budgets. Decreases in the overall volume of new car sales, particularly domestic brands, lead to decreased supply and generally increased prices in the used car market. Also, expansions or constrictions in consumer credit, as well as general economic conditions, can have an overall effect on the demand and the resulting purchase cost of the types of vehicles the Company purchases for resale.
COVID-19 has had an impact on the availability and prices of the vehicles the Company purchases. Auctions and other wholesale outlets have been closed, forced to operate at limited capacity, or converted to online. The timing and duration of these closures could continue to impact the availability of product. The Company constantly reviews and adjusts purchasing avenues in order to obtain an appropriate flow of vehicles. Declining purchase costs may present the opportunity to purchase a slightly newer, lower mileage vehicle for our customers.
The Company consistently focuses on collections. Each dealership is responsible for its own collections with supervisory involvement of the corporate office. Over the last five fiscal years, the Company’s credit losses as a percentage of sales have ranged from approximately 20.3% in fiscal 2021 to 28.7% in fiscal 2017 (average of 25.3%). Credit losses as a percentage of sales have steadily improved on an annual basis in each of the past five fiscal years from a historical high in fiscal 2017, as improvements in collection processes and higher recovery rates on repossessions have progressively offset continuing competitive pressures. The Company’s credit loss results were temporarily negatively impacted during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 by the impacts of COVID-19, including the Company’s suspension of certain collection activities for a period of time and the Company’s decision to increase the allowance for credit losses as a result of the pandemic from 24.5% to 26.5%, resulting in a $9.1 million pretax charge to the provision for credit losses. However, credit loss results improved substantially in fiscal 2021 due to a lower frequency of losses and lower severity of loss amounts relative to the principal balance as the CARES Act enhanced unemployment and stimulus funds, combined with the Company’s commitment to working with customers, aided customers’ ability to make their vehicle payments. The improvement in credit losses for fiscal 2021 was further accelerated by the Company’s decision during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 to reduce the allowance for credit losses back to 24.5% of finance receivables, net of deferred revenue, which resulted in a $15.1 million pretax decrease in the provision for credit losses.
Historically, credit losses, on a percentage basis, tend to be higher at new and developing dealerships than at mature dealerships. Generally, this is because the management at new and developing dealerships tends to be less experienced in making credit decisions and collecting customer accounts and the customer base is less seasoned. Normally more mature dealerships have more repeat customers and, on average, repeat customers are a better credit risk than non-repeat customers. Credit losses and charge-offs can also be impacted by market and economic factors, including a competitive used vehicle financing environment and macro-economic conditions such as inflation in the price of gasoline, groceries and other staple items and overall unemployment levels, as well as the personal income levels of the Company’s customers. Negative macro-economic issues, however, do not always lead to higher credit loss results for the Company because the Company provides basic affordable transportation which in many cases is not a discretionary expenditure for customers.
In an effort to offset credit losses and to operate more efficiently, the Company continues to look for improvements to its business practices, including better underwriting and better collection procedures. The Company has a proprietary credit scoring system which enables the Company to monitor the quality of contracts. Corporate office personnel monitor proprietary credit scores and work with dealerships when the distribution of scores falls outside of prescribed thresholds. The Company also uses credit reporting and the use of global positioning system (“GPS”) units on vehicles. Additionally, the Company has placed significant focus on the collection area as the Company’s training department continues to spend significant time and effort on collections improvements. The Company’s director of collections services oversees the collections department and provides timely oversight and additional accountability on a consistent basis. The Company believes that the proper execution of its business practices is the single most important determinant of its long-term credit loss experience.
Historically, the Company’s gross margin as a percentage of sales has been fairly consistent from year to year at approximately 40% or 41% over each of the previous five fiscal years. The Company’s gross margin is based upon the cost of the vehicle purchased, with lower-priced vehicles typically having higher gross margin percentages but lower gross profit dollars, and is also affected by the percentage of wholesale sales to retail sales, which relates for the most part to repossessed vehicles sold at or near cost. The gross margin percentage increased slightly in fiscal 2021 to 40.7% from 40.5% in the prior fiscal year, while gross margin dollars per retail unit sold increased by $791, primarily as a result of the Company selling on average a higher priced vehicle in fiscal 2021. The Company expects that increasing vehicle purchase costs and sales prices will continue to put pressure on its gross margin percentage over the near term.
Hiring, training and retaining qualified associates is critical to the Company’s success. The rate at which the Company adds new dealerships and is able to implement operating initiatives is limited by the number of trained managers and support personnel the Company has at its disposal. Excessive turnover, particularly at the dealership manager level, could impact the Company’s ability to add new dealerships and to meet operational initiatives. During the past fiscal year, COVID-19 has impacted unemployment levels, business activity and workforce participation, making the landscape for hiring very competitive. The Company has continued to add resources to recruit, train, and develop personnel, especially personnel targeted to fill dealership manager positions. The Company expects to continue to invest in the development of its workforce.
Consolidated Operations
(Operating Statement Dollars in Thousands)
2021 Compared to 2020
Total revenues increased $174.0 million, or 23.4%, in fiscal 2021, as compared to revenue growth of 11.3% in fiscal 2020, principally as a result of (i) revenue growth from dealerships that operated a full twelve months in both fiscal years ($137.6 million), and (ii) revenue from stores opened or acquired during or after the year ended April 30, 2020 ($36.7 million), partially offset by (iii) decreased revenue from dealerships closed during or after the year ended April 30, 2020 ($333,000). The increase in revenue for fiscal 2021 is attributable to (i) a 15.5% increase in average retail sales price, (ii) a 7.4% increase in retail units sold and (iii) a 20.7% increase in interest and other income.
Cost of sales, as a percentage of sales, decreased slightly to 59.3% compared to 59.5% in fiscal 2020, resulting in a slight improvement in the gross margin percentage to 40.7% of sales in fiscal 2021 from 40.5% of sales in fiscal 2020. On a dollar basis, our gross margin per retail unit sold increased by $791 in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.. The average retail sales price for fiscal 2021 was $13,621, a $1,828 increase over the prior fiscal year, reflecting the high demand for used cars, especially in the market we serve. As purchase costs increase, the margin between the purchase cost and the sales price of the vehicles we sell generally narrows on a percentage basis because the Company must offer affordable prices to our customers. However, during fiscal 2021, the pressure on the cost of sales and gross margin percentages from the increase in average purchase costs was more than offset by improved wholesale margins, strong demand and low supply of lower priced units, and reduced repair expenses to prepare purchased vehicles for resale. Demand for the vehicles we purchase for resale has remained high and the supply has continued to be restricted due to lower repossessions, lower levels of new car production and sales and additional demand due to stimulus money. While the long-term impact of COVID-19 on the availability of vehicles in our market and new car sales is undetermined at this time, the Company has seen disruptions in the supply of vehicles since the beginning of the pandemic and expects the supply to be tighter in the near-term relative to demand, resulting in the continuation of elevated purchase costs and related pressure on the gross margin percentage.
Selling, general and administrative expenses, as a percentage of sales decreased to 16.2% in fiscal 2021 from 18.0% for fiscal 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses are, for the most part, more fixed in nature. In dollar terms, overall selling, general and administrative expenses increased $13.1 million from fiscal 2020. The increase is primarily focused on investments in our associates, especially building our customer experience team and investing in procurement, combined with increased commissions due to higher net income.
Provision for credit losses as a percentage of sales decreased to 20.3% for fiscal 2021 compared to 24.8% for fiscal 2020. Net charge-offs as a percentage of average finance receivables decreased to 19.3% for fiscal 2021 compared to 23.1% for the prior year. The decrease in net charge-offs for fiscal 2021 primarily resulted from a lower frequency of losses combined with a lower severity of losses relative to the principal balance, primarily due to improvements in collections as a result of the stimulus money and enhanced unemployment, as well as higher recovery rates on repossessions. As a result of the improved credit losses, improved delinquencies at yearend, as well as our outlook for projected losses, the Company decreased the allowance for credit losses from 26.5% to 24.5%, a $15.1 million pretax decrease to the provision for credit losses. The Company uses several operational initiatives (including credit reporting and the use of GPS units on vehicles) to improve collections and continually pushes for improvements and better execution of its collection practices. The Company believes that the proper execution of its business practices is the single most important determinant of credit loss experience and will continue to focus on improvements in oversight and accountability provided by the Company’s investments in our corporate infrastructure within the collections area. The Company also believes the somewhat improved macro-economic environment prior to the pandemic mitigated the competitive pressures and positively impacted credit loss results for fiscal 2021.
Interest expense for fiscal 2021 as a percentage of sales decreased slightly to 0.8% in fiscal 2021 from 1.2% in fiscal 2020. Although the Company had higher average borrowings in fiscal 2021 ($215.0 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $179.9 million for fiscal 2020), the lower interest rates offset the interest on the higher debt balances.
2020 Compared to 2019
Total revenues increased $75.5 million, or 11.3%, in fiscal 2020, as compared to revenue growth of 9.3% in fiscal 2019, principally as a result of (i) revenue growth from dealerships that operated a full twelve months in both fiscal years ($61.5 million), and (ii) revenue from stores opened or acquired during or after the year ended April 30, 2019 ($17.0 million), partially offset by (iii) decreased revenue from dealerships closed during or after the year ended April 30, 2019 ($3.0 million). The increase in revenue for fiscal 2020 is attributable to (i) a 6.0% increase in average retail sales price, (ii) a 5.3% increase in retail units sold and (iii) a 10.9% increase in interest and other income.
Cost of sales, as a percentage of sales, increased slightly to 59.5% compared to 58.6% in fiscal 2019, representing a decrease in the gross margin percentage to 40.5% of sales in fiscal 2020 from 41.4% of sales in fiscal 2019, which resulted from the increase in purchase costs outpacing the increase in average retail sales price on a percentage basis. The average retail sales price for fiscal 2020 was $11,793, a $668 increase over the prior fiscal year, reflecting the high demand for used cars. However, on a dollar basis, our gross margin per retail unit sold increased by $172 in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019.
Selling, general and administrative expenses, as a percentage of sales remained relatively consistent at 18.0% in fiscal 2020, compared to 18.3% for fiscal 2019. In dollar terms, overall selling, general and administrative expenses increased $10.5 million from fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily focused on investments in our associates, especially general manager recruitment, training and collections support along with improvements in digital marketing, all in an effort to provide superior customer service.
Provision for credit losses as a percentage of sales decreased slightly to 24.8% for fiscal 2020 compared to 25.0% for fiscal 2019. Net charge-offs as a percentage of average finance receivables decreased to 23.1% for fiscal 2020 compared to 25.7% for the prior year. The decrease in net charge-offs for fiscal 2020 primarily resulted from a lower frequency of losses combined with a lower severity of losses, primarily due to improvements in collections processes and higher recovery rates on repossessions. However, the fiscal 2020 credit loss results were negatively impacted by net provision changes of $9.1 million primarily as a result of the Company’s decision to increase the allowance for credit losses in light of the uncertainty regarding the COVID-19 impact and the fact that the Company suspended certain collection activities including repossession efforts for a period of time due to the pandemic.
Interest expense for fiscal 2020 as a percentage of sales remained relatively consistent at 1.2% compared to 1.3% for fiscal 2019. Although the Company had a higher average borrowings in fiscal 2020 ($179.9 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $161.0 million for fiscal 2019), the lower interest rates offset the interest on the higher debt balances.
Financial Condition
The following table sets forth the major balance sheet accounts of the Company at April 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The following table shows receivables growth compared to revenue growth during each of the past three fiscal years. For fiscal year 2021, growth in finance receivables of 28.7% exceeded revenue growth of 23.4%. The Company currently anticipates going forward that the growth in finance receivables will generally be slightly higher than overall revenue growth on an annual basis due to overall term length increases in our installment sales contracts in recent years, partially offset by improvements in underwriting and collection procedures in an effort to reduce credit losses. The average term for installment sales contracts at April 30, 2021 was 37.3 months, compared to 33.3 months for April 30, 2020.
At fiscal year-end 2021, inventory increased 125.9% ($45.8 million), compared to fiscal year-end 2020. This increase was primarily related to COVID-19, as the Company held off on inventory purchases for a period of time towards the end of fiscal 2020 to conserve cash flow and for additional clarity on restrictions and sales volumes during the pandemic. During fiscal 2021, the Company has returned to an inventory level to support increased sales and high used car demand. The Company strives to improve the quality of the inventory and maintain adequate turns while maintaining inventory levels to ensure adequate supply of vehicles, in volume and mix, and to meet sales demand.
Property and equipment, net, increased by approximately $4.6 million as of April 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. The increase is attributable to approximately $9.0 million in building and leasehold improvements and purchases of furniture and equipment primarily related to new dealership openings and remodels, partially offset by depreciation expense of $3.7 million and disposals of approximately $700,000 in furniture and equipment.
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities increased by approximately $16.6 million at April 30, 2021 as compared to April 30, 2020 primarily due to higher accounts payable related to increased inventory and sales activity, higher deferred sales tax related to the increase in sales, and the deferral of the employer’s share of social security and payroll taxes as permitted under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, also known as the CARES Act.
Income taxes payable, net, decreased approximately $3.7 million at April 30, 2021 compared to April 30, 2020 primarily due to the relief provided by the CARES Act, as the Company elected to defer certain estimated tax payments in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020.
Deferred revenue increased $20.7 million at April 30, 2021 over April 30, 2020, primarily resulting from the increase in sales of the accident protection plan and service contract products.
Deferred income tax liabilities, net, increased approximately $7.0 million at April 30, 2021 as compared to April 30, 2020 due primarily to the increase in finance receivables.
Debt facilities increased $10.4 million primarily as a result of additional borrowing to fund the increase in inventory.
Borrowings on the Company’s revolving credit facilities fluctuate primarily based upon a number of factors including (i) net income, (ii) finance receivables changes, (iii) income taxes, (iv) capital expenditures and (v) common stock repurchases. Historically, income from continuing operations, as well as borrowings on the revolving credit facilities, have funded the Company’s finance receivables growth, capital asset purchases and common stock repurchases. In fiscal 2021, the Company had a $67.0 million net increase in total debt, net of cash, used to contribute to the funding of finance receivables growth of $188.4 million, an inventory increase of $45.8 million, net capital expenditures of $9.0 million and common stock repurchases of $10.6 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table sets forth certain historical information with respect to the Company’s Statements of Cash Flows (in thousands):
The primary drivers of operating profits and cash flows include (i) top line sales (ii) interest rates on finance receivables, (iii) gross margin percentages on vehicle sales, and (iv) credit losses, a significant portion of which relates to the collection of principal on finance receivables. The Company generates cash flow from income from operations. Historically, most or all of this cash is used to fund finance receivables growth, capital expenditures and common stock repurchases. To the extent finance receivables growth, common stock repurchases and capital expenditures exceed income from operations the Company generally increases its borrowings under its revolving credit facilities. The majority of the Company’s growth has been self-funded.
Cash flows from operations in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 decreased primarily as a result of (i) an increase in finance receivable originations, (ii) an increase in inventory and (iii) a decrease in income taxes payable, partially offset by (iv) an increase in finance receivable collections and (v) an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities and (vi) an increase in deferred revenue. Finance receivables, net, increased by $159.0 million during fiscal 2021.
Cash flows from operations in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 decreased primarily as a result of (i) an increase in finance receivable originations, (ii) an increase in deferred tax assets and (iii) accounts payable and accrued liabilities increasing at a lower rate than the prior year, offset by (iv) an increase in finance receivable collections and (v) an increase in the provision for credit losses. Finance receivables, net, increased by $50.7 million during fiscal 2020.
The purchase price the Company pays for a vehicle has a significant effect on liquidity and capital resources. Because the Company bases its selling price on the purchase cost for the vehicle, increases in purchase costs result in increased selling prices. As the selling price increases, it generally becomes more difficult to keep the gross margin percentage and contract term in line with historical results because the Company’s customers have limited incomes and their car payments must remain affordable within their individual budgets. Several external factors can negatively affect the purchase cost of vehicles. Decreases in the overall volume of new car sales, particularly domestic brands, lead to decreased supply in the used car market. Also, constrictions in consumer credit, as well as general economic conditions, can increase overall demand for the types of vehicles the Company purchases for resale as used vehicles become more attractive than new vehicles in times of economic instability. A negative shift in used vehicle supply, combined with strong demand, results in increased used vehicle prices and thus higher purchase costs for the Company.
Sustained macro-economic pressures affecting our customers have helped keep demand high in recent years for the types of vehicles we purchase. This strong demand, coupled with modest levels of new vehicle sales in recent years, have led to a generally ongoing tight supply of used vehicles available to the Company in both quality and quantity. The impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the business operations of auctions and wholesalers as well as new car production and sales during the past fiscal year further increased the price and reduced the quantity of used cars available for purchase by the Company. The Company expects these effects on used vehicle supply to continue for the short term.
The Company has devoted significant efforts to improving its purchasing processes to ensure adequate supply at appropriate prices, including expanding its purchasing territories to larger cities in close proximity to its dealerships and increasing its efforts to purchase vehicles from individuals at the dealership level as well as via the internet. The Company has also increased the level of accountability for its purchasing agents including updates to sourcing and pricing guidelines. The Company has also recently begun to make some corporate level purchases and form relationships with national vendors that can supply a large quantity of high-quality vehicles. Even with these efforts, the Company expects gross margin percentages to remain under pressure over the near term.
The Company believes that the amount of credit available for the sub-prime auto industry will remain relatively consistent with levels in recent years, which management expects will contribute to continued strong overall demand for most, if not all, of the vehicles the Company purchases for resale. Increased competition resulting from availability of funding to the sub-prime auto industry generally contributes to lower down payments and longer terms, which can have a negative effect on collection percentages, liquidity and credit losses when compared to historical periods. The availability of credit was somewhat dampened for consumers during fiscal year 2021, although with the high demand of used vehicles and related financing, the availability of credit has loosened more recently.
The Company’s liquidity is also impacted by our credit losses. Macro-economic factors such as unemployment levels and general inflation, particularly within staple items such as groceries, can significantly affect our collection results and ultimately credit losses. The long-term economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting effects on the Company’s collections and credit loss results remains uncertain. The Company has made improvements to its business processes within the last few years to strengthen controls and provide stronger infrastructure to support its collections efforts. The Company continues to strive to reduce credit losses in spite of the current economic challenges and continued competitive pressures by improving deal structures. Management continues to focus on improved execution at the dealership level, specifically as related to working individually with customers concerning collection issues.
The Company has generally leased the majority of the properties where its dealerships are located. As of April 30, 2021, the Company leased approximately 82% of its dealership properties. The Company expects to continue to lease the majority of the properties where its dealerships are located.
The Company’s revolving credit facilities generally restrict distributions by the Company to its shareholders. The distribution limitations under the credit facilities allow the Company to repurchase the Company’s stock so long as either: (a) the aggregate amount of such repurchases after September 30, 2019 does not exceed $50 million, net of proceeds received from the exercise of stock options, and the total availability under the credit facilities is equal to or greater than 20% of the sum of the borrowing bases, in each case after giving effect to such repurchases (repurchases under this item are excluded from fixed charges for covenant calculations), or (b) the aggregate amount of such repurchases does not exceed 75% of the consolidated net income of the Company measured on a trailing twelve month basis; provided that immediately before and after giving effect to the stock repurchases, at least 12.5% of the aggregate funds committed under the credit facilities remain available. Thus, although the Company does routinely repurchase stock, the Company is limited in its ability to pay dividends or make other distributions to its shareholders without the consent of the Company’s lenders.
At April 30, 2021, the Company had approximately $2.9 million of cash on hand and $99.1 million of availability under its revolving credit facilities (see Note F to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8). On a short-term basis, the Company’s principal sources of liquidity include income from operations and borrowings under its revolving credit facilities. On a longer-term basis, the Company expects its principal sources of liquidity to consist of income from operations and borrowings under revolving credit facilities or fixed interest term loans. The Company’s revolving credit facilities mature in September 2022 and the Company expects that it will be able to renew or refinance its revolving credit facilities on or before the date they mature. Furthermore, while the Company has no specific plans to issue debt or equity securities, the Company believes, if necessary, it could raise additional capital through the issuance of such securities.
The Company expects to use cash from operations and borrowings to (i) grow its finance receivables portfolio, (ii) purchase fixed assets of approximately $25 million in the next 12 months in connection with refurbishing existing dealerships and adding new dealerships, subject to strong operating results, (iii) repurchase shares of common stock when favorable conditions exist and (iv) reduce debt to the extent excess cash is available.
The Company believes it will have adequate liquidity to continue to grow its revenues and to satisfy its capital needs for the foreseeable future.
Contractual Payment Obligations
The following is a summary of the Company’s contractual payment obligations as of April 30, 2021, including renewal periods under operating leases that are reasonably assured (in thousands):
The table above includes estimated interest payments on the Company’s revolving lines of credit. We have assumed $226 million remains outstanding under our revolving lines of credit until the maturity date of September 30, 2022, using the interest rate in effect on April 30, 2021, which was approximately 2.85%. The $85.4 million of operating lease commitments includes $25.2 million of non-cancelable lease commitments under the lease terms, and $60.2 million of lease commitments for renewal periods at the Company’s option that are reasonably assured.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has a standby letter of credit relating to an insurance policy totaling $250,000 at April 30, 2021.
Other than its letter of credit, the Company is not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangement that management believes is reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Related Finance Company Contingency
Car-Mart of Arkansas and Colonial do not meet the affiliation standard for filing consolidated income tax returns, and as such they file separate federal and state income tax returns. Car-Mart of Arkansas routinely sells its finance receivables to Colonial at what the Company believes to be fair market value and is able to take a tax deduction at the time of sale for the difference between the tax basis of the receivables sold and the sales price. These types of transactions, based upon facts and circumstances, have been permissible under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code as described in the Treasury Regulations. For financial accounting purposes, these transactions are eliminated in consolidation and a deferred income tax liability has been recorded for this timing difference. The sale of finance receivables from Car-Mart of Arkansas to Colonial provides certain legal protection for the Company’s finance receivables and, principally because of certain state apportionment characteristics of Colonial, also has the effect of reducing the Company’s overall effective state income tax rate by approximately 287 basis points. The actual interpretation of the Regulations is in part a facts and circumstances matter. The Company believes it satisfies the material provisions of the Regulations. Failure to satisfy those provisions could result in the loss of a tax deduction at the time the receivables are sold and have the effect of increasing the Company’s overall effective income tax rate as well as the timing of required tax payments.
The Company’s policy is to recognize accrued interest related to unrecognized tax benefits in interest expense and penalties in operating expenses. The Company had no accrued penalties or interest as of April 30, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions in determining the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from the Company’s estimates. The Company believes the most significant estimate made in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 relates to the determination of its allowance for credit losses, which is discussed below. The Company’s accounting policies are discussed in Note B to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
The Company maintains an allowance for credit losses on an aggregate basis at a level it considers sufficient to cover estimated losses expected to be incurred on the portfolio at the measurement date in the collection of its finance receivables currently outstanding. At April 30, 2021, the weighted average total contract term was 37.3 months with 29.1 months remaining. The reserve amount in the allowance for credit losses at April 30, 2021, $184.4 million, was 24.5% of the principal balance in finance receivables of $809.5 million, less unearned accident protection plan revenue of $32.7 million and unearned service contract revenue of $24.1 million. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company decreased the allowance for credit losses as a percentage of finance receivables from 26.5% to 24.5% as a result of improved credit losses and delinquencies, as well as changes in our outlook for projected losses. The decrease resulted in a $15.1 million pretax decrease to the provision for credit losses.
The estimated reserve amount is the Company’s anticipated future net charge-offs for losses expected to be incurred on the portfolio at the measurement date. The allowance takes into account historical credit loss experience (both timing and severity of losses), with consideration given to recent credit loss trends and changes in contract characteristics (i.e., average amount financed, months outstanding at loss date, term and age of portfolio), delinquency levels, collateral values, economic conditions and underwriting and collection practices. The allowance for credit losses is reviewed at least quarterly by management with any changes reflected in current operations. The calculation of the allowance for credit losses uses the following primary factors:
●
The number of units repossessed or charged-off as a percentage of total units financed over specific historical periods of time from one year to five years.
●
The average net repossession and charge-off loss per unit during the last eighteen months, segregated by the number of months since the contract origination date, and adjusted for the expected future average net charge-off loss per unit. Approximately 50% of the charge-offs that will ultimately occur in the portfolio are expected to occur within 10-11 months following the balance sheet date. The average age of an account at charge-off date is 13 months.
●
The timing of repossession and charge-off losses relative to the date of sale (i.e., how long it takes for a repossession or charge-off to occur) for repossessions and charge-offs occurring during the last eighteen months.
A point estimate is produced by this analysis which is then supplemented by any positive or negative subjective factors to arrive at an overall reserve amount that management considers to be a reasonable estimate of losses expected to be incurred on the portfolio at the measurement date that will be realized via actual charge-offs in the future. Although it is at least reasonably possible that the deterioration in economic conditions and high unemployment as a result of COVID-19 could lead to additional losses in the portfolio or that other events or circumstances could occur in the future that are not presently foreseen which could cause actual credit losses to be materially different from the recorded allowance for credit losses, the Company believes that it has given appropriate consideration to all relevant factors and has made reasonable assumptions in determining the allowance for credit losses. While challenging economic conditions can negatively impact credit losses, the effectiveness of the execution of internal policies and procedures within the collections area and the competitive environment on the funding side have historically had a more significant effect on collection results than macro-economic issues. A 1% change, as a percentage of finance receivables, in the allowance for credit losses would equate to an approximate pre-tax change of $7.5 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Occasionally, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) or other standard setting bodies which the Company will adopt as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, the Company believes the implementation of recently issued standards which are not yet effective will not have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
Adopted in Current Period
Credit Losses. In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326). ASU 2016-13 requires financial assets such as loans to be presented net of an allowance for credit losses that reduces the cost basis to the amount expected to be collected over the estimated life. Expected credit losses will be measured based on historical experience and current conditions, as well as forecasts of future conditions that affect the collectability of the reported amount. Our allowance for credit losses calculation was modified to comply with these new requirements and adopted for our fiscal year beginning May 1, 2020. The Company did not incur a material impact to our financial statements as a result of this adoption.
Cloud Computing Arrangement. In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40). ASU 2018-15 aligns the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs in a cloud computing arrangement with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred to develop or obtain internal-use software. ASU 2018-15 is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim reporting periods within those years. The Company did not incur a material impact to our financial statements as a result of this adoption.
Effective in Future Periods
Reference Rate Reform. In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform. The pronouncement provides optional guidance for a limited period of time to ease the potential burden of accounting for reference rate reform. This guidance is effective for all entities as of March 12, 2020 through December 31, 2022. The Company expects to utilize this optional guidance but does not expect the impact to be material.
Impact of Inflation
Inflation has not historically been a significant factor impacting the Company’s results; however, recent purchase price increases for vehicles, most pronounced over the last five fiscal years, have had a negative effect on the Company’s gross margin percentages when compared to past years. This is due to the fact that the Company focuses on keeping payments affordable for its customer base and at the same time ensuring that the term of the contract matches the economic life of the vehicle.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
The reconciliation between the Company’s debt to equity ratio and adjusted debt, net of cash, to equity ratio for fiscal year ending April 30, 2021, is summarized in the table below.