ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Business Overview
Crocs, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company,” “Crocs,” “we,” “us,” or “our”) are engaged in the design, development, worldwide marketing, distribution, and sale of casual lifestyle footwear and accessories for women, men, and children. We strive to be the world leader in innovative casual footwear for women, men, and children, combining comfort and style with a value that consumers want. The vast majority of shoes within Crocs’ collection contain Croslite™ material, a proprietary, molded footwear technology, delivering extraordinary comfort with each step. The broad appeal of our footwear has allowed us to market our products through a wide range of distribution channels. We currently sell our products in more than 80 countries, through three distribution channels: wholesale, retail, and e-commerce. Our wholesale channel includes domestic and international multi-brand retailers, mono-branded partner stores, e-tailers, and distributors; our retail channel consists of company-operated stores; and our e-commerce channel includes company-operated e-commerce sites and third-party marketplaces.
Known or Anticipated Trends
Based on our recent operating results and our assessment of the current operating environment, we anticipate certain trends will continue to impact our future operating results:
•The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our business globally in 2020, including through store closures and reduced operating hours, primarily during the second quarter of the year. Despite this, in 2020, we saw strong sales in e-commerce and strong sell-through in e-tail and wholesale partner sites, as consumers migrated to online shopping. The vast majority of our 351 company-operated stores were open at December 31, 2020. To ensure the well-being of our employees and customers, our corporate offices, retail stores, and distribution centers have implemented various elevated safety protocols, in accordance with local guidelines and regulations, including temperature checks, mandatory mask policies, social distancing, access to hand sanitizer, plexiglass partitions, and enhanced cleaning of the facilities. Our corporate offices have also actively managed attendance levels in accordance with local guidelines and regulations, and many of our corporate employees have continued to successfully conduct business virtually. We expect these measures to continue into 2021 until the population is vaccinated for COVID-19 to such a degree that these measures are no longer necessary.
•Digital growth, which was a priority in 2020 and a growing consumer trend, remains a key focus for 2021, along with a focus on clogs, sandals, personalization, and visible comfort technology, and growth in China, which remains a significant long-term opportunity. Digital sales include sales through our company-owned website, third-party marketplaces, and e-tailers.
•We expect revenue growth in 2021, primarily driven by our Americas and EMEA segments, and expect to incur costs affecting gross margin for investments in our distribution center network. Additionally, we plan to be able to continue leveraging SG&A as revenues grows in 2021.
•We were cash flow positive for the year ended December 31, 2020, despite the negative impacts of the global pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, we have returned to standard payment terms with our customers and vendors after encountering term extension requests from some customers and more strictly managing accounts payable in the first part of the year. At December 31, 2020, there were $180.0 million of borrowings outstanding on our credit facility after net repayments of $25.0 million during 2020. Our borrowings may continue to fluctuate as we manage our liquidity needs.
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to financial measures presented on the basis of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”), we present certain information related to our current period results of operations through “constant currency,” which is a non-GAAP financial measure and should be viewed as a supplement to our results of operations and presentation of reportable segments under U.S. GAAP. Constant currency represents current period results that have been retranslated using prior year average foreign exchange rates for the comparative period to enhance the visibility of the underlying business trends excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rates on reported amounts.
Management uses constant currency to assist in comparing business trends from period to period on a consistent basis in communications with the Board of Directors, stockholders, analysts, and investors concerning our financial performance. We believe constant currency is useful to investors and other users of our consolidated financial statements as an additional tool to
evaluate operating performance and trends. Investors should not consider constant currency in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
2020 Financial and Operational Highlights
Revenues were $1,386.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a 12.6% increase compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in 2020 revenues compared to 2019 revenues was due to the net effects of: (i) higher sales volumes, which increased revenues by $24.5 million, or 2.0%; (ii) higher average selling prices as a result of favorable channel mix, reduced discounts and promotions, and increased prices on certain products, which increased revenues by $141.5 million, or 11.5%; and (iii) unfavorable changes in exchange rates, which decreased revenues by $10.6 million, or 0.9%.
The following were significant developments affecting our businesses and capital structure during the year ended December 31, 2020:
•Digital sales represented 41.5% of 2020 revenues, compared to 31.1% in 2019. Direct-to-consumer comparable sales grew 39.2% in 2020, compared to 2019.
•We sold 69.1 million pairs of shoes worldwide, an increase from 67.1 million pairs in 2019, despite volume declines as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Gross margin was 54.1% compared to 50.1% in 2019, an increase of 400 basis points, primarily as a result of fewer promotions, favorable product mix, higher pricing, and increased sales of charms per shoe.
•SG&A was $514.8 million, an increase of $26.3 million, or 5.4%, compared to 2019. As a percent of revenues, SG&A improved 260 basis points to 37.1% of revenues, as reductions from several actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the elimination of certain temporary and permanent corporate and regional roles and a reduction in travel and related costs, were offset by higher variable costs associated with higher revenues and costs incurred as a result of COVID-19, including $9.9 million of inventory donations to frontline healthcare workers and other organizations.
•We recognized $21.1 million in asset impairments, related primarily to a retail store location in New York City.
•Income from operations was $214.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to income from operations of $128.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our operating margin rose to 15.4%, compared to 10.5% in 2019.
•In December 2020, we completed a series of transactions that included a transfer of certain intellectual property rights among wholly-owned subsidiaries and resulted in the recognition of a $127.7 million tax benefit.
•Net income was $312.9 million compared to $119.5 million in 2019. Diluted net income per common share was $4.56 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a diluted net income per common share of $1.66 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
•During 2020, we repurchased 3.2 million shares of common stock at an aggregate cost of $170.8 million, including a $125.0 million accelerated share repurchase agreement (“ASR”) in November 2020. For more information on the ASR, refer to Liquidity and Capital Resources, which appears in a forthcoming subsection within Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
A discussion of our comparison between 2020 and 2019 is presented below. A discussion of the changes in our results of operations between the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 has been omitted from this Annual Report on Form 10-K but may be found in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 27, 2020, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our corporate website (www.crocs.com).
(1) Changes for gross margin and operating margin are shown in basis points (“bp”).
(2) Average footwear selling price is calculated as footwear and charms revenues divided by footwear units.
Revenues by Channel
(1) Reflects year over year change as if the current period results were in constant currency, which is a non-GAAP financial measure. See “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information.
The primary drivers of the changes in revenues were:
(1) The change due to price is based on the change in average selling price on a constant currency basis (“ASP”).
Revenues. Despite the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which had the most significant adverse impact on sales in the first half of the year, revenues increased for the full year ended December 31, 2020. Sales volumes, which were lower in all regions in the first two quarters of the year, rebounded in the second half of the year, as retail locations, partner stores, and brick-and-mortar retailers reopened as COVID-19 restrictions were lifted. Increased ASP, especially in the Americas, was the largest contributor to higher revenues in 2020, as a result of fewer promotions and discounts, higher pricing on certain products, channel mix from higher sales in our e-commerce channel, which typically sells at a higher price, and increased sales of charms per shoe. Our continued focus on digital commerce, which was further bolstered by consumer migration to online shopping during the pandemic, led to an increase of 58.2% in e-commerce channel revenues. Currency fluctuations, primarily in the Brazilian Real, Russian Ruble, and Korean Won, had a negative impact on revenues.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales increased compared to 2019 due to higher average cost per unit on a constant currency basis (“AUC”) of $9.5 million, or 1.5%, due to increased e-commerce sales, which carry higher freight and fulfillment costs. Additionally, AUC increased as a result of continued investment in our global supply chain during 2020. Higher sales volume of $18.1 million, or 3.0%, also increased cost of sales, while foreign currency translation resulted in a decrease in cost of sales of $5.1 million, or 0.8%.
Gross profit. Gross margin was 54.1% compared to 50.1% in 2019, while gross profit increased $132.9 million, or 21.5%. This was primarily a result of net higher ASP and AUC, which led to an increase of $132.0 million, or 21.4%, due to fewer
promotions and discounts, favorable product mix, and higher pricing. Additionally, higher volume increased gross profit by $6.3 million, or 1.0%, while negative currency fluctuations decreased gross profit by $5.4 million, or 0.9%
Selling, general and administrative expenses. SG&A increased $26.3 million, or 5.4%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. SG&A was higher due to inventory donations of $9.9 million to frontline healthcare workers and other organizations, net higher marketing costs of $9.5 million due to higher variable marketing associated with increased e-commerce sales, and higher bad debt expense of $4.2 million, mostly due to the impacts of COVID-19 on certain global distributors, and other net increases, including higher variable compensation and sales commissions, of $2.7 million. However, SG&A improved as a percent of sales by 260 basis points to 37.1% from 39.7% in 2019. This was primarily a result of higher revenues leveraging our fixed cost base, coupled with several actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the elimination of certain temporary and permanent corporate and regional roles and a decrease in travel and related costs.
Asset impairment charges. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $20.0 million in impairment charges to the right-of-use asset and store assets for a retail location in New York City and $1.1 million in impairment charges to the right-of-use asset for our former corporate headquarters. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred no impairment charges.
Foreign currency gains (losses), net. Foreign currency gains (losses), net, consists of unrealized and realized foreign currency gains and losses from the remeasurement and settlement of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in non-functional currencies as well as realized and unrealized gains and losses on foreign currency derivative instruments. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized realized and unrealized net foreign currency losses of $1.1 million compared to net losses of $1.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income tax benefit. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an income tax benefit of $105.9 million on pre-tax book income of $207.0 million, representing an effective tax rate of (51.2)%, compared to income tax benefit of $0.2 million on pre-tax book income of $119.3 million in 2019, which represented an effective tax rate of (0.1)%. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a foreign deferred income tax benefit as a result of an intra-entity intellectual property rights transfer, resulting in a lower effective tax rate as compared to 2019. Our effective tax rate has varied dramatically in recent years due to the intra-entity intellectual property rights transfer, differences in our profitability level and relative operating earnings across multiple jurisdictions. and by changes in the valuation allowance.
During the three months ended December 31, 2020, we completed an intra-entity transfer of certain intellectual property rights primarily to align with current and future international operations. The transfer resulted in a step-up in tax basis of intellectual property rights and a correlated increase in foreign deferred tax assets based on the fair value of the transferred intellectual property rights. We recorded a deferred tax asset of $492.5 million, net of a reserve for uncertain tax positions of $197.0 million, and further reduced by a valuation allowance of $167.8 million. Based on available objective evidence, management believes that $167.8 million of the deferred tax asset, to the extent not offset by reserves for uncertain tax positions, is not more-likely-than-not to be realizable as of December 31, 2020 and, therefore, is offset by a valuation allowance. As such, a net deferred tax asset of $127.7 million was recognized along with a corresponding foreign deferred income tax benefit.
Our valuation allowances are primarily the result of uncertainties regarding the future realization of tax attributes recorded in various jurisdictions. The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced by a valuation allowance if, based upon available evidence, it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We have evaluated the realizability of our deferred tax assets in each jurisdiction by assessing the adequacy of expected taxable income, including the reversal of existing temporary differences, historical and projected operating results, and the availability of prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In assessing our valuation allowance as of December 31, 2020, we considered all available evidence, including the magnitude of recent and current operating results, the duration of statutory carryforward periods, our historical experience utilizing tax attributes prior to their expiration dates, the historical volatility of operating results of these jurisdictions, and our assessment regarding the sustainability of their profitability. The weight we give to any particular item is, in part, dependent upon the degree to which it can be objectively verified. Certain jurisdictions for which we have historically recorded significant valuation allowances now have a sufficient history of sustained profitability as of December 31, 2020. During 2020, valuation allowances recorded against deferred tax assets, not associated with the intra-entity intellectual property rights transfer, decreased by $20.2 million.
The 2020 impact of changes in valuation allowances to the effective tax rate was an unfavorable impact of $143.0 million, equating to a 69.0% unfavorable impact. There is also a $4.6 million change in the valuation allowance related to cumulative translation adjustments. We maintain valuation allowances of approximately $226.7 million as of December 31, 2020, which may be reduced in the future depending upon the achieved profitability of certain jurisdictions as well as the magnitude of the profitability.
In 2017, we began operating under a tax holiday in one of our foreign jurisdictions. This tax holiday is in effect through 2022, and may be extended if certain additional requirements are met. The tax holiday is conditional based upon meeting certain employment and investment thresholds. The impact of the tax holiday in 2020 had no impact to tax expense or to our reported earnings per diluted share.
Reportable Operating Segments
The following table sets forth information related to our reportable operating business segments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(1) Reflects year over year change as if the current period results were in constant currency, which is a non-GAAP financial measure. See “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information.
(2) “Unallocated corporate and other” includes corporate support and administrative functions, costs associated with share-based compensation, research and development, brand marketing, legal, and depreciation and amortization of corporate and other assets not allocated to operating segments.
The primary drivers of changes in revenues by operating segment were:
(1) The change due to price for revenues is based on ASP, as defined earlier in this section.
Americas
Revenues. The Americas segment had the largest segment revenue growth for the year ended December 31, 2020, with significant increases due to both ASP and volume, slightly offset by negative currency fluctuations, primarily in the Brazilian Real. E-commerce revenues, which increased 80.9%, and wholesale revenues, which increased 42.0%, contributed to this growth, while we also saw growth in retail revenues of 3.1%, despite temporary store closures for part of the year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. ASP increased in all channels as a result of less promotional activity, product mix, price increases, and increased sales of charms per shoe, while higher volumes in our e-commerce and wholesale channels more than offset lower volume in our retail channel. This was in part a result of COVID-19-related closures that drove a consumer shift to online shopping.
Income from Operations. During the year ended December 31, 2020, income from operations for our Americas segment was $361.9 million, an increase of $157.1 million, or 76.7% from 2019. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $174.1 million, or 48.9%, and gross margin increased 590 basis points to 61.4%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Gross profit increased $132.7 million, or 37.3%, due to higher ASP and lower AUC. ASP increased as a result of channel mix due to higher sales in our e-commerce channel, less promotional activity, and favorable product mix. This was further supplemented by lower AUC as a result of product mix, partially offset by channel mix and higher distribution center costs from the expansion of our U.S. distribution center. Gross profit also increased $43.6 million, or 12.2%, due to sales volume. Foreign currency translation decreased gross profit by $2.2 million, or 0.6%.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, SG&A for our Americas segment increased by $17.0 million, or 11.3%, compared to 2019. This was primarily due to an increase in marketing costs of $10.2 million due to higher variable marketing associated with a higher share of e-commerce sales, $8.3 million of inventory donations associated with COVID-19, and an increase in other net costs of $3.5 million, in part due to bad debt expense recognized related to the impact of COVID-19 on our distributors. These increases were offset by a decrease of $5.0 million in compensation expense, primarily due to the temporary closure of, and reduction of store hours at, our retail stores during the year and the permanent elimination of certain roles in response to COVID-19.
Asia Pacific Operating Segment
Revenues. The decrease in revenues in our Asia Pacific segment was primarily due to lower sales volumes in our wholesale and retail channels, as a result of store closures, decreased customer traffic, and lack of tourism, all of which were brought about by the pandemic. An increase in e-commerce revenues partially offset these declines. Foreign currency fluctuations, primarily in the Korean Won, also decreased revenue slightly. Increased ASP, due to channel mix, fewer promotions, less discounting, and increased sales of charms per shoe, partially offset these declines.
Income from Operations. During the year ended December 31, 2020, income from operations for our Asia Pacific segment was $47.4 million, a decrease of $33.2 million, or 41.2%. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $36.0 million, or 19.4%, while gross margin increased 40 basis points to 53.8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in gross profit was largely due to lower volume of $34.1 million, or 18.4%, particularly in our wholesale channel, as a result of the lack of tourism in our distributors’ markets and temporary closures of our wholesale partners’ brick-and-mortar stores during the pandemic. Foreign currency fluctuations also decreased gross profit by $1.5 million or 0.8%. Finally, higher
ASP, net of AUC, of $2.0 million, due to the shift in direct-to-consumer revenues, was offset by a pandemic-related inventory write-off of $2.4 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, SG&A for our Asia Pacific segment decreased $2.8 million, or 2.6%, compared to the same period in 2019. This was due in part to reductions in compensation expense of $3.2 million due to the temporary and permanent elimination of certain roles in response to COVID-19, facilities expense of $3.2 million as a result of store closures in Australia and Hong Kong and COVID-19 related rent abatements, primarily in Singapore, and travel and related costs of $2.0 million. These decreases were offset by an increase in SG&A from donations of inventory to frontline healthcare workers and other organizations of $1.4 million, higher bad debt expense of $1.2 million, in part due to the impact of COVID-19 on distributor partners, an increase in marketing costs of $1.2 million due to variable marketing associated with a higher share of e-commerce sales, and higher other net costs of $1.8 million.
Europe, Middle East, and Africa Operating Segment
Revenues. The increase in revenues for our EMEA segment compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was due to increased ASP, primarily in our e-commerce channel as a result of less discounting, offset in part by lower volumes. E-commerce volume increases of 33.4% were more than offset by retail volume decreases of 36.4% and wholesale volume decreases of 2.7%, as consumers shifted to online shopping during the pandemic. Negative foreign currency fluctuations in the Russian Ruble, partially offset by positive fluctuations in the Euro, also reduced revenues.
Income from Operations. During the year ended December 31, 2020, income from operations for our EMEA segment was $63.3 million, a decrease of $7.0 million, or 10.0%. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $5.3 million, or 4.4%, and gross margin decreased by 250 basis points to 47.7% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in our EMEA segment gross profit was due to lower volumes of $3.6 million, or 3.0%, primarily in our retail channel, and negative foreign currency fluctuations of $1.3 million, or 1.1%. Higher AUC in our wholesale channel due to increased distribution costs at our EMEA distribution center was mostly offset by higher ASP in our e-commerce channel as a result of fewer promotions and discounts and price increases, for a total decrease to gross profit of $0.4 million or 0.3%.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, SG&A for our EMEA segment increased $1.7 million, or 3.3%, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to increased marketing cost of $2.5 million as a result of higher variable marketing associated with a higher share of e-commerce sales and increased other net costs of $0.7 million, offset by a reduction in compensation expense of $1.5 million.
Other Businesses and Unallocated Corporate
During the year ended December 31, 2020, total net costs within ‘Other businesses’ and ‘Unallocated corporate’ increased by $31.4 million, or 13.8%, compared to the same period in 2019. This increase was primarily due to a $20.0 million impairment to the right-of-use asset and store assets for a retail location in New York City, a $1.1 million impairment to the right-of-use asset for our former corporate headquarters, higher compensation expense of $13.2 million due to higher variable compensation and sales commissions associated with higher revenues, and an increase in facilities expense of $3.0 million due to duplicate rent costs associated with our new corporate headquarters and higher insurance premiums. These higher costs were partially offset by a lower investment in brand marketing of $4.4 million as a result of COVID-19 and decreases in travel, professional services, and other net costs of $1.5 million.
Store Locations and Comparable Store Sales
The table below illustrates the overall change in the number of our company-operated retail locations by type of store and reportable operating segment:
Digital sales, which includes sales through our company-owned website, third-party marketplaces, and e-tailers (which are reported in our wholesale channel), as a percent of total revenues, by operating segment were:
Comparable retail store sales and direct-to-consumer comparable sales by reportable operating segment are as follows:
(1) Reflects period over period change on a constant currency basis, which is a non-GAAP financial measure. See the “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section for additional information.
(2) Comparable store status is determined on a monthly basis. Comparable store sales includes the revenues of stores that have been in operation for more than twelve months. Stores in which selling square footage has changed more than 15% as a result of a remodel, expansion, or reduction are excluded until the thirteenth month in which they have comparable prior year sales. Temporarily closed stores are excluded from the comparable store sales calculation during the month of closure and in the same month in the following year. Location closures in excess of three months are excluded until the thirteenth month post re-opening. E-commerce revenues are based on same site sales period over period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity position as of December 31, 2020 was:
As of December 31, 2020, we had $135.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and up to $319.4 million in available borrowings under our Facility (as defined below), which was amended in March 2020 to provide additional flexibility and borrowing commitments to operate in a business landscape impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We also entered into two revolving credit facility agreements in Asia during 2020, which are discussed in more detail under “Asia Revolving Credit Facilities” below. Throughout the year, we took several defensive measures to maximize liquidity in response to COVID-19, including reducing expenses, primarily through the temporary and permanent elimination of certain corporate and regional roles, extending payment terms with vendors, managing inventory levels by constraining incoming supply and focusing on core product, deferring discretionary capital expenditures, and suspending our share repurchase and foreign currency exchange derivative programs for a portion of the year. We began to reinvest in the business in the second half of the year and resumed both our share repurchase and foreign currency exchange derivative programs. We plan to continue to closely monitor our costs and adjust as needed in response to changes in the market.
As of December 31, 2020, we have largely returned to standard payment terms with our vendors and customers after encountering term extension requests from some customers, recognizing bad debt expense of $4.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 associated with global distributors as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and more strictly managing accounts payable in the first part of the year. Through December 31, 2020, we also received rent concessions from landlords of $6.0 million, the majority of which were either paid back during the year or are expected to be paid back by the end of 2021.
We believe that our cash flows from operations, our cash and cash equivalents on hand, and available borrowings under our Facility and other financing agreements will be sufficient to meet our ongoing liquidity needs and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months. Additional future financing may be necessary to fund our operations and there can be no assurance that, if needed, we will be able to secure additional debt or equity financing on terms acceptable to us or at all, especially in light of the market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak. Although we believe we have adequate sources of liquidity over the long term, the success of our operations, the global economic outlook, and the pace of sustainable growth in our markets, in each case, in light of the market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, among other factors, could impact our business and liquidity.
Repatriation of Cash
As a global business, we have cash balances in various countries and amounts are denominated in various currencies. Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates impact our results of operations and cash positions. Future fluctuations in foreign currencies may have a material impact on our cash flows and capital resources. Cash balances held in foreign countries may have additional restrictions and covenants associated with them which could adversely impact our liquidity and our ability to timely access and transfer cash balances between entities.
All of the cash held outside of the U.S. could be repatriated to the U.S. without incurring additional U.S. federal income taxes. As of December 31, 2020, we held $71.1 million of our total $135.8 million in cash in international locations. This cash is primarily used for the ongoing operations of the business in the locations in which the cash is held. None of the $71.1 million held in international locations is limited by local regulations.
Senior Revolving Credit Facility
In July 2019, Crocs, Inc. and certain of its subsidiaries (the “Borrowers”) entered into a Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (as amended, the “Credit Agreement”), with the lenders named therein and PNC Bank, National Association, as a lender and administrative agent for the lenders, which provides for a revolving credit facility of $500.0 million, which can be increased by an additional $100.0 million subject to certain conditions (the “Facility”). Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at a variable rate based on (A) a domestic base rate (defined as the highest of (i) the Federal Funds open rate, plus 0.25%, (ii) the Prime Rate, and (iii) the Daily LIBOR rate, plus 1.00%), plus an applicable margin ranging from 0.25% to 0.875% based on our leverage ratio, or (B) a LIBOR rate, plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.25% to 1.875% based on
our leverage ratio. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are secured by all of the assets of the Borrowers and guaranteed by certain other subsidiaries of the Borrowers.
The Credit Agreement requires us to maintain a minimum interest coverage ratio of 4.00 to 1.00, and a maximum leverage ratio of (i) 3.50 to 1.00 from the quarter ended December 31, 2020 to the quarter ended December 31, 2021 and (ii) 3.25 to 1.00 from the quarter ending March 31, 2022 and thereafter (subject to adjustment in certain circumstances). The Credit Agreement permits (i) stock repurchases subject to certain restrictions, including after giving effect to such stock repurchases, the maximum leverage ratio does not exceed certain levels; and (ii) certain acquisitions so long as there is borrowing availability under the Credit Agreement of at least $40.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under the Credit Agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, the total commitments available from the lenders under the Facility were $500.0 million. At December 31, 2020, we had $180.0 million in outstanding borrowings, which are due when the Facility matures in July 2024, and $0.6 million in outstanding letters of credit under the Facility, which reduces amounts available for borrowing under the Facility. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $319.4 million and $240.4 million, respectively, of available borrowing capacity under the Facility. Our borrowings may continue to fluctuate as we manage our liquidity needs.
Asia Revolving Credit Facilities
Our revolving credit facility with China Merchants Bank Company Limited, Shanghai Branch (the “CMBC Facility”) provides up to 30.0 million RMB, or $4.6 million at current exchange rates, and matures in May 2021. For RMB loans under the CMBC Facility, interest is determined at the time of borrowing based on variable rates in effect at that time.
The revolving credit facility with Citibank (China) Company Limited, Shanghai Branch (the “Citibank Facility”) provides up to an equivalent of $5.0 million and matures in June 2021. For RMB loans under the Citibank Facility, interest is based on a National Interbank Funding Center 1-year prime rate, plus 65 basis points. For USD loans under the Citibank Facility, interest is based on a LIBOR rate, plus 1.5%.
We had no borrowings under our Asia revolving facilities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 or outstanding at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Our consolidated statements of cash flows are summarized as follows:
Operating Activities. Our primary source of liquidity is cash provided by operating activities, consisting of net income adjusted for non-cash items and changes in working capital. Cash provided by operating activities increased $176.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This change was driven by higher net income adjusted for non-cash items of $66.7 million, offset by a net decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $243.7 million.
Investing Activities. The $5.5 million increase in cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily due to the relocation of our Corporate headquarters in Broomfield and continued investment in our U.S. distribution center.
Financing Activities. The $129.4 million increase in cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted primarily from a decrease in borrowings of $110.0 million, net of repayments, on our Facility and an increase of $23.6 million in repurchases of our common stock, as detailed below. The increase was offset by less cash used in other financing activities of $3.0 million, associated with the final payment made in
2019 related to the conversion of our Series A Convertible Preferred Stock that did not recur in the current year, and $1.2 million, primarily due to costs associated with amending the Credit Agreement that did not recur in the current year.
Stock Repurchases
On February 20, 2018, the Board of Directors approved and authorized a program to repurchase up to $500.0 million of our common stock, and on May 5, 2019, the Board approved an increase to the repurchase authorization of an additional $500.0 million of our common stock. The number, price, structure, and timing of the repurchases are at our sole discretion and may be made depending on market conditions, liquidity needs, restrictions under our revolving credit facility, and other factors. The Board of Directors may suspend, modify, or terminate the program at any time without prior notice. Share repurchases may be made in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. The repurchase authorization does not have an expiration date and does not obligate us to acquire any amount of our common stock. Under Delaware state law, these shares are not retired, and we have the right to resell any of the shares repurchased.
We repurchased 3.2 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $170.8 million, including commissions, during the year ended December 31, 2020. This includes 1.5 million shares delivered under a $125.0 million November 2020 accelerated share repurchase arrangement (“ASR”). Under the ASR, a financial institution delivers shares of our common stock during the purchase period in exchange for an up-front payment. The total number of shares ultimately delivered under the ASR, and therefore the average repurchase price paid per share, is determined based on the volume-weighted average price of our common stock during the purchase period. The purchase period for this ASR ended in January 2021, at which time an additional 0.5 million shares were delivered. The shares received are recorded in the periods they are delivered, and the up-front payment is accounted for as a reduction to stockholders’ equity in our consolidated balance sheet in the period the payment is made.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we repurchased 6.1 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $147.2 million, including commissions. See Note 10 - Equity in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on our repurchases and repurchase authorizations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no material off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020, other than certain purchase commitments, which are described in Note 15 - Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes aggregate information about our significant contractual cash obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Our operating lease obligations consist of leases for real estate, which includes retail, warehouse, distribution center, and office spaces, expiring at various dates through 2033. This balance represents the minimum cash commitment under contract to various third parties for operating lease obligations.
(2) Our inventory purchase obligations with third-party manufacturers consist of open purchase orders for footwear products and include an immaterial amount of purchase commitments with certain third-party manufacturers for yet-to-be-received finished product where title passes to us upon receipt. All purchase obligations with third-party manufacturers are expected to be paid within one year.
(3) Other contracts include $36.1 million of future lease commitments related to our new distribution center in the Netherlands, which is expected to be fully operational in 2021, and $31.5 million of operating costs related to our new third-party operated distribution center in Japan.
(4) Our minimum licensing royalties consist of usage-based payments for the right to use various licenses, trademarks and copyrights in the production of our footwear and accessories. Royalty obligations are based on minimum guarantees under contract; however, may include additional royalty obligations based on sales volume that are not determinable for future periods.
(5) Our debt obligations consist of long-term borrowings on our Facility, maturing in July 2024.
(6) Future interest payment obligations, which are estimated by assuming the amounts outstanding under our Facility and the interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2020, will remain constant into the future. This is only an estimate, as actual amounts borrowed and rates will vary over time, based on a domestic base rate or LIBOR rate, as described in the “Senior Revolving Credit Facility” section.
Excluded from the table above is a $205.8 million liability for unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2020, as we cannot make a reliable estimate of the period in which the liability will be settled, if ever.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
General
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations, outside of discussions regarding constant currency and non-GAAP financial measures, is based on the consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and contingencies as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate our assumptions and estimates on an on-going basis.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it is important to our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows, and requires significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in its application. Our estimates are often based on historical experience, complex judgments, assessments of probability, and assumptions that management believes to be reasonable, but that are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. We believe that the following discussion represents those accounting policies that are the most critical to the reporting of our financial condition and results of operations. For a discussion of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Reserves for Uncollectible Accounts Receivable, Sales Returns, Allowances, Discounts, and Rebates
We make ongoing estimates related to the collectability of our accounts receivable and maintain a reserve for estimated losses resulting from the inability or unwillingness of our customers to make required payments. Our estimates are based on a variety of factors, including the length of time receivables are past due, economic trends and conditions affecting our customer base, significant non-recurring events, and historical write-off experience. Specific provisions are recorded for individual receivables when we become aware of a customer’s inability or unwillingness to meet its financial obligations. Because we cannot predict future changes in the financial stability of our customers, actual future losses from uncollectible accounts may differ from our estimates and we may experience changes in the amount of reserves we recognize for accounts receivable that we deem uncollectible. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in their inability to make payments, a larger reserve might be required. In the event we determine that a smaller or larger reserve is appropriate, we would record a credit or a charge, respectively, to ‘Selling, general and administrative expenses’ in our consolidated statement of operations in the period in which we made such a determination.
Additionally, a significant area of judgment affecting reported revenues and net income involves estimating reserves for sales returns, allowances, discounts, and rebates, which represent the portion of revenues not expected to be realized. Wholesale revenues are reduced by estimates of returns, allowances, discounts, contractual discounts to major customers, and rebates. We also may accept returns from our wholesale customers, on an exception basis, to ensure that our products are merchandised in the proper assortments, and may provide markdown allowances at our sole discretion to key wholesalers and distributors to facilitate sales of slower moving products. Further, we record reductions to revenues for estimated customer credits as a result of price markdowns in certain markets. Revenues in our retail and e-commerce channels are also reduced by an estimate of returns.
Our estimated sales returns and allowances are based on customer return history and actual outstanding returns yet to be received. Changes to our estimates for customer returns, allowances, discounts, and rebates may be caused by many factors, including, but not limited to whether customers accept our new styles, customer inventory levels, shipping delays or errors, known or suspected product defects, the seasonal nature of our products, and macroeconomic factors affecting our customers.
Historically, actual amounts of customer returns, allowances, discounts, and rebates have not differed significantly from our estimates. A hypothetical 1% increase in our reserves for returns, allowances, discounts, and rebates as of December 31, 2020 would have an immaterial impact on our 2020 revenues.
See Schedule II in Part IV - Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedule to the accompanying consolidated financial statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for an analysis of the activity in our reserves for uncollectible accounts receivable, sales returns, allowances, and discounts.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Property and equipment along with other long-lived assets are evaluated for impairment periodically whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying values may not be fully recoverable. Testing of long-lived assets for impairment is at the level of an asset group, which is the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. In our retail business, the asset group for impairment testing is each individual retail store. In evaluating long-lived assets for recoverability, we use our best estimate of future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition, where applicable. To the extent that estimated future undiscounted net cash flows attributable to the asset are less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recognized equal to the difference between the carrying value of such asset and its fair value. Assets to be disposed of and for which there is a committed plan of disposal are reported at the lower of carrying value or fair value, less costs to sell.
In determining future cash flows, we take various factors into account, including the remaining useful life of each asset group, forecasted growth rates, pricing, working capital, capital expenditures, and other cash needs specific to the asset group. Additional considerations when assessing impairment include changes in our strategic operational and financial decisions, global and regional economic conditions, demand for our product and other corporate initiatives which may eliminate or significantly decrease the realization of future benefits from our long-lived assets. Since the determination of future cash flows is an estimate of future performance, future impairments may arise in the event that future cash flows do not meet expectations.
In 2020, we recorded non-cash impairments of $20.0 million to reduce the net carrying value of certain long-lived assets to their estimated fair values for a retail store in New York City and $1.1 million for our former corporate headquarters. During 2019, we did not record any impairment charges. During 2018, we recorded non-cash impairment of $2.2 million to reduce the net carrying value of certain long-lived assets to their estimated fair values, including $1.3 million to reduce the carrying values of certain supply chain assets related to the closure of our Mexico and Italy manufacturing and distribution facilities and $0.9 million related to underperforming company-operated retail stores. See Note 3 - Property and Equipment, Net in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information related to long-lived asset impairments.
Income Taxes
As a result of the Tax Act, we recorded provisional estimates in accordance with GAAP, during 2017 in relation to the revaluation of our net deferred tax assets at the lower U.S. corporate income tax rate and the additional tax expense associated with the deemed repatriation tax. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recorded measurement period adjustments related to the provisional estimates. We have not changed our indefinite reinvestment assertion, and we have elected to account for the impact of global intangible low tax income (“GILTI”) based on the period cost method. While we consider our accounting for the Tax Act to be complete, we continue to evaluate new guidance and legislation as it is issued.
During the three months ended December 31, 2020, we completed an intra-entity transfer of certain intellectual property rights primarily to align with current and future international operations. This transaction was executed using transfer pricing guidelines issued by the relevant taxing authorities. Significant estimates and assumptions were required to compute the valuation of this transaction. These estimates and assumptions include, but are not limited to, estimated future revenue growth and discount rates, which by their nature are inherently uncertain therefore may ultimately differ materially from our actual results.
We have recorded certain tax reserves to address potential differences involving our income tax positions. These potential tax liabilities result from the varying application of statutes, rules, regulations and interpretations by different taxing jurisdictions. While our tax position is not uncertain, because of the significant estimates used in the value of certain intellectual property rights, our tax reserves contain assumptions based on past experiences and judgments about the interpretation of statutes, rules and regulations by taxing jurisdictions. It is possible that the costs of the ultimate tax liability or benefit from these matters may be materially more or less than the amount that we estimated.
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts and the tax bases of other assets and liabilities. We provide for income taxes at the current and future enacted tax rates and laws applicable in each taxing jurisdiction. We account for the tax effects of GILTI as a component of income tax expense in the period the tax arises, to the extent applicable. We use a two-step approach for recognizing and measuring tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in a tax return and disclosures regarding uncertainties in income tax positions. The impact of an uncertain tax position that is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the relevant taxing authority must be recognized at the largest amount that is more likely than not to be sustained. No portion of an uncertain tax position will be recognized if the position has less than a 50% likelihood of being sustained. Interest expense is recognized on the full amount of deferred benefits for uncertain tax positions. While the validity of any tax position is a matter of tax law, the body of statutory, regulatory and interpretive guidance on the application of the law is complex and often ambiguous. We recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the ‘Income tax expense (benefit)’ line in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. Accrued interest and penalties are included within the related tax liability line in the consolidated balance sheets.
We evaluate our ability to realize the tax benefits associated with deferred tax assets by analyzing our forecasted taxable income using both historical and projected future operating results, the reversal of existing temporary differences, taxable income in prior carry back years (if permitted) and the availability of tax planning strategies. A valuation allowance is required unless management determines that it is more likely than not that we will ultimately realize the tax benefit associated with a deferred tax asset. We determine on a regular basis the amount of undistributed earnings that will be indefinitely reinvested in our non-U.S. operations. This assessment is based on the cash flow projections and operational and fiscal objectives of each of our U.S. and foreign subsidiaries. Foreign withholding taxes have not been provided on cumulative undistributed foreign earnings of the non-U.S. subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020, which are considered to be indefinitely reinvested outside of the U.S.
See Note 13 - Income Taxes in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information related to income taxes.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Recent Accounting Pronouncements in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recently adopted accounting pronouncements, and issued accounting pronouncements that we believe may have an impact on our consolidated financial statements when adopted.