ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to those set forth in “Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
This Form 10-K and other reports filed by Creatd, Inc., formerly Jerrick Media Holdings, Inc. (the “Company”), from time to time with the SEC (collectively, the “Filings”) contain or may contain forward-looking statements and information that are based upon beliefs of, and information currently available to, the Company’s management as well as estimates and assumptions made by Company’s management. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which are only predictions and speak only as of the date hereof. When used in the Filings, the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “future,” “intend,” “plan,” or the negative of these terms and similar expressions as they relate to the Company or the Company’s management identify forward-looking statements. Such statements reflect the current view of the Company with respect to future events and are subject to risks, uncertainties, assumptions, and other factors, including the risks relating to the Company’s business, industry, and the Company’s operations and results of operations. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should the underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may differ significantly from those anticipated, believed, estimated, expected, intended, or planned.
Although the Company believes that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, the Company cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, the Company does not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results.
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). These accounting principles require us to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. These estimates, judgments and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Our financial statements would be affected to the extent there are material differences between these estimates and actual results. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
We intend for this discussion to provide information that will assist in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles affect our financial statements.
Overview
Creatd is the parent company and creator of Vocal, a robust and proprietary technology platform that uniquely serves creators, brands, and audiences by providing long-form storytelling tools, advanced social features, and monetization opportunities. Since launching in December 2016, Vocal has become home to nearly one million content creators, over 20,000 paid subscribers of its Vocal+ premium membership program and attracts over 10 million monthly visitors across its network of 36 wholly owned and operated niche communities as well as various social media channels.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had cash and marketable securities of approximately $8 million, and accounts receivable of $90,000. The Company’s healthy cash position is principally due to the net cash proceeds of $7.0 million secured at year end 2020 from the successful completion of the Company’s Series E Convertible Preferred private placement.
2020 was a positioning year for the Company. Expenses during Fiscal Year 2020 encompassed numerous charges related to financing activities which are described as non-recurring. Though it is the case that the Company may require additional financing in 2021, the financings that occurred this year positioned the Company for ease and relative affordability of future financings.
Restatement of Previously Issued Interim Financial Statements
On March 13, 2021, our audit committee concluded, after consultation with management and the Company’s financial consulting firm, that our previously issued unaudited financial statements for the period ended September 30, 2020, included in the Company’s Quarterly Reports of Form 10-Q for the period ended September 30, 2020, should no longer be relied upon as a result of the change in accounting for a make-whole provision. We concluded that a derivative liability of $3,041,688 should have been recorded as of September 30, 2020. The adjustments resulting therefrom, which are non-cash in nature, but has no impact on previously reported cash, total assets, and revenues.
Results of Operations
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes total current assets, liabilities and working capital (deficit) at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019:
At December 31, 2020, we had a working capital of $3,115,299 as compared to a working capital deficit of $(10,850,767) at December 31, 2019, an increase in working capital of $13,966,066. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in cash as a result of the completion of the September 2020 $7.7 million Equity Raise, the Sale of $7.8 million of Series E Convertible Preferred Stock in December of 2020, an increase in marketable securities of $62,733, and promissory note increase of $561,539. This was offset by a decrease in demand loans, convertible notes, and related party debentures totaling $7,373,638.
Net Cash
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $7,340,487 and $5,957,027, respectively. The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $24,162,783 and $8,035,372, respectively. This change is primarily attributable to the net loss for the current period offset by share-based payments in the amount of $6,861,163 to employees and consultants for services rendered, the accretion of debt discount and debt issuance costs of $4,303,072 due to the incentives given with debentures, and a loss on extinguishment of debt of $5,586,012 in addition to a change in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $2,880,392. These increases were offset by a change in fair value of derivative liabilities and a change in fair value of derivative liabilities and a change in accounts receivable during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $547,212 and $363,288, respectively. This change is attributable to the cash used to purchase marketable securities, property and equipment, and deposits for investments.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $15,814,083 and $6,337,947. During the year ended December 31, the Company was predominantly financed by net proceeds from the issuance of preferred series E, common stock, debt and related party notes of $6,670,417, $6,662,015 and $5,152,496, respectively to fund operations. These increases were offset by repayment of notes and related party notes of $2,150,666 and $983,752, respectively.
Summary of Statements of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net Revenue
Net Revenue was $1,212,870 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $453,006 for the comparable year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $759,864. The increase in net revenue is primarily attributable to the launch and growth of Vocal+ paid subscribers, the rising price points for Vocal for Brands campaigns, and the integration of Seller’s Choice into Creatd following the Company’s successful acquisition in late third quarter 2019. During 2020, management completed its corporate positioning to support its goal of reaching profitable revenue growth by securing funds necessary to eliminate its debt, attracting a marquee board and executive management talent, engaging a strategic senior marketing and sales effort, and uplisting to Nasdaq.
Creatd’s 2020 Creator Subscription revenues are reported net of the amounts paid to subscribers as cash prizes for winning Vocal Challenges and earnings through reads. As Vocal+ was commercially launched early 2020, with Vocal Challenges following soon after, both progressively grew during the year. As Creatd Challenges increased in frequency, in conjunction with an increase in readership, payments to Vocal+ subscribers totaled $213,182 in 2020. Gross revenues (including payments to Vocal+ subscribers) were $1,426,052.
Going forward, with the continued release of advancements and new offerings to its Vocal technology platform and the resulting growth of vocal subscribers, unique monthly visitors and brand relationships, management anticipates reporting accelerated revenue growth for the foreseeable future.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $17,496,205 as compared to $7,669,984 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $9,826,221 in operating expenses is mainly related to non-recurring expenses totaling approximately $1,320,000 attributed to the Nasdaq up-listing and financing activities during the year, which included two offerings. In addition, the Company incurred $1,100,000 of non-cash charges related to employee option exchange for stock during second quarter, $4,100,000 in stock options granted for previously performed services to 13 members of the management team during the third quarter, and in fourth quarter $107,000 was expensed due to reimbursements from Covid-related pay cuts enacted for several weeks during 2020. The remainder of the increase in expenses is attributed to an increase in marketing totaling roughly $2,000,000, and a significant increase in personnel to 42 full time and 12 part-time, including the addition of a Chief Operating Officer and additions to the sales team with senior-level experience and long-standing brand relationships. Going forward, the Company expects operating expenses to materially decrease, potentially offset by a measured increase in support staff and consultants focused on revenue growth. During 2020, the Company’s average monthly cash burn was approximately $658,000, slightly elevated from last year as the Company accommodated its growth strategy.
Loss from Operations
The Company incurred a loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $16,283,335 as compared to $7,216,978 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in the loss from operations is primarily due to non-cash stock-based payments to consultants and employees, one-time charges related to the Nasdaq up-listing, increase in personnel and the launch of the company’s first significant marketing campaign.
Other Expenses
Other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $7,929,448 as compared to $818,394 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Other expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 was comprised of interest expense of $1,376,902 on notes and related party notes as well as a non-cash change in derivative liability of 3,019,457. Additionally, other expenses included the non-cash, non-recurring accretion of debt discount and issuance cost of $(4,303,072) due to the incentives given with debentures and loss on extinguishment of liabilities of $(5,586,012) for incentives given to convert debt. During the year ended December 31, 2019, other expenses were comprised of interest expense of $612,830 on notes and related party notes and accretion of debt discount and issuance cost of $348,665 due to the incentives given with debentures, loss on extinguishment of liabilities of $162,860 for the incentives given to amend or convert debt.
Net Loss
Net loss attributable to common shareholders for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $27,348,485, or loss per share of $5.68, which included a non-cash deemed dividend charge of $3,135,702 related to fair value assigned to the series E preferred and warrants granted in financings during the year. This compares to a net loss of $8,035,372, or loss per share of $2.93, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Inflation did not have a material impact on the Company’s operations for the applicable period. Other than the foregoing, management knows of no trends, demands, or uncertainties that are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.”
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, valuation of equity issuances and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. The Company uses estimates in accounting for, among other items, revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, stock-based compensation, income tax provisions, excess and obsolete inventory reserve and impairment of intellectual property. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value measurement disclosures are grouped into three levels based on valuation factors:
● Level 1 - quoted prices in active markets for identical investments
● Level 2 - other significant observable inputs (including quoted prices for similar investments and market corroborated inputs)
● Level 3 - significant unobservable inputs (including our own assumptions in determining the fair value of investments)
The Company’s Level 1 assets/liabilities include cash, accounts receivable, marketable trading securities, accounts payable, prepaid and other current assets, line of credit and due to related parties. Management believes the estimated fair value of these accounts at December 31, 2020 approximate their carrying value as reflected in the balance sheets due to the short-term nature of these instruments or the use of market interest rates for debt instruments.
The Company’s Level 2 assets/liabilities include certain of the Company’s notes payable and capital lease obligations. Their carrying value approximates their fair values based upon a comparison of the interest rate and terms of such debt given the level of risk to the rates and terms of similar debt currently available to the Company in the marketplace.
The Company’s Level 3 assets/liabilities include goodwill, intangible assets, marketable debt securities, equity investments at cost, and derivative liabilities, when they are recorded at fair value due to an impairment charge. Inputs to determine fair value are generally unobservable and typically reflect management’s estimates of assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability. The fair values are therefore determined using model-based techniques, including option pricing models and discounted cash flow models. Unobservable inputs used in the models are significant to the fair values of the assets and liabilities.
Long-lived Assets Including Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangibles Assets
We evaluate the recoverability of property and equipment and acquired finite-lived intangible assets for possible impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. The evaluation is performed at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate from the use and eventual disposition. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of property and equipment and intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value. We have not recorded any significant impairment charges during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Acquired finite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. We routinely review the remaining estimated useful lives of property and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets. If we change the estimated useful life assumption for any asset, the remaining unamortized balance is amortized or depreciated over the revised estimated useful life.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company completed its annual impairment test of goodwill. The Company performed the qualitative assessment as permitted by ASC 350-20 and determined that the fair value of the reporting unit was more likely than not equal or greater than the carrying value, including Goodwill. Based on completion of this annual impairment test, no impairment was indicated.
Investments
The Company accounts for its investments in available-for-sale debt securities, in accordance with sub-topic 320-10 of the FASB ASC (“Sub-Topic 320-10”). Accrued interest on these securities is included in fair value and amortized cost.
Pursuant to Paragraph 320-10-35, investments in debt securities that are classified as available for sale shall be measured subsequently at fair value in the statement of financial position. Unrealized holding gains and losses for available-for-sale securities (including those classified as current assets) shall be excluded from earnings and reported in other comprehensive income until realized.
The Company follows FASB ASC 320-10-35 to assess whether an investment in debt securities is impaired in each reporting period. An investment in debt securities is impaired if the fair value of the investment is less than its amortized cost. If the Company intends to sell the debt security (that is, it has decided to sell the security), an other-than-temporary impairment shall be considered to have occurred. If the Company more likely than not will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis or it otherwise does not expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security, an other-than-temporary impairment shall be considered to have occurred. The Company considers the expected cash flows from the investment based on reasonable and supportable forecasts as well as several other factors to estimate whether a credit loss exists. If the Company intends to sell the security or more likely than not will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis less any current-period credit loss, the other-than-temporary impairment shall be recognized in earnings equal to the entire difference between the investment’s amortized cost basis and its fair value at the balance sheet date.
Derivative Liability
The Company evaluates its debt and equity issuances to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives to be separately accounted for in accordance with paragraph 815-10-05-4 and Section 815-40-25 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification. The result of this accounting treatment is that the fair value of the embedded derivative is marked-to-market each balance sheet date and recorded as either an asset or a liability. In the event that the fair value is recorded as a liability, the change in fair value is recorded in the consolidated statement of operations as other income or expense. Upon conversion, exercise or cancellation of a derivative instrument, the instrument is marked to fair value at the date of conversion, exercise or cancellation and then the related fair value is reclassified to equity.
In circumstances where the embedded conversion option in a convertible instrument is required to be bifurcated and there are also other embedded derivative instruments in the convertible instrument that are required to be bifurcated, the bifurcated derivative instruments are accounted for as a single, compound derivative instrument.
The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Equity instruments that are initially classified as equity that become subject to reclassification are reclassified to liability at the fair value of the instrument on the reclassification date. Derivative instrument liabilities will be classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument is expected within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
The Company adopted Section 815-40-15 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“Section 815-40-15”) to determine whether an instrument (or an embedded feature) is indexed to the Company’s own stock. Section 815-40-15 provides that an entity should use a two-step approach to evaluate whether an equity-linked financial instrument (or embedded feature) is indexed to its own stock, including evaluating the instrument’s contingent exercise and settlement provisions. The Company changed its method of accounting for the debt and warrants through the early adoption of ASU 2017-11 during the three months ended December 31, 2017 on a retrospective basis.
The Company utilizes an option pricing model to compute the fair value of the derivative and to mark to market the fair value of the derivative at each balance sheet date. The Company records the change in the fair value of the derivative as other income or expense in the consolidated statements of operations.
Revenue Recognition
Under Topic 606, revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
● identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
● identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
● determination of the transaction price. The transaction price for any given subscriber could decrease based on any payments made to that subscriber. A subscriber may be eligible for payment through one or more of the monetization features offered to Vocal creators, including earnings through reads (on a cost per mille basis) and cash prizes offered to Challenge winners;
● allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
● recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
For more information see Note 2 within the consolidated financial statements.
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue consists of billings and payments from clients in advance of revenue recognition. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had deferred revenue of $88,637 and $50,691, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company recognizes compensation expense for all equity-based payments granted in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718 “Compensation - Stock Compensation”. Under fair value recognition provisions, the Company recognizes equity-based compensation net of an estimated forfeiture rate and recognizes compensation cost only for those shares expected to vest over the requisite service period of the award.
Restricted stock awards are granted at the discretion of the Company. These awards are restricted as to the transfer of ownership and generally vest over the requisite service periods, typically over a five-year period (vesting on a straight-line basis). The fair value of a stock award is equal to the fair market value of a share of Company stock on the grant date.
The fair value of an option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the development of assumptions that are inputs into the model. These assumptions are the value of the underlying share, the expected stock volatility, the risk-free interest rate, the expected life of the option, the dividend yield on the underlying stock and the expected forfeiture rate. Expected volatility is benchmarked against similar companies in a similar industry over the expected option life and other appropriate factors. Risk-free interest rates are calculated based on continuously compounded risk-free rates for the appropriate term. The dividend yield is assumed to be zero as the Company has never paid or declared any cash dividends on its Common stock and does not intend to pay dividends on its Common stock in the foreseeable future. The expected forfeiture rate is estimated based on management’s best estimate.
Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards requires the input of the subjective assumptions described above. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if factors change and the Company uses different assumptions, our equity-based compensation could be materially different in the future. The Company issues awards of equity instruments, such as stock options and restricted stock units, to employees and certain non-employee directors. Compensation expense related to these awards is based on the fair value of the underlying stock on the award date and is amortized over the service period, defined as the vesting period, using the straight-line method. The vesting period is generally five years. A Black-Scholes model is utilized to estimate the fair value of stock options, while the market price of the Company’s common stock at the date of grant is used for restricted stock units. Compensation expense is reduced for actual forfeitures as they occur.
Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance
The Company invests in equity and debt securities. The Company’s investments in debt securities are classified at the date of purchase as available-for-sale securities. Debt securities are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of the related tax effect, reflected as an accumulated other comprehensive income component of stockholder’s equity until such gains or losses are realized. In accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-01, Equity securities are now reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of the related tax effect, reflected as a gain or loss on the statement of operations.
In October 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-16, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Intra-Entity Transfers of Assets Other than Inventory”, which eliminates the exception that prohibits the recognition of current and deferred income tax effects for intra-entity transfers of assets other than inventory until the asset has been sold to an outside party. The updated guidance is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption of the update is permitted. The adoption of ASU 2016-16 did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, which eliminates the requirement to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill (i.e., Step 2 of the current goodwill impairment test) to measure a goodwill impairment charge. Instead, entities will record an impairment charge based on the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount over its fair value (i.e., measure the charge based on the current Step 1). The updated guidance, which became effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement - Disclosure Framework (Topic 820). The updated guidance improves the disclosure requirements for fair value measurements. The adoption of ASU 2018-13 did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other - Internal Use Software (Subtopic 350-40): Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That is a Service Contract. This guidance requires companies to apply the internal-use software guidance in ASC 350-40 to implementation costs incurred in a hosting arrangement that is a service contract to determine whether to capitalize certain implementation costs or expense them as incurred. The adoption of ASU 2018-15 did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-10, “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815), and Leases (Topic 842): The mandatory effective dates for Credit Losses in this Update (ASU 2019-10) are as follows: 1. Public business entities that meet the definition of an SEC filer, excluding entities eligible to be SRCs as defined by the SEC, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those 2. All other entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The adoption of ASU 2019-10 had a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements because it deferred the adoption of ASU 2016-13.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective accounting pronouncements, when adopted, will have a material effect on the accompanying consolidated financial statements.