ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Please read the following discussion in conjunction with our audited historical consolidated financial statements and notes thereto, which are included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains statements that are forward-looking. These statements are based on current expectations and assumptions that are subject to risk, uncertainties and other factors. Actual results could differ materially because of the factors discussed in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this Form 10-K and elsewhere in this report, as well as in the documents filed by us with the SEC, specifically the most recent reports on Forms 10-Q and 8-K, each as it may be amended from time to time.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations are based upon the consolidated financial statements included in this report, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts. We evaluate the estimates on an on-going basis. We base these estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies involve significant judgments and estimates that are used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements:
▪We recognize revenue upon the transfer of promised goods or services to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Revenue Recognition of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 for discussion on the identification of the Company's performance obligations and determination of transaction price, including treatment of rebates, right of returns, warranties, price protection and stock rotation.
▪Inventories are recorded at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost being determined on a first-in, first-out basis. We write down inventories to net realizable value based on forecasted demand while taking into account product release schedules and product life cycles. We also review and write down inventory, as appropriate, based on the age and condition of the inventory. Actual demand and market conditions may be different from those projected by management, which could have a material effect on our operating results and financial position. See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8.
▪We evaluate the recoverability of property, plant, and equipment and intangible assets by testing for impairment losses on long-lived assets used in operations when indicators of impairment are present and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the assets’ carrying amounts. An impairment loss is recognized in the event the carrying value of these assets exceeds the fair value of the applicable assets. Impairment evaluations involve management estimates of asset useful lives and future cash flows. Actual useful lives and cash flows could be different from those estimated by management, which could have a material effect on our operating results and financial position. See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 7 - Intangibles, net and Goodwill of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8. See also Note 11 - Restructuring Costs for discussion of fiscal year 2021 and 2020 asset disposals related to the microelectromechanical systems ("MEMS") restructuring.
▪We evaluate goodwill and other intangible assets for impairment. The Company tests goodwill and other intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if the Company believes indicators of impairment exist. Impairment evaluations involve management’s assessment of qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that goodwill and other intangible assets are impaired. If management concludes from its assessment of qualitative factors that it is more likely than not that impairment exists, then a quantitative impairment test will be performed involving management estimates of asset useful lives and future cash flows. Significant management judgment is required in the forecasts of future operating results that are used in these evaluations. Following the quantitative test, an impairment charge would be recorded for the amount the carrying value exceeds the calculated fair value. If our actual results, or the plans and estimates used in future impairment analyses, are lower than the original estimates used to assess the recoverability of these assets, we could incur additional impairment charges in a future period. The Company has recorded no goodwill impairments in fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019. There were no material other intangible asset impairments in fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019.
▪We are subject to the possibility of loss contingencies for various legal matters. See Note 15 - Legal Matters of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8. We regularly evaluate current information available to us to determine whether any accruals should be made based on the status of the case, the results of the discovery
process and other factors. If we ultimately determine that an accrual should be made for a legal matter, this accrual could have a material effect on our operating results and financial position and the ultimate outcome may be materially different than our estimate.
▪We report income taxes under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and tax basis of assets and liabilities, which are measured using the enacted tax laws and tax rates that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. We assess the likelihood that the deferred tax assets will be realized. A valuation allowance is established against deferred tax assets to the extent the Company believes that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized, taking into consideration the level of historical taxable income and projections for future taxable income over the periods in which the temporary differences are deductible.
Although we believe our assumptions, judgments and estimates are reasonable, the provision for income taxes in our consolidated financial statements could be significantly impacted by changes in tax laws, interpretations of tax laws, and the resolution of any tax audits. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves assessing uncertainties with respect to the application of complex tax rules. Uncertain tax positions must meet a more likely than not threshold to be recognized in the financial statements and the tax benefits recognized are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon final settlement. The ultimate settlement of uncertain tax positions may differ from our estimates, which could result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the income tax provision in the relevant period. See Note 18 - Income Taxes of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 for additional details.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. This ASU requires credit losses on available-for-sale debt securities to be presented as an allowance rather than a write-down. Unlike current U.S. GAAP, the credit losses could be reversed with changes in estimates, and recognized in current year earnings. This ASU is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within those annual periods. The Company adopted this ASU in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, with no material impact to the financial statements.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. This ASU eliminates step two of the goodwill impairment test. An impairment charge is to be recognized for the amount by which the recorded book value exceeds the fair value. This ASU is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods. The Company adopted this ASU in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, with no material impact to the financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement. This ASU adjusts current required disclosures related to fair value measurements. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within that fiscal year. The Company adopted this ASU in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, with no material impact to the financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-15, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40), Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That Is a Service Contract. This ASU provides guidance on the accounting for implementation costs related to a cloud computing arrangement that is a service contract. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within that fiscal year. The Company adopted this ASU in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, with prospective application and no material impact to the financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The ASU removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within that fiscal year. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this ASU, but does not expect a material impact to the financial statements upon adoption in the first quarter of fiscal year 2022.
In January 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-01, Investments - Equity Securities (Topic 321) - Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323), and Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815) - Clarifying the Interactions between Topic 321, Topic 323, and Topic 815 (a consensus of the FASB Emerging Issues Task Force). This ASU clarifies the interaction of the accounting for equity securities, investments accounted for under the equity method of accounting, and the accounting for certain forward contracts and purchased options. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within that fiscal year. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this ASU, but does not expect a material impact to the financial statements upon adoption in the first quarter of fiscal year 2022.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting. The ASU, effective immediately for reporting periods through December 31, 2022, provides accounting relief for contract modifications that replace an interest rate impacted by reference rate reform (e.g., LIBOR) with a new alternative reference rate. The guidance is applicable to investment securities, receivables, debt, leases, hedging relationships and other contractual arrangements. The Company adopted this ASU in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, with no material impact to the financial statements.
Overview
Cirrus Logic develops low-power, high-precision mixed-signal processing solutions for a broad range of customers. We track operating results in one reportable segment, but report revenue performance by product line, currently audio and high-performance mixed-signal products. See Item 1. Business for discussion of our change to product line classifications in the current fiscal year. In fiscal year 2021, the Company made excellent progress executing on the growth vectors and strategic initiatives that we believe will contribute to our continued success. In the past year, we expanded our position in audio in Android smartphones, gained traction in applications beyond smartphones and further diversified our product portfolio with the introduction of our first camera controller. Design activity and development were robust across our product lines and we made substantial R&D investment in critical technologies and intellectual property that are important to our roadmap.
Fiscal Year 2021
Fiscal year 2021 net sales of $1.37 billion represented an increase over fiscal year 2020 net sales of $1.28 billion. High-performance mixed-signal product line sales of $265.2 million represented a 54.9 percent increase from fiscal year 2020 sales of $171.2 million, primarily attributable to content gains in smartphones. Audio product line sales of $1.10 billion in fiscal year 2021 decreased from fiscal year 2020 sales of $1.11 billion, attributable to headwinds in wired headset codecs and decreased smart codec sales in Android. The decrease was partially offset by higher unit volumes in smartphones as well as content gains in smartphones, tablets and wearables.
Overall, gross margin for fiscal year 2021 was 51.7 percent. The decrease in gross margin for fiscal year 2021 was primarily due to a shift in product mix and typical pricing reductions on certain products, partially offset by cost reductions associated with exiting the MEMS product line. The Company’s number of employees increased to 1,481 as of March 27, 2021. The Company achieved net income of $217.3 million in fiscal year 2021, which included an income tax provision in the amount of $27.9 million.
Fiscal Year 2020
Fiscal year 2020 net sales of $1.28 billion represented an increase over fiscal year 2019 net sales of $1.19 billion. Audio product line sales of $1.11 billion in fiscal year 2020 increased from fiscal year 2019 sales of $1.04 billion, attributable to strong demand for components shipping in smartphones. High-performance mixed signal product line sales of $171.2 million represented a 18.3% increase from fiscal year 2019 sales of $144.7 million attributable to increased content and sales of haptic drivers.
Overall, gross margin for fiscal year 2020 was 52.6 percent. The increase in gross margin for fiscal year 2020 was primarily due to favorable product mix and cost reductions on certain products, and, to a lesser extent, the benefit of lower reserves and supply chain efficiencies versus fiscal year 2019. The Company’s number of employees decreased to 1,443 as of March 28, 2020. The Company achieved net income of $159.5 million in fiscal year 2020, which included an income tax provision in the amount of $21.8 million.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for each of the past three fiscal years as a percentage of net sales. All percentage amounts were calculated using the underlying data, in thousands:
Net Sales
We report sales in two product categories: audio products and high-performance mixed-signal products. Our sales by product line are shown in the table below (in thousands). Prior periods were retrospectively adjusted to conform to the fiscal year 2021 product line categories. See Note 9 - Revenues for disclosure of revenue associated with modified product line categories and revenue as previously reported under the previous product line groupings.
Net sales for fiscal year 2021 increased by 6.9 percent, to $1.37 billion from $1.28 billion in fiscal year 2020. The increase in net sales reflects a $94.0 million increase in high-performance mixed-signal product sales, or 54.9 percent, from fiscal year 2020 sales of $171.2 million, which was primarily attributable to content gains in smartphones. This increase was offset by a $5.9 million decrease in audio product sales. The audio product line experienced a decrease in net sales attributable to headwinds in wired headset codecs and decreased smart codec sales in Android. The decrease was partially offset by higher unit volumes in smartphones as well as content gains in smartphones, tablets and wearables.
Net sales for fiscal year 2020 increased by 8.1%, to $1.28 billion from $1.19 billion in fiscal year 2019. The increase in net sales reflects a $69.1 million increase in audio product sales and a $26.5 million increase in high-performance mixed-signal product sales. The audio product line experienced an increase in net sales attributable to content gains, primarily in smartphones and, to a lesser extent, higher unit volumes. In Android, increased sales of boosted amplifiers were offset somewhat by a reduction in smart codec revenue. High-performance mixed-signal product line sales of $171.2 million represented an 18.3% increase from fiscal year 2019 sales of $144.7 million, which was primarily attributable to increased content and sales of haptic drivers.
International sales, including sales to U.S.-based end customers that manufacture products through contract manufacturers or plants located overseas, were approximately $1.3 billion in fiscal years 2021 and 2020 and $1.2 billion in fiscal year 2019, representing 98 percent of net sales in fiscal years 2021 and 2019, and 99 percent in fiscal year 2020. Our sales are denominated primarily in U.S. dollars.
Gross Margin
Overall gross margin of 51.7 percent for fiscal year 2021 reflects a decrease from fiscal year 2020 gross margin of 52.6 percent. The decrease was primarily attributable to a shift in product mix and typical pricing reductions on certain products. This was partially offset by cost reductions associated with exiting the MEMS product line. Changes in excess and obsolete inventory charges, including scrapped inventory, and sales of product written down in prior periods did not have a material impact on margin in fiscal year 2021.
Overall gross margin of 52.6 percent for fiscal year 2020 reflects an increase from fiscal year 2019 gross margin of 50.4 percent. The increase was primarily attributable to favorable product mix and cost reductions on certain products, and, to a lesser extent, the benefit of lower reserves and supply chain efficiencies versus fiscal year 2019. Changes in excess and obsolete inventory charges, including scrapped inventory, and sales of product written down in prior periods did not have a material impact on margin in fiscal year 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Fiscal year 2021 research and development expenses of $342.8 million reflect a decrease of $4.9 million, or 1 percent, from fiscal year 2020. The overall decrease was attributable to reduced amortization of acquisition intangibles, travel and employee events expenses, depreciation and amortization costs on non-acquisition-related intangibles, and product development costs after exiting the MEMS product line, offset by increases in employee-related expenses, primarily salaries, variable compensation and stock-based compensation.
Fiscal year 2020 research and development expenses of $347.6 million reflect a decrease of $27.5 million, or 7 percent, from fiscal year 2019. The decrease was attributable to reduced amortization of intangibles and increased R&D incentives, offset by increases in employee-related expenses, primarily variable compensation and stock-based compensation.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Fiscal year 2021 selling, general and administrative expenses of $127.0 million reflect a decrease of $4.1 million, or 3 percent, compared to fiscal year 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to reduced travel and employee events expenses in fiscal year 2021.
Fiscal year 2020 selling, general and administrative expenses of $131.1 million reflect an increase of $4.6 million, or 4 percent, compared to fiscal year 2019. The primary drivers were employee-related expenses, primarily variable compensation, in fiscal year 2020.
Restructuring Costs
During the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020, the Company approved a restructuring plan (the "MEMS Restructuring"), including discontinuing efforts relating to the MEMS microphone product line. The Company recorded charges of approximately $0.4 million in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 and $21.9 million in fiscal year 2020, as part of the MEMS Restructuring, which included equipment disposal costs, asset impairment and write-off of intangible assets, and other nonrecurring costs. No additional restructuring charges were incurred for the remainder of fiscal year 2021. See Note 11 - Restructuring Costs for additional details.
Gain on Sale of Assets
In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2019, the Company sold the previously-acquired Edinburgh, Scotland property, for a gain of $4.9 million, presented as "Gain on sale of assets" in the Consolidated Statements of Income. See Item 2. Properties for additional information.
Interest Income
Interest income in fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019, was $6.3 million, $10.5 million, and $8.0 million, respectively. The fluctuations in interest income in fiscal year 2021 and 2020 versus prior years were a function of earnings on average cash, cash equivalent, and marketable securities balances throughout the year.
Interest Expense
The Company reported interest expense of $1.1 million, $1.1 million and $1.1 million for fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, primarily as a result of the revolving credit facility, described in Note 8.
U.K. Pension Settlement
The Company settled its defined benefit pension scheme in the third quarter of fiscal year 2019. A settlement loss of $13.8 million was recognized, which was the amount of the previously recorded unamortized actuarial pension loss in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income ("AOCI"). The loss is presented as a separate line item in the Consolidated
Statements of Income under the caption "U.K. pension settlement". The Company has no further contribution obligations going forward.
Other Income (Expense)
In fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019 the Company reported $2.8 million, $(1.6) million, and $(0.2) million respectively, in other income (expense), primarily related to remeasurement on foreign currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities.
Provision for Income Taxes
We recorded income tax expense of $27.9 million in fiscal year 2021 on a pre-tax income of $245.2 million, yielding an effective tax rate of 11.4 percent. Our effective tax rate was lower than the U.S. statutory rate of 21.0 percent, primarily due to the effect of income earned in certain foreign jurisdictions that is taxed below the federal statutory rate, the release of prior year unrecognized tax benefits during fiscal year 2021, and excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation.
We recorded income tax expense of $21.8 million in fiscal year 2020 on a pre-tax income of $181.3 million, yielding an effective tax rate of 12.0 percent. Our effective tax rate was lower than the U.S. statutory rate of 21.0 percent, primarily due to the effect of income earned in certain foreign jurisdictions that is taxed below the federal statutory rate, excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation, and the release of prior year unrecognized tax benefits during fiscal year 2020.
We recorded income tax expense of $3.8 million in fiscal year 2019 on pre-tax income of $93.7 million, yielding an effective tax provision rate of 4.0 percent. Our effective tax rate was lower than the U.S. statutory rate of 21.0 percent, primarily due to a decrease in the provisional enactment-date effects of the legislation commonly referred to as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”), as well as the U.S. federal research and development tax credit and the effect of income earned in certain foreign jurisdictions that is taxed below the federal statutory rate. This overall decrease was partially offset by an increase in valuation allowance related to certain U.S. federal deferred tax assets and state tax attributes due to the likelihood that they will expire or go unutilized.
For additional discussion about our income taxes, see Note 18 - Income Taxes.
Outlook
Given the wide array of uncertainties surrounding the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic, industry-wide supply constraints and the timing of when these challenges will be alleviated, it is difficult to predict our revenue, gross margin and operating expense outlook for fiscal year 2022. Cirrus Logic made meaningful progress in fiscal year 2021 however, with numerous strategic initiatives that we believe position the Company for growth in the coming years. In fiscal year 2022, we expect gross margins to be impacted by capacity constraints driving an increase in third-party manufacturing costs. Additionally, with strong customer engagements and content gains in new products coming to market, we expect revenue growth to accelerate.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In fiscal year 2021, cash flow from operations was $348.9 million. Operating cash flow during fiscal year 2021 was related to the cash components of our net income and a $33.2 million favorable change in working capital. The favorable change in working capital was driven primarily by a decrease in accounts receivable and increase in accounts payable, partially offset by an increase in inventories. In fiscal year 2020, cash flow from operations was $295.8 million. Operating cash flow during fiscal year 2020 was related to the cash components of our net income, offset by a $2.8 million unfavorable change in working capital. The unfavorable change in working capital was driven primarily by an increase in accounts receivable, partially offset by an increase in payables. In fiscal year 2019, cash flow from operations was $206.7 million. Operating cash flow during fiscal year 2019 was related to the cash components of our net income, offset by a $23.4 million unfavorable change in working capital. The unfavorable change in working capital was driven primarily by a decrease in payables and an increase in accounts receivable, partially offset by a decrease in inventories during the period.
In fiscal year 2021, the Company used $77.7 million in cash for investing activities primarily related to $57.2 million in net purchases of marketable securities, and capital expenditures and technology investments of $20.5 million. In fiscal year 2020, the Company used approximately $100.2 million in cash for investing activities principally related to $78.6 million in net purchases of marketable securities, and capital expenditures and technology investments of $21.6 million. In fiscal year 2019, the Company used approximately $54.7 million in cash for investing activities primarily related to $28.0 million in net purchases of marketable securities, and capital expenditures and technology investments of $35.8 million.
In fiscal year 2021, the Company used $121.2 million related to financing activities. In fiscal year 2020, the Company used $119.6 million in financing activities. In fiscal year 2019, the Company used $171.5 million in financing activities. In fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019, the Company utilized approximately $110.0 million, $120.0 million, and $160.0 million, respectively, in cash to repurchase and retire portions of its outstanding common stock. See Note 16 for a description of our share repurchase programs.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the rate of sales growth, market acceptance of our products, the timing and extent of research and development projects, potential acquisitions of companies or technologies and the expansion of our sales and marketing activities. We believe our expected future cash earnings, existing cash, cash equivalents, investment balances, and available borrowings under our Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements both domestically and internationally, through at least the next 12 months, although we could be required, or could elect, to seek additional funding prior to that time.
Revolving Credit Facility
On July 12, 2016, Cirrus Logic entered into an amended and restated credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Administrative Agent, and the Lenders party thereto, for the purpose of refinancing an existing credit facility and providing ongoing working capital. The Credit Agreement provides for a $300 million senior secured revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”). The Credit Facility matures on July 12, 2021. Cirrus Logic must repay the outstanding principal amount of all borrowings, together with all accrued but unpaid interest thereon, on the maturity date. The Credit Facility is required to be guaranteed by all of Cirrus Logic’s material domestic subsidiaries (the “Subsidiary Guarantors”). The Credit Facility is secured by substantially all of the assets of Cirrus Logic and any Subsidiary Guarantors, except for certain excluded assets.
Borrowings under the Credit Facility may, at our election, bear interest at either (a) a base rate plus the applicable margin (“Base Rate Loans”) or (b) a LIBOR rate plus the applicable margin (“LIBOR Rate Loans”). The applicable margin ranges from 0% to 0.50% per annum for Base Rate Loans and 1.25% to 2.00% per annum for LIBOR Rate Loans based on the Leverage Ratio (as defined below). A commitment fee accrues at a rate per annum ranging from 0.20% to 0.30% (based on the Leverage Ratio) on the average daily unused portion of the commitment of the lenders. The Credit Agreement contains certain financial covenants providing that (a) the ratio of consolidated funded indebtedness to consolidated EBITDA for the prior four fiscal quarters must not be greater than 3.00 to 1.00 (the “Leverage Ratio”) and (b) the ratio of consolidated EBITDA for the prior four consecutive fiscal quarters to consolidated fixed charges (including amounts paid in cash for consolidated interest expenses, capital expenditures, scheduled principal payments of indebtedness, and income taxes) for the prior four consecutive fiscal quarters must not be less than 1.25 to 1.00 as of the end of each fiscal quarter. The Credit Agreement also contains negative covenants limiting the Company’s or any Subsidiary’s ability to, among other things, incur debt, grant liens, make investments, effect certain fundamental changes, make certain asset dispositions, and make certain restricted payments.
As of March 27, 2021, the Company had no amounts outstanding under the Credit Facility and was in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreement.
See also Note 8 - Revolving Credit Facility.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of March 27, 2021, the Company did not have any off-balance-sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K, that were reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
In our business activities, we incur certain commitments to make future payments under contracts such as debt agreements, purchase orders, operating leases and other long-term contracts. Maturities under these contracts are set forth in the following table as of March 27, 2021:
(1)Our debt is subject to a variable interest rate based on LIBOR. The interest included in the table above is based on forecasted commitment fees.
Certain of our operating lease obligations include escalation clauses. These escalating payment requirements are reflected in the table.
We are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate as to when or if a cash settlement with taxing authorities will occur related to our unrecognized tax benefits. Therefore, our liability of $32.9 million for unrecognized tax benefits is not included in the table above. See Note 18 - Income Taxes, to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.