ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with the information set forth under our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash position at December 31, 2020 was approximately $358,000.
Accounting standards require management to evaluate our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year subsequent to the date of the filing of this Form 10-K (“evaluation period”). As such, we have evaluated if cash and cash equivalents on hand and cash generated through operating activities would be sufficient to sustain projected operating activities through one year after the date the financial statements are issued. We anticipate that our current resources, along with cash generated from operations, will not be sufficient to meet our cash requirements throughout the evaluation period, including funding anticipated losses and scheduled debt maturities. We expect to seek additional funds from a combination of dilutive and/or nondilutive financings in the future. Because such transactions have not been finalized, receipt of additional funding is not considered probable under current accounting standards. If we do not generate sufficient cash flows from operations and obtain sufficient funds when needed, we expect that we would scale back our operating plan by deferring or limiting some, or all, of our capital spending, reducing our spending on travel, and/or eliminating planned headcount additions, as well as other cost reductions to be determined. Because such contingency plans have not been finalized (the specifics would depend on the situation at the time), such actions also are not considered probable for purposes of current accounting standards. As we continue to incur losses, our transition to profitability is dependent upon achieving a level of revenues adequate to support its cost structure. We may never achieve profitability, and unless and until doing so, we intend to fund future operations through additional dilutive or non-dilutive financings. There can be no assurances, however, that additional funding will be available on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was identified in Wuhan, China, and has subsequently spread to other regions of the world, and has resulted in increased travel restrictions, business disruptions and emergency quarantine measures across the world including the United States. The extent to which COVID-19 will negatively impact our business results is highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted. Management believes that the COVID-19 outbreak and the measures taken to control it may have a large negative impact on economic activities across the world and the United States. As such, these uncertainties may impede our ability to conduct our daily operations and could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations in the foreseeable future.
These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern for a period of time within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. The financial information contained in these financial statements have been prepared on a basis that assumes that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. This financial information and these financial statements do not include any adjustments that may result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
As of December 31, 2020, our working capital deficit was approximately $72,041,000, our accumulated deficit was approximately $187,810,000, and our stockholders’ deficit was approximately $103,261,000 Operating loss was approximately $1,878,000 and $3,300,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our net loss was approximately $11,683,000 and $14,140,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following is a summary of cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Net increase in cash during the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $88,000. The principal use of cash in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was to fund our current expenses primarily related to research and development activities and administrative changes, adjusted for non-cash items. The change in cash flows used in operating activities between 2019 and 2020 of approximately $645,000 is primarily a result of gain on extinguishment of the payroll protection program loan and interest. The change in cash flows used in investing activities between 2019 and 2020 of approximately $42,000 is primarily a result of the reduction of purchases and installation of CareView Patient Systems and costs associated with patents and trademarks. The change in cash flows provided by financing activities between 2019 and 2020 of approximately $1,082,000 is primarily due to receiving funds from our payroll protection program loan.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Revenue, net
Revenue increased approximately $168,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in revenue is a result of new hospital billing as well as organic growth within our existing customer base and the introduction of a new product line. Of the 100 hospitals on December 31, 2020, one hospital group accounted for 18% of the total.
Operating Expenses
Our principal operating costs include the following items as a percentage of total expense.
Operating expenses decreased by approximately $1,192,000 (13%) as a result of the following items:
Human resource related costs (including salaries and benefits and non-cash compensation) increased approximately $270,000 primarily because of additional sales and marketing and research and development staffing and PTO carryover expenses during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Professional and consulting fees increased approximately $172,000, primarily because of increased accounting, consulting, and other professional fees. An increase in research and development (less non-personnel and travel costs) of approximately $57,000 primarily related to patent maintenance, software security, and obtaining industry-specific certifications. There was an increase in sales and marketing costs approximately $144,000 primarily related to marketing and website costs.
Depreciation and amortization expense decrease by approximately $123,000, primarily because of a reduction in depreciation expense as certain deployable assets purchased have become fully depreciated in 2020. Travel and entertainment expense decreased approximately $321,000 because of less product installations and COVID-19 related slowdown during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. Other product development costs decreased approximately $117,000 primarily because of decreases in product deployment and installation costs and related non-capital equipment costs. The decrease of approximately $1,315,000 in other expense is primarily attributable to prior year write off of abandoned CareView Connect assets of approximately $1,130,000. The decrease in non-cash expense related to option grants of approximately $39,000 was due to lower stock option grants.
Critical Accounting Estimates and New Accounting Pronouncements
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and related disclosures in the financial statements. Management considers an accounting estimate to be critical if:
●
if requires assumptions to be made that were uncertain at the time the estimate was made, and
●
changes in the estimate or different estimates that could have been selected could have a material impact on our results of operations or financial condition.
We base our estimates and judgments on our experience, our current knowledge, our beliefs of what could occur in the future, our observation of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following accounting policies and estimates as those that we believe are most critical to our financial condition and results of operations and that require management’s most subjective and complex judgments in estimating the effect of inherent uncertainties: share-based compensation expense, income taxes, complex derivative financial instruments and impairment of long-lived assets.
Share-Based Compensation Expense. We calculate share-based compensation expense for option awards and certain warrant issuances (“Share-based Award(s)”) based on the estimated grant/issue date fair value using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model (“Black-Sholes Model”) and recognize the expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period, net of estimated forfeitures. We have not included an estimate for forfeitures due to our limited history and we revise based on actual forfeitures each period. The Black-Scholes Model requires the use of several assumptions including volatility of the stock price, the weighted average risk-free interest rate, and the vesting period of the Share-based Award in determining the fair value of Share-based Awards. Although we believe our assumptions used to calculate share-based compensation expense are reasonable, these assumptions can involve complex judgments about future events, which are open to interpretation and inherent uncertainty. In addition, significant changes to our assumptions could significantly impact the amount of expense recorded in each period.
Income Taxes. As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. Our provision for income taxes is determined using the asset and liability approach to account for income taxes. A current liability is recorded for the estimated taxes payable for the current year. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the timing differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of changes in tax rates or tax laws are recognized in the provision for income taxes in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount more-likely-than-not to be realized. Changes in valuation allowances will flow through the statement of operations unless related to deferred tax assets that expire unutilized or are modified through translation, in which case both the deferred tax asset and related valuation allowance are similarly adjusted. Where a valuation allowance was established through purchase accounting for acquired deferred tax assets, any future change will be credited or charged to income tax expense. See NOTE 5 in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion related to Tax Reform.
The determination of our provision for income taxes requires significant judgment, the use of estimates, and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws. In the ordinary course of our business, there are transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Despite our belief that we have appropriate support for all the positions taken on our tax returns, we acknowledge that certain positions may be successfully challenged by the taxing authorities. We determine the tax benefits more likely than not to be recognized with respect to uncertain tax positions. Although we believe our recorded tax assets and liabilities are reasonable, tax laws and regulations are subject to interpretation and inherent uncertainty; therefore, our assessments can involve both a series of complex judgments about future events and rely on estimates and assumptions. Although we believe these estimates and assumptions are reasonable, the final determination could be materially different than that which is reflected in our provision for income taxes and recorded tax assets and liabilities.
Complex Derivative Financial Instruments. From time to time, we sell common stock and we issue convertible debt, both with common stock purchase warrants, which may include terms requiring conversion price or exercise price adjustments based on subsequent issuance of securities at prices lower than those in the agreements of such securities. In these situations, the instruments may be accounted for as liabilities and recorded at fair value each reporting period. Due to the complexity of the agreement, we use an outside expert to assist in providing the mark to market fair valuation of the liabilities over the reporting periods in which the original agreement was in effect. It was determined that a Binomial Lattice option pricing model using a Monte Carlo simulation would provide the most accuracy given all the potential variables encompassing a future dilutive event. This model incorporated transaction assumptions such as our stock price, contractual terms, maturity, risk free rates, as well as estimates about future financings, volatility, and holder behavior. Although we believe our estimates and assumptions used to calculate the fair valuation liabilities and related expense were reasonable, these assumptions involved complex judgments about future events, which are open to interpretation and inherent uncertainty. In addition, significant changes to our assumptions could significantly impact the amount of expense recorded in each period.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. Carrying values of property and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying values may not be recoverable. If impairment indicators are present, we determine whether an impairment loss should be recognized by testing the applicable asset or asset group’s carrying value for recoverability. This assessment requires the exercise of judgment in assessing the future use of and projected value to be derived from the eventual disposal of the assets to be held and used. Assessments also consider changes in asset utilization, including the temporary idling of capacity and the expected timing for placing this capacity back into production. If the carrying value of the assets is not recoverable, then a loss is recorded for the difference between the assets’ fair value and respective carrying value. The fair value of the assets is determined using an “income approach” based upon a forecast of all the expected discounted future net cash flows associated with the subject assets. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions include market size and growth, market share, projected selling prices, manufacturing cost and discount rate. Our estimates are based upon historical experience, commercial relationships, market conditions and available external information about future trends.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which requires entities to record expected credit losses for certain financial instruments, including trade receivables, as an allowance that reflects the entity’s current estimate of credit losses expected to be incurred. For available-for-sale debt securities in unrealized loss positions, the new standard requires allowances to be recorded instead of reducing the amortized cost of the investment. The Company does not currently hold or plan to invest in available-for-sale securities and has not historically experienced collection issues or bad debts with trade receivables. Accordingly, the Company does not expect this to have a significant impact on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures at this time. The Company will adopt this guidance on its effective date for smaller reporting companies, January 1, 2023.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”), issued Accounting Standards Update ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework- Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement that eliminates certain disclosure requirements for fair value measurements for all entities, requires public entities to disclose certain new information and modifies some disclosure requirements. The FASB developed the amendments to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 820 as part of its broader disclosure framework project, which aims to improve the effectiveness of disclosures in the notes to financial statements by focusing on requirements that clearly communicate the most important information to users of the financial statements. The new guidance is effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 and for interim periods within those fiscal years. An entity is permitted to early adopt either the entire standard or only the provisions that eliminate or modify requirements. We are currently evaluating the effect of this guidance on our disclosures.
There have been no material changes to our significant accounting policies as summarized in NOTE 2 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020. We do not expect that the adoption of any recent accounting pronouncements will have a material impact on our accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Recent Events Since December 31, 2019
On January 31, 2021, the Company, the Borrower, the Subsidiary Guarantor, the Lender and the Tranche Three Lenders entered into a Twenty-Third Amendment to Modification Agreement (the “Twenty- Third Modification Agreement Amendment”), pursuant to which the parties agreed to amend the Modification Agreement to provide that the dates on which the Lender may elect, in the Lender’s sole discretion, to terminate the Modification Period would be July 31, 2018 and May 31, 2021 (with each such date permitted to be extended by the Lender in its sole discretion); and that the Borrower’s (i) interest payments that would otherwise be due under the Credit Agreement on December 31, 2018, March 31, 2019, June 30, 2019, September 30, 2019, December 31, 2019, March 31, 2020, June 30, 2020 and September 30, 2020 from January 31, 2021 until May 31, 2021 and (ii) payments for principal and for any other Obligations then outstanding under the Tranche One Loan and the Tranche Three Loans that would otherwise be due under the Credit Agreement on October 7, 2020, would each be deferred from January 31, 2021 until May 31, 2021, and that such deferrals would be a Covered Event.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2019, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements with third parties that include indemnification provisions which, in our judgment, are normal and customary for companies in our industry sector. These agreements are typically with business partners, clinical sites, and suppliers. Pursuant to these agreements, we generally agree to indemnify, hold harmless, and reimburse indemnified parties for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified parties with respect to our product candidates, use of such product candidates, or other actions taken or omitted by us. The maximum potential number of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification provisions is unlimited. We have not incurred material costs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification provisions. As a result, the estimated fair value of liabilities relating to these provisions is minimal. Accordingly, we have no liabilities recorded for these provisions as of December 31, 2020.
In the normal course of business, we may be confronted with issues or events that may result in a contingent liability. These generally relate to lawsuits, claims, environmental actions or the actions of various regulatory agencies. We consult with counsel and other appropriate experts to assess the claim. If, in our opinion, we have incurred a probable loss as set forth by accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., an estimate is made of the loss and the appropriate accounting entries are reflected in our financial statements. After consultation with legal counsel, we do not anticipate that liabilities arising out of currently threatened lawsuits and claims, if any, will have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.