ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Objective
The following discussion and analysis is intended to provide material information relevant to an assessment of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations, as well as an evaluation of the amounts and certainty of cash flows from operations and from outside sources. This discussion and analysis is further intended to provide details concerning material events and uncertainties known to management that are reasonably likely to cause reported financial information to not be necessarily indicative of future operating results or future financial condition. This data includes descriptions and amounts of matters that have had a material impact on reported operations, as well as matters that management has assessed to be reasonably likely to have a material impact on future operations. Management expects that this discussion and analysis will enhance a reader’s understanding of the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and capital resources. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
The following table contains results of operations for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 and the dollar and percentage changes for those periods (in thousands, except percentages).
Net Sales:
Sales of $79.2 million for 2021 were $5.8 million higher than 2020, an increase of 7.9%, primarily due to higher sell-through at major brick-and-mortar and internet retailers, which has been partially offset by declines at certain retailers that have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly one customer that remained closed throughout 2021. Sales of bedding, blankets and accessories in the current year increased by $9.0 million over the prior year, while sales of bibs, bath, developmental toys, feeding, baby care and disposable products in the current year decreased by $3.2 million from the prior year.
Gross Profit:
Gross profit increased by $2.5 million and increased from 29.4% of net sales for 2020 to 30.4% of net sales for 2021. The increase in amount is primarily due to higher sales in the current year and the increase in the gross profit percentage is due to a more favorable customer and product mix.
Marketing and Administrative Expenses:
Marketing and administrative expenses increased by $365,000 for fiscal year 2021 compared with fiscal year 2020, which included an increase in the current year in outside services and overall compensation costs of $336,000 and $236,000, respectively, as compared to the prior year, partially offset by lower travel expenses of $117,000.
Loss from Impairment of Long-Lived Assets:
The Company recognized a loss of $2.2 million from the impairment of Carousel’s long-lived assets during the fiscal year ended March 28, 2021, and did not recognize such a loss during the fiscal year ended March 29, 2020. The loss from impairment did not result in any cash expenditures and did not have an adverse effect on the covenant calculations under the Company’s financing agreement with The CIT Group/Commercial Services, Inc. (“CIT”), a subsidiary of CIT Group Inc.
Income Tax Expense:
The Company’s provision for income taxes is based upon an annual effective tax rate (“ETR”) on continuing operations, which was 24.0% during both fiscal years ended March 28, 2021 and March 29, 2020.
Management evaluates items of income, deductions and credits reported on the Company’s various federal and state income tax returns filed and recognizes the effect of positions taken on those income tax returns only if those positions are more likely than not to be sustained. The Company applies the provisions of accounting guidelines requiring a minimum recognition threshold that a tax benefit must meet before being recognized in the financial statements. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs.
After considering all relevant information regarding the calculation of the state portion of its income tax provision, the Company believes that the technical merits of the tax position that the Company has taken with respect to state apportionment percentages would more likely than not be sustained. However, the Company also realizes that the ultimate resolution of such tax position could result in a tax charge that is more than the amount realized based upon the application of the tax position taken. Therefore, the Company’s measurement regarding the tax impact of the revised state apportionment percentages resulted in the Company recording discrete reserves for unrecognized tax liabilities during fiscal years 2021 and 2020 of $88,000 and $58,000, respectively, in the accompanying consolidated statements of income.
In December 2016, the Company was notified by the FTB of its intention to examine the Company’s claims for refund made in connection with amended consolidated income tax returns that the Company had filed for the fiscal years ended March 30, 2014, March 31, 2013, April 1, 2012 and April 3, 2011. On July 31, 2019, the FTB notified the Company that it would take no further action with regard to the fiscal years ended March 31, 2013, April 1, 2012 and April 3, 2011. Also, on January 7, 2020 and January 10, 2021, the Company’s California consolidated income tax returns for the fiscal years ended March 29, 2015 and April 3, 2016, respectively, became closed to examination or other adjustment. Accordingly, the Company reversed the reserves for unrecognized tax liabilities that it had previously recorded for these fiscal years, which resulted in the recognition of discrete income tax benefits of $233,000 and $444,000 during the fiscal years ended March 28, 2021 and March 29, 2020, respectively, in the accompanying consolidated statements of income.
During the fiscal years ended March 28, 2021 and March 29, 2020, the Company recorded discrete income tax benefits of $74,000 and $274,000, respectively, to reflect the aggregate effect of certain tax credits claimed on amended and original consolidated federal income tax returns.
During the fiscal years ended March 28, 2021 and March 29, 2020, the Company recorded a discrete income tax benefit of $12,000 and a discrete income tax charge of $5,000, respectively, to reflect the effects of the excess tax benefits and tax shortfalls arising from the exercise of stock options and the vesting of non-vested stock during the periods.
The ETR on continuing operations and the discrete income tax charges and benefits discussed above contributed to an overall provision for income taxes of 21.3% and 15.5% for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Known Trends and Uncertainties
The Company’s financial results are closely tied to sales to the Company’s top two customers, which represented approximately 68% of the Company’s gross sales in fiscal year 2021. A significant downturn experienced by either or both of these customers could lead to pressure on the Company’s revenues.
During fiscal years 2021 and 2020, the Company at times faced higher costs associated with the Company’s sourcing activities in China, including freight and higher duties on some products. Future increases in these costs could adversely affect the profitability of the Company if it cannot pass the cost increases along to its customers in the form of price increases or if the timing of price increases does not closely match the cost increases.
Due to the uncertainties associated with the duration and widespread nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, the effectiveness of the vaccines on COVID-19 and variants thereof, and the extent to which the vaccines will be administered, the Company cannot currently predict the long-term impact on its operations and financial results. The uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic include potential adverse effects on the overall economy, the impact on the Company’s supply chain, manufacturing and distribution operations, transportation services, customers and employees and consumer sentiment in general. The COVID-19 outbreak, and the government and private sector responses thereto, has negatively impacted certain of the Company’s customers who have been forced to temporarily close retail stores or have seen a significant decline in their sales. As a result, the Company experienced a decrease in sales to these customers beginning in March 2020. This decrease, however, has been somewhat offset by higher sales to other customers and sales in other channels, such as e-commerce. The Company cannot predict with certainty when or if these customers will reopen their retail stores or if demand from consumers will return to the same level as it was prior to the COVID-19 outbreak. If the Company’s customers experience financial difficulties as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak, such difficulties may cause them to close their retail stores permanently, reduce orders, file for bankruptcy or liquidate, any of which may negatively impact the Company’s sales.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also resulted in the disruption of the Company’s supply chain because nearly all of the Company’s products are imported from China into the Port of Long Beach in California. A global shortage of shipping containers, primarily caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with the belated return of dockworkers to ports worldwide, have led to shipping delays and vessels being backed up in the Pacific Ocean awaiting the opportunity to dock at the Port in Long Beach. These conditions have resulted in significant inflation in overall freight costs and increased interruptions in the receipt of the Company’s products. The Company could experience even higher freight costs in future operating periods.
The Company continues to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on its supply chain, manufacturing and distribution operations, customers and employees, as well as the U.S. economy in general. The COVID-19 outbreak could adversely affect the Company’s revenues, earnings, liquidity and cash flows and may require significant actions in response, including employee furloughs, closings of Company facilities, expense reductions or discounts of the pricing of the Company’s products, all in an effort to mitigate such effects. Conditions surrounding COVID-19 change rapidly, and additional impacts of which the Company is not currently aware may arise.
For an additional discussion of trends, uncertainties and other factors that could impact the Company’s operating results, refer to “Risk Factors” in Item 1A. of Part I. of this Annual Report.
Financial Position, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Net cash provided by operating activities increased from $8.5 million for the fiscal year ended March 29, 2020 to $8.7 million for the fiscal year ended March 28, 2021. In the current year, the Company experienced an increase in its accounts payable balances that was $3.8 million higher than the decrease in the prior year, and the Company recognized a non-cash loss of $2.2 million from the impairment of Carousel’s long-lived assets. As offsets to these increases in cash provided by operating activities, the Company in the current year experienced an increase in its inventory balances that was $4.4 million higher than the decrease in the prior year and an increase in its accounts receivable balances that was $1.5 million higher than the increase in the prior year.
Net cash used in investing activities was $733,000 in fiscal year 2021 compared with $678,000 in fiscal year 2020. The increase in fiscal year 2021 was due to payments in the current year for expenditures for property, plant and equipment that were $28,000 higher than the prior year, and $27,000 in proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment in the prior year that did not occur in the current year.
Net cash used in financing activities remained flat at $7.7 million during both fiscal years 2021 and 2020. In the current year, the Company made a cash payment of $1.9 million to acquire shares of the Company’s common stock from E. Randall Chestnut, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, that did not occur in the prior year. The Company also made net repayments under its revolving line of credit that were $670,000 higher than in the prior year. Offsetting these increases in cash used in financing activities were proceeds of the PPP Loan received in the current year of $1,963,800 that did not occur in the prior year, and dividend payments that were $776,000 lower in the current year than in the prior year.
The Company’s future performance is, to a certain extent, subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors beyond its control. Based upon the current level of operations, the Company believes that its cash flow from operations and the availability on its revolving line of credit will be adequate to meet its liquidity needs.
The Company’s credit facility at March 28, 2021 consisted of a revolving line of credit under a financing agreement with CIT of up to $26.0 million, which includes a $1.5 million sub-limit for letters of credit, bearing interest at the rate of prime minus 0.5% or LIBOR plus 1.75%, and which is secured by a first lien on all assets of the Company. On May 13, 2021, the Company and CIT entered into an agreement whereby CIT’s lien on Carousel’s assets will be automatically released upon the sale of such assets.
The financing agreement was scheduled to mature on July 11, 2022, but on May 31, 2021 the financing agreement was amended to extend the maturity date to July 11, 2025 and to change the interest rates to prime minus 1.0% or LIBOR plus 1.5%, effective as of May 31, 2021. The financing agreement was also amended to provide for a transition from the LIBOR reference rate to its replacement at the appropriate time. As of March 28, 2021, the Company had elected to pay interest on balances owed under the revolving line of credit under the LIBOR option, which was 1.87% as of March 28, 2021. The financing agreement also provides for the payment by CIT to the Company of interest on daily negative balances, if any, held by CIT at the rate of prime as of the beginning of the calendar month minus 2.0%, which was 1.25% as of March 28, 2021.
As of March 28, 2021, there was no balance owed on the revolving line of credit, there was no letter of credit outstanding and $26.0 million was available under the revolving line of credit based on the Company’s eligible accounts receivable and inventory balances. As of March 29, 2020, there was a balance of $2.6 million owed on the revolving line of credit, there was no letter of credit outstanding and $20.1 million was available under the revolving line of credit based on the Company’s eligible accounts receivable and inventory balances.
The financing agreement contains usual and customary covenants for agreements of that type, including limitations on other indebtedness, liens, transfers of assets, investments and acquisitions, merger or consolidation transactions, transactions with affiliates, and changes in or amendments to the organizational documents for the Company and its subsidiaries. The Company believes it was in compliance with these covenants as of March 28, 2021.
To reduce its exposure to credit losses, the Company assigns the majority of its trade accounts receivable to CIT pursuant to factoring agreements, which have expiration dates that are coterminous with that of the financing agreement described above. Under the terms of the factoring agreements, CIT remits customer payments to the Company as such payments are received by CIT.
CIT bears credit losses with respect to assigned accounts receivable from approved shipments, while the Company bears the responsibility for adjustments from customers related to returns, allowances, claims and discounts. CIT may at any time terminate or limit its approval of shipments to a particular customer. If such a termination or limitation occurs, the Company either assumes (and may seek to mitigate) the credit risk for shipments to the customer after the date of such termination or limitation or discontinues shipments to the customer. Factoring fees, which are included in marketing and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of income, were $291,000 and $255,000 during fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company prepares its financial statements to conform with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”) as promulgated by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”). References herein to GAAP are to topics within the FASB Accounting Standards Codification (the “FASB ASC”), which the FASB periodically revises through the issuance of an Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) and which has been established by the FASB as the authoritative source for GAAP recognized by the FASB to be applied by nongovernmental entities.
Use of Estimates: The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated balance sheets and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The listing below, while not inclusive of all of the Company's accounting policies, sets forth those accounting policies which the Company's management believes embody the most significant judgments due to the uncertainties affecting their application and the likelihood that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions.
Revenue Recognition: Revenue is recognized upon the satisfaction of all contractual performance obligations and the transfer of control of the products sold to the customer. The majority of the Company’s sales consists of single performance obligation arrangements for which the transaction price for a given product sold is equivalent to the price quoted for the product, net of any stated discounts applicable at a point in time. Each sales transaction results in an implicit contract with the customer to deliver a product as directed by the customer. Shipping and handling costs that are charged to customers are included in net sales, and the Company’s costs associated with shipping and handling activities are included in cost of products sold.
A provision for anticipated returns, which are based upon historical returns and claims, is provided through a reduction of net sales and cost of products sold in the reporting period within which the related sales are recorded. Actual returns and claims experienced in a future period may differ from historical experience, and thus, the Company’s provision for anticipated returns at any given point in time may be over-funded or under-funded. The Company recognizes revenue associated with unredeemed store credits and gift certificates at the earlier of their redemption by customers, their expiration or when their likelihood of redemption becomes remote, which is generally two years from the date of issuance.
Revenue from sales made directly to consumers is recorded when the shipped products have been received by customers, and excludes sales taxes collected on behalf of governmental entities. Revenue from sales made to retailers is recorded when legal title has been passed to the customer based upon the terms of the customer’s purchase order, the Company’s sales invoice, or other associated relevant documents. Such terms usually stipulate that legal title will pass when the shipped products are no longer under the control of the Company, such as when the products are picked up at the Company’s facility by the customer or by a common carrier. Payment terms can vary from prepayment for sales made directly to consumers to payment due in arrears (generally, 60 days of being invoiced) for sales made to retailers.
Allowances Against Accounts Receivable: Revenue from sales made to retailers is reported net of allowances for anticipated returns and other allowances, including cooperative advertising allowances, warehouse allowances, placement fees, volume rebates, coupons and discounts. Such allowances are recorded commensurate with sales activity or using the straight-line method, as appropriate, and the cost of such allowances is netted against sales in reporting the results of operations. The provision for the majority of the Company’s allowances occurs on a per-invoice basis. When a customer requests to have an agreed-upon deduction applied against the customer’s outstanding balance due to the Company, the allowances are correspondingly reduced to reflect such payments or credits issued against the customer’s account balance. The Company analyzes the components of the allowances for customer deductions monthly and adjusts the allowances to the appropriate levels. The timing of funding requests for advertising support can cause the net balance in the allowance account to fluctuate from period to period. The timing of such funding requests should have no impact on the consolidated statements of income since such costs are accrued commensurate with sales activity or using the straight-line method, as appropriate.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets and Identifiable Intangible Assets: In addition to the systematic annual depreciation and amortization of the Company’s fixed assets and identifiable intangible assets, the Company reviews for impairment long-lived assets and identifiable intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of any asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss must be recognized if the carrying amount of a long-lived asset group is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value. Assets to be disposed of, if any, are recorded at the lower of net book value or fair market value, less estimated costs to sell at the date management commits to a plan of disposal, and are classified as assets held for sale on the consolidated balance sheets. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
Inventory Valuation: On a periodic basis, management reviews its inventory quantities on hand for obsolescence, physical deterioration, changes in price levels and the existence of quantities on hand which may not reasonably be expected to be sold within the Company’s normal operating cycle. To the extent that any of these conditions is believed to exist or the market value of the inventory expected to be realized in the ordinary course of business is otherwise no longer as great as its carrying value, an allowance against the inventory value is established. To the extent that this allowance is established or increased during an accounting period, an expense is recorded in cost of products sold in the Company's consolidated statements of income. Only when inventory for which an allowance has been established is later sold or is otherwise disposed is the allowance reduced accordingly. Significant management judgment is required in determining the amount and adequacy of this allowance.
In the event that actual results differ from management's estimates or these estimates and judgments are revised in future periods, the Company may not fully realize the carrying value of its inventory or may need to establish additional allowances, either of which could materially impact the Company's financial position and results of operations.