Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on our current expectations, estimates, and projections about our business and operations. Our actual results may differ materially from those currently anticipated and expressed in such forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those we discuss under Item 1A - “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview and Recent Developments
We are a technology-enabled research organization engaged in creating transformative technology solutions to be utilized in drug discovery and development. Our research center consists of a comprehensive set of computational and experimental research platforms. Our pharmacology, biomarker, and data platforms are designed to facilitate drug discovery and development at lower costs and increased speeds. We perform studies which we believe may predict the efficacy of experimental oncology drugs or approved drugs as stand-alone therapies or in combination with other drugs and can stimulate the results of human clinical trials. These studies include in vivo studies that rely on implanting multiple tumors from our TumorBank in mice and testing the therapy of interest on these tumors. Studies may also include bioinformatics analysis that reveal the differences in the genetic signatures of the tumors that responded to a therapy as compared to the tumors that did not respond. Additionally, we provide computational or experimental support to identify novel therapeutic targets, select appropriate patient populations for clinical evaluation, identify potential therapeutic combination strategies, and develop
biomarker hypothesis of sensitivity or resistance. These studies include the use of our in vivo, ex vivo, analytical and computational platforms.
We are engaged in the development and sale of advanced technology solutions and products to personalize the development and use of oncology drugs through our Translational Oncology Solutions ("TOS"). This technology ranges from computational-based discovery platforms, unique oncology software solutions, and innovative and proprietary experimental tools such as in vivo, ex vivo and biomarker platforms. Utilizing our TumorGraft Technology Platform ("The Platform"), a comprehensive Bank of unique, well characterized models, we provide select services to pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies seeking personalized approaches to drug development. By performing studies to predict the efficacy of oncology drugs, our Platform facilitates drug discovery with lower costs and increased speed of drug development as well as increased adoption of existing drugs.
As part of our growth strategy, we launched Lumin Bioinformatics ("Lumin"), a new oncology data-driven software program, during fiscal 2021. Our Lumin software contains comprehensive information derived from our research services and clinical studies. Lumin leverages Champions’ large Datacenter coupled with analytics and artificial intelligence to provide a robust tool for computational cancer research. It is the combination of the Datacenter and the analytics that create a unique foundation for Lumin. Insights developed using Lumin can provide the basis for biomarker hypotheses, reveal potential mechanisms of therapeutic resistance, and guide the direction of additional preclinical evaluations.
Our drug discovery and development business leverages the computational and experimental capabilities within our platforms. Our discovery strategy utilizes our rich and unique Datacenter, coupled with artificial intelligence and other advanced computational analytics, to identify novel therapeutic targets. We then employ the use of our proprietary experimental platforms to rapidly validate these targets for further drug development efforts.
We have a rich pipeline of targets at various stages of discovery and validation, with a select group that has progressed to therapeutic development. Our commercial strategy for the validated targets and therapeutics established from this business is wide-ranging and still being developed. It will depend on many factors, and will be specific for each target or therapeutic area identified.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our operating results for the periods presented below (dollars in thousands):
Oncology Services Revenue
Oncology services revenue, which is primarily derived from research services, was $41.0 million and $32.1 million, for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020 respectively, an increase of $8.9 million, or 27.8%. The increase in revenue is due to
increased sales, both in number and size of studies, and the expansion of both our platform and product lines. Additionally, customers are seeking more complex study designs and end point analysis testing, leading to larger contracts, which contributed to revenue growth.
Cost of Oncology Services
Cost of oncology services were $21.4 million and $17.0 million for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $4.4 million or 26.2%. For the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, gross margins were 47.7% and 47.1%, respectively. The expense increase was mostly a function of an increase in variable costs in conjunction with the growth in revenue, study volume, and expansion into new services. The increase was primarily from the following expense categories, compensation, lab supply, and outsourced lab service expenses. Gross margin varies based on timing differences between expense and revenue recognition and was pressured by outsourced lab services, in addition to the increase in costs on growing study volume ahead of revenue recognition.
Research and Development
Research and development expense was $7.2 million and $5.9 million for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $1.3 million or 22.9%. The increase is mainly due to the investment in new service capabilities and our discovery programs with the increase coming primarily from compensation and lab supply expenses. Additionally, we incurred costs stemming from our investment in adding valuable data to our platform.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense was $5.5 million and $4.2 million for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $1.3 million or 30.1%. The increase is mainly due to compensation expense driven by the continued expansion of our research services business development team and the addition of a SaaS business development team.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense was $6.5 million and $6.6 million for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $102,000, or (1.5)%. General and administrative expenses were primarily comprised of compensation, insurance, professional fees, IT, and depreciation and amortization expenses. In 2020, the CEO received a one time remuneration for salary not taken in prior years, resulting in the general and administrative expenses decrease in 2021. Excluding the one-time payment, general and administrative expenses increased $650,000 which was used to support the overall infrastructure growth of the company.
Goodwill Impairment
We recognized an impairment on goodwill of zero and $335,000 for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As a result of our annual evaluation of goodwill impairment for the year ended April 30, 2020, the Company determined that the recording of the impairment charge was warranted. This charge was attributable to the expected decline in the Company's POS business operations.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income was $71,000 and other expense was $42,000 for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Other income for the year ended April 30, 2021 was primarily attributable to a $72,000 gain on operating lease termination. Other expense in the prior year resulted from foreign currency transaction losses and fees offset by a gain on disposal of equipment.
Inflation
Inflation does not have a meaningful impact on the results of our operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs have typically arisen from the funding of our research and development programs and the launch of new products, working capital requirements, and other strategic initiatives. In the past, we have met these cash requirements through our cash on hand, working capital management, proceeds from certain private placements and public offerings of our securities
and sales of products and services. For the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company had net income of approximately $362,000 and a net loss of $2.1 million, respectively. As of April 30, 2021, the Company had an accumulated deficit of approximately $72.5 million, working capital of $1.4 million and cash of $4.7 million. We believe that our cash on hand, together with future improved cash flows from operations, are adequate to fund operations through at least August 2022. Should the Company be required to raise additional capital, there can be no assurance that management would be successful in raising such capital on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
Cash Flows
The following discussion relates to the major components of our cash flows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash (used in) provided by operating activities was ($1.7) million and $2.9 million for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in cash provided of ($4.6) million relates primarily to an increase in our accounts receivable and prepaid expenses and a decrease in our accounts payable despite the increase in total expenses. The changes in these working capital accounts were in the course of ordinary business operating activities.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $3.2 million and $2.2 million for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash used was for the investment in additional lab equipment and software development.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.2 million and $4.4 million for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash flows provided by financing activities was due to exercises of stock options and decreased from the prior year due to lower volume of exercises of options and warrants.
Critical Accounting Policies
The following discussion of critical accounting policies identifies the accounting policies that require application of management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. It is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our significant accounting policies, which are more fully described in Note 2 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this document. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by generally accepted accounting principles, with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which the selection of an available alternative policy would not produce a materially different result.
General
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States or GAAP. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Significant estimates of the Company include, among other things, accounts receivable realization, revenue recognition (replacement of licensed tumors), valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, valuation of goodwill, and stock-based compensation and warrant assumptions. We base our estimates on historical experience, our observance of trends in particular areas and information or valuations and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances and which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that may not be readily apparent from other sources. Actual amounts could differ significantly from amounts previously estimated.
Revenue Recognition
The Company accounts for revenue under the Financial Accounting Standards Board's (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers In accordance with ASC 606, revenue is now recognized when, or as, a customer obtains control of promised services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for these services.
A performance obligation is a promise (or a combination of promises) in a contract to transfer distinct goods or services to a customer and is the unit of accounting under ASC 606 for the purposes of revenue recognition. A contract's transaction price is allocated to each separate performance obligation based upon the standalone selling price and is recognized as revenue, when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. The majority of the Company's contracts have a single performance obligation because the promise to transfer individual services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts, and therefore, is not distinct.
The majority of the Company's revenue arrangements are service contracts that are completed within a year or less. There are a few contracts that range in duration between 1 and 3 years. Substantially all of the Company's performance obligations, and associated revenue, are transferred to the customer over time. Most of the Company's contracts can be terminated by the customer without cause. In the event of termination, the Company's contracts provide that the customer pay the Company for services rendered through the termination date. The Company generally receives compensation based on a predetermined invoicing schedule relating to specific milestones for that contract. In addition, in certain instances a customer contract may include forms of variable consideration such as performance increases or other provisions that can increase or decrease the transaction price. This variable consideration is generally awarded upon achievement of certain performance metrics. For the purposes of revenue recognition, variable consideration is assessed on a contract-by-contract basis and the amount to be recorded is estimated based on the assessment of the Company's anticipated performance and consideration of all information that is reasonably available. Variable consideration is recognized as revenue if and when it is deemed probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved in the future.
Amendments to contracts are common. The Company evaluates each amendment which meets the criteria of a contract modification under ASC 606. Each modification is further evaluated to determine whether the contract modification should be accounted for as a separate contract or as a continuation of the original agreement.
The Company accounts for amendments as a separate contract when they meet the criteria under ASC 606-10-25-12.
Stock-Based Payments
We typically recognize expense for stock-based payments based on the fair value of awards on the date of grant. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate fair value. The option pricing model requires us to estimate certain key assumptions such as expected life, volatility, risk free interest rates, and dividend yield to determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions are based on historical information and management judgment. We expense stock-based payments over the period that the awards are expected to vest. In the event of forfeitures, compensation expense is adjusted. We report cash flows resulting from tax deductions in excess of the compensation cost recognized from those options (excess tax benefits) as financing cash flows when the cash tax benefit is received.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in a business combination. The Company evaluates the carrying value of goodwill annually in connection with the annual budgeting and forecast process and also between annual evaluations if events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit to which goodwill was allocated to below its carrying amount. Such circumstances could include, but are not limited to: (1) a significant adverse change in legal factors, market conditions, or in business climate, (2) unanticipated competition, or (3) an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. When evaluating goodwill for impairment, we may first perform an assessment qualitatively whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, referred to as a “step zero” approach. Subsequently (if necessary after step zero), an entity should perform its goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying value. Under FASB's ASU 2014-02, Topic 350, "Intangibles-Goodwill and Other" goodwill impairment is measured as the excess of the carrying amount of the reporting unit over its fair value.
The impairment evaluation test involves comparing the current fair value of each business unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. Fair value is typically estimated using a discounted cash flow analysis, which requires the Company to estimate the future cash flows anticipated to be generated by the business unit being tested for impairment as well as to select a risk-adjusted discount rate to measure the present value of the anticipated cash flows. When determining future cash flow estimates, the Company considers historical results adjusted to reflect current and anticipated operating conditions. The Company estimates cash flows for the business unit over a discrete period (typically four or five years) and the terminal period (considering expected long term growth rates and trends). Estimating future cash flows requires significant judgment by management in such areas as future economic conditions, industry-specific conditions, product pricing, and necessary capital expenditures. The use of different assumptions or estimates for future cash flows or significant changes in risk-adjusted discount rates due to changes in market conditions could produce substantially different estimates of the fair value of the business unit.
We have one reportable segment. The Company assesses goodwill impairment by business unit. Judgments regarding the existence of impairment indicators are based on legal factors, market conditions and operational performance of the businesses. Future events, including but not limited to continued declines in economic activity, loss of contracts or a significant number of customers, or a rapid increase in costs or capital expenditures, could cause us to conclude that impairment indicators exist and that goodwill is impaired. For the year ended April 30, 2021, the Company's annual assessment did not result in any impairment indicators. The Company recognized goodwill impairment for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020 of $0 and $335,000, respectively. As of April 30, 2021 and 2020, goodwill was $335,000.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method to account for income taxes. Significant management judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against net deferred tax assets. In preparing the consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves estimating the actual current tax liability together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items, such as deferred revenue, depreciation on property, plant and equipment, goodwill and losses for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets, which include tax loss carry-forwards, and liabilities, which are included within the consolidated balance sheet. We then assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income, and to the extent that recovery is not likely or there is insufficient operating history, a valuation allowance is established. To the extent a valuation allowance is established or increased in a period, we include an expense within the tax provision of the consolidated statements of operations. As of April 30, 2021 and 2020, we have established a full valuation allowance for all deferred tax assets.
As of April 30, 2021 and 2020, we recognized a liability for uncertain tax positions on the balance sheet relative to foreign operations in the amount of $181,000 and $178,000, respectively. We do not anticipate any significant unrecognized tax benefits will be recorded during the next 12 months. Any interest or penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits is recognized in income tax expense. The Company has accrued $3,000 for penalties and interest during the year ended April 30, 2021.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (ASC 740) - Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. ASU 2019-12 which modifies ASC 740 to simplify the accounting for income taxes. The ASU removes certain exceptions for recognizing deferred taxes for investments, performing intra-period allocation and calculating income taxes in interim periods. The ASU also adds guidance to reduce complexity in certain areas, including recognizing deferred taxes for tax goodwill and allocating taxes to members of a consolidated group. ASU 2019-12 is effective for annual periods, including interim periods within those annual periods, beginning after December 15, 2020. We are currently assessing the potential impact of this ASU on our consolidated financial statements and do not expect a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Accounting Pronouncements Being Evaluated
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, "Financial Instruments - Credit Losses". This update requires immediate recognition of management’s estimates of current expected credit losses ("CECL"). Under the prior model, losses were recognized only as they were incurred. The new model is applicable to all financial instruments that are not accounted for at fair value through net income. The standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022 for public entities qualifying as smaller reporting companies. Early adoption is permitted. We are currently assessing the impact of this update on our consolidated financial statements and have not yet determined the impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (ASC 740) - Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. ASU 2019-12 which modifies ASC 740 to simplify the accounting for income taxes. The ASU removes certain exceptions for recognizing deferred taxes for investments, performing intra-period allocation and calculating income taxes in interim periods. The ASU also adds guidance to reduce complexity in certain areas, including recognizing deferred taxes for tax goodwill and allocating taxes to members of a consolidated group. ASU 2019-12 is effective for annual periods, including interim periods within those annual periods, beginning after December 15, 2020. We are currently assessing the potential impact of this ASU on our consolidated financial statements and do not expect a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, "Leases", (Topic 842), which required the Company to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities (related to leases previously classified as operating under previous U.S. GAAP) on its consolidated balance sheet for all leases in excess of one year in duration. The ASU was effective for the Company on May 1, 2019. The Company elected to adopt ASU 2016-02 using the modified retrospective method and, therefore, have not recast comparative periods presented in its unaudited consolidated financial statements. As permitted under ASU 2016-02, the Company elected to account for the non-lease components together with the lease components as a single lease component. The Company recorded an operating lease right-of-use ("ROU") asset of $3.2 million, net of deferred rent of $900,000 and an operating lease liability of $4.1 million as of May 1, 2019. Refer to "Note 12. Leases" for additional information.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other” (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment (ASU 2017-04). This new standard simplifies how an entity is required to test goodwill for impairment by eliminating a step from the goodwill impairment test. ASU 2017-04 allows for prospective application and is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods therein with early adoption permitted for interim or annual goodwill impairment tests performed on testing dates after January 1, 2017. The Company adopted this guidance on May 1, 2019 and it did not have an impact on its consolidated financial statements.
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-07, "Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting". This ASU expands the scope of Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (which currently only includes share-based payments to employees) to include share-based payments issued to nonemployees for goods or services. Under the new guidance, the existing employee guidance will apply to nonemployee share-based transactions (as long as the transaction is not effectively a form of financing), with the exception of specific guidance related to the attribution of compensation cost. The cost of nonemployee awards will continue to be recorded as if the grantor had paid cash for the goods or services. The new accounting guidance was effective for the Company on May 1, 2019. The Company early adopted ASU 2018-07 beginning with its financial reporting for the quarter ended January 31, 2019. The adoption did not have a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, which amends ASC 350-40, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other-Internal-Use Software, to address a customer’s accounting for implementation costs incurred in a cloud computing arrangement ("CCA") that is a service contract. This update aligns the accounting for costs incurred to implement a CCA that is a service arrangement with the guidance on capitalizing costs associated with developing or obtaining internal-use software. The update is effective for public business entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company adopted this guidance on May 1, 2020 and it's impact was captured within its current year consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (ASC 820) - Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement. ASU 2018-13 removes certain disclosures, modifies certain disclosures and adds additional disclosures. ASU 2018-13 is effective for annual periods, including interim periods within those annual periods, beginning after December 15, 2019. The Company adopted this guidance on May 1, 2020 and it did not have an impact on its consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing
We have no off-balance sheet debt or similar obligations. We have no transactions or obligations with related parties that are not disclosed, consolidated into or reflected in our reported results of operations or financial position. We do not guarantee any third-party debt.