Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains a number of forward-looking statements relative to our future plans and our expectations concerning our business and the industries we serve. These forward-looking statements are based on assumptions about a number of important factors and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from estimates contained in the forward-looking statements. Some of the risks that are foreseen by management are outlined above within Item 1A., “Risk Factors”. Item 1A. constitutes an integral part of this report, and readers are strongly encouraged to review this section closely in conjunction with MD&A.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared a global pandemic related to the rapidly spreading coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak which has led to a global health emergency. This outbreak has negatively affected the U.S. and the global economy, created a significant disruption of the financial markets, disrupted global supply chains, and has resulted in mandated closures, orders to shelter-in-place, and significant travel restrictions. While we have taken measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, to include a remote working environment for those employees who are able to conduct business from home and significantly reduced travel, we are still conducting business as usual and are working with our customers to minimize any potential disruption. At this time, we do not believe that our remote working environment and limited staffing in select office locations has adversely impacted our internal controls, financial reporting systems, or our operations.
The full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations, and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict. See Part II Item 1A. Risk Factors of this report for additional details. While the outbreak did not negatively impact our operating results for the first quarter of 2020, we began to realize these impacts to revenue during the second quarter of 2020 as we experienced extended sales and implementation cycles related to our revenue management and customer experience solutions, as well as processing volume reductions. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we experienced our second quarter of sequential revenue growth, reflecting stabilization in the impacted areas of our business. We also continued to build our sales pipeline, driven in large part by the accelerating demand for digital transformation. Going forward, we will continue to diligently monitor and manage our expense levels in line with our anticipated revenue profile.
As we continue to manage our business in this uncertain environment, our priorities will remain the health and safety of our employees, providing our customers with world-class services and solutions, and prudently managing our liquidity to ensure our continued financial strength. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $240 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, and an additional $200 million available to borrow under our revolving credit facility. Given our financial strength, we expect to be able to maintain adequate liquidity as we manage through the current environment, though we cannot reasonably estimate the duration and severity of this global pandemic or its ultimate impact on the global economy and our business results.
Executive Transition Costs
In August 2020, we announced that effective December 30, 2020, Bret Griess, our then-current President and CEO would step down and effective January 1, 2021, Brian Shepherd, our then-current Executive Vice President and Group President would become President and CEO.
As a result of these changes, we entered into a Separation Agreement, dated August 26, 2020, and a subsequent amendment to the Separation Agreement dated December 31, 2020, with Mr. Griess. Under the terms of the Separation Agreement, Mr. Griess is entitled to the following:
•
Compensation, benefits, and other payments pursuant to the terms of his Employment Agreement. The additional compensation, totaling $7.3 million, was expensed ratably over his remaining service period, for which approximately $5 million will be paid in 2021 and approximately $2 million will be paid in 2022.
•
Accelerated vesting of approximately 198,000 shares of unvested restricted stock on December 30, 2020. This modification resulted in a reversal of stock-based compensation expense of $2.7 million in the third quarter of 2020. The fair value of the modified award of $8.4 million was recognized ratably from the date of the modification through December 30, 2020.
The net impact of the executive transition costs for 2020 was $13.0 million, and was recorded in selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expense.
Management Overview
Results of Operations. A summary of our results of operations for 2020 and 2019, and other key performance metrics are as follows (in thousands, except percentages and per share amounts):
(1)
Transaction fees are primarily comprised of interchange and other payment-related fees that we pay, in conjunction with the delivery of service to customers under our payment services contracts, to third-party payment processors and financial institutions. Because we control the integrated service provided under our payment services customer contracts, these transaction fees are presented gross, and not netted against revenue.
(2)
Stock-based compensation included in the table above exclude amounts that have been recorded in restructuring and reorganization charges and executive transition costs.
Revenue. Revenue for 2020 was $990.5 million, a 1% decrease when compared to $996.8 million for 2019, with the decrease mainly attributed to the pricing adjustments associated with the five-year Comcast extension effective January 1, 2020, as well as foreign currency headwinds, offset by the year-over-year growth in our revenue management solutions and strong professional services revenue.
Operating Results. Operating income for 2020 was $105.6 million, or a 10.7% operating income margin percentage, compared to $126.1 million, or a 12.7% operating income margin percentage for 2019. Operating income for 2020 was negatively impacted by the $13.0 million of executive transition costs, discussed above, a $10 million impairment charge, discussed below, and lower revenue generated in 2020, which were offset to a certain extent by the benefit of lower employee-related costs.
Diluted Earnings Per Share (“EPS”). Diluted EPS for 2020 was $1.82 compared to $2.55 for 2019, reflective of the lower operating income discussed above. Additionally, 2019 diluted EPS was positively impacted by a lower effective income tax rate due to Comcast’s exercise of 0.4 million vested common stock warrants that resulted in the recognition of an approximately $4 million net income tax benefit.
Balance Sheet and Cash Flows. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $240.3 million, compared to $182.7 million as of December 31, 2019. Cash flows from operating activities for 2020 were $173.0 million, compared to $151.1 million for 2019. See the Liquidity section below for further discussion of our cash flows.
Significant Customer Relationships
Comcast. Comcast continues to be our largest customer. For 2020 and 2019, revenue from Comcast was $213 million and $229 million, respectively, representing approximately 22% and 23% of our total revenue. The decrease in Comcast revenue is mainly due to the pricing adjustments associated with the new agreement that was executed in December 2019 and became effective January 1, 2020. Our agreement with Comcast runs through December 31, 2024 for cloud and related solutions, and through December 31, 2025 for print and mail services for residential customer accounts, with the option to extend the cloud and related services for an additional one-year term.
A copy of the Comcast agreement and related amendments, with confidential information redacted, is included in the exhibits to our periodic filings with the SEC.
Charter. Charter is our second largest customer. For 2020 and 2019, revenue from Charter was $209 million and $195 million, respectively, representing approximately 21% and 20% of our total revenue. Our agreement with Charter runs through December 31, 2021, with an option to extend the agreement for an additional one-year term. We are currently engaged in discussions with Charter regarding contract renewal terms.
A copy of the Charter agreement and related amendments, with confidential information redacted, is included in the exhibits to our periodic filings with the SEC.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense is included in the following (in thousands):
(1)
SG&A stock-based compensation in the table above excludes the $5.7 million of executive transition costs in 2020.
See Notes 2 and 13 to our Financial Statements for additional discussion of our stock-based compensation expense.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of our Financial Statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires us to select appropriate accounting policies, and to make judgments and estimates affecting the application of those accounting policies. In applying our accounting policies, different business conditions or the use of different assumptions may result in materially different amounts reported in our Financial Statements.
We have identified the most critical accounting policies that affect our financial position and the results of our operations. These critical accounting policies were determined by considering our accounting policies that involve the most complex or subjective decisions or assessments. Our most critical accounting policies identified relate to: (i) revenue recognition; (ii) impairment assessments of long-lived assets; (iii) income taxes; and (iv) loss contingencies. These critical accounting policies, as well as our other significant accounting policies, are disclosed in the notes to our Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition. In accordance with ASC 606, revenue is recognized upon conclusion that a contract with a customer exists. Such conclusion is made by us when the contract is legally enforceable and certain criteria, including collectability, are met. In making our determination of collectability, we consider a number of factors depending upon the specific aspects of an arrangement, which may include, but is not limited to, the following items: (i) an assessment of the customer’s specific credit worthiness, evidenced by its current financial position and/or recent operating results, credit ratings, and/or a bankruptcy filing status (as applicable); (ii) the customer’s current accounts receivable status and/or its historical payment patterns with us (as applicable); (iii) the economic condition of the industry in which the customer conducts the majority of its business; and/or (iv) the economic conditions and/or political stability of the country or region in which the customer is domiciled and/or conducts the majority of its business. The evaluation of these factors, and the ultimate determination of collectability, requires significant judgments to be made by us. Our judgments could have a significant effect to the amount and timing of revenue recognized in any period.
Our contracts with customers include cloud-based revenue management solution arrangements, managed services arrangements, cloud-based payment processing transaction services, software license and service arrangements, professional services arrangements, and bundled service arrangements. The revenue recognition policies that involve the most complex and subjective decisions or assessments that may have a material impact on our operations relate to the accounting for cloud-based revenue management solution arrangements, software license and service arrangements, and bundled service arrangements.
Our cloud-based revenue management solution arrangements are complex agreements that typically include multiple performance obligations. Key factors considered in accounting for cloud-based revenue management solution arrangements include the following criteria: (i) identification of performance obligations within the contract; (ii) determination of the transaction price given the variable nature of the consideration and significance of the consideration; (iii) determination of stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation and the allocation of value between the performance obligations; and (iv) calculation of revenue recognized in each period. The evaluation of these factors and ultimate revenue recognition decision requires significant judgements to be made by us. Depending on the significance of variable consideration, number of solutions/services, complex pricing structures and long-term nature of these types of contracts, our judgements and estimates made in this area could have a significant effect on the amount and timing of revenue recognized in any period. In addition, certain solutions and arrangements require us to assess whether we are a principal to the transaction (gross revenue) or an agent to the transaction (net revenue). Such assessments can have a significant effect on the amount of total revenue recognized.
Our software license and related services arrangements include multiple performance obligations which may be complex and require considerable judgement. Key factors considered in accounting for our software license and related service arrangements include the following criteria: (i) identification of performance obligations within the contract; (ii) assessment of whether services included in the arrangement represent significant production, modification or customization of the software (as applicable), such that the delivery of the software license and related services required to implement the software represent one combined performance obligation; (iii) determination of the transaction price for the contract as these types of arrangements may include both fixed and variable consideration; (iv) determination of stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation including the allocation of value between performance obligations; and (v) estimates to measure progress for delivery. The evaluation of these factors and ultimate revenue recognition decision requires significant judgements to be made by us. We generally determine stand-alone selling prices using pricing calculations (which include regional market factors) for our software license fees and maintenance, and cost-plus margins for services. The pricing calculations can be complex and require estimates based on volumes. Additionally, our use of an hours-based method of accounting for software license and other professional services performance obligations that are satisfied over time requires estimates of total project revenue and costs, along with the expected hours necessary to complete a project. Changes in estimates as a result of additional information as work progresses on a project are inherent characteristics of this method of revenue recognition as we are exposed to business risks in completing these types of performance obligations. The estimation process to support our hours-based recognition method is more difficult for projects of greater length and/or complexity. Our judgments and estimates could: (i) have a significant effect on revenue recognized in any period by changing the amount and/or the timing of the revenue recognized; and/or (ii) impact the expected profitability of a project, including whether an overall loss on an arrangement has occurred.
Our contracts are subject to modification via amendment, change requests, and/or statement of works. Such modifications may occur frequently. The accounting for contract modifications under ASC 606 is complex and requires significant judgements to be made by us as to whether the contract modification is treated as either a separate contract or part of the existing contract. Our judgements could have a significant effect on the revenue recognized in any period by changing the amount and/or timing of the revenue recognized.
Our contracts typically include service level agreements or other incentives which may result in refunds or credits to our customers. Under ASC 606, failure to meet service level standards under the terms of the contract represent adjustments to the overall consideration (reductions in revenue) and may need to be estimated at the outset of the arrangement as part of the overall variable consideration. Such estimates require significant judgement by us and may impact the amount and/or timing of the revenue recognized.
Impairment Assessments of Long-Lived Assets. Long-lived assets relate primarily to property and equipment, software, acquired customer contracts, and customer contract costs. These assets are required to be evaluated for possible impairment as events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be recoverable. A long-lived asset (or group of long-lived assets) is impaired if estimated future undiscounted cash flows associated with that asset, without consideration of interest, are insufficient to recover the carrying amount of the long-lived asset. Once deemed impaired, even if by $1, the long-lived asset is written down to its fair value which could be considerably less than the carrying amount or future undiscounted cash flows. The determination of estimated future cash flows and, if required, the determination of the fair value of a long-lived asset, are by their nature, highly subjective judgments. Changes to one or more of the assumptions utilized in such an analysis could materially affect our impairment conclusions for long-lived assets.
Income Taxes. We are required to estimate our income tax liability in each jurisdiction in which we operate, including U.S. federal, state, and foreign income taxes.
Various judgments are required in evaluating our income tax positions and determining our provisions for income taxes. We regularly assess the likelihood of the future realization of our deferred income tax assets. To the extent we believe that it is not more likely than not that a deferred income tax asset will be realized, a valuation allowance is established. During the ordinary course of our business, there are certain transactions and calculations for which the ultimate income tax determination may be uncertain. In addition, we may be subject to examination of our income tax returns by various tax authorities which could result in adverse outcomes. For these reasons, we establish a liability associated with unrecognized tax benefits based on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest may be due. We adjust this liability based upon changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit, the closing of a tax year upon the expiration of a statute of limitations, or the refinement of an estimate. Should any of the factors considered in determining the adequacy of this liability change significantly, an adjustment to the liability may be necessary. Due to the potential significance of these issues, such an adjustment could be material.
One of the more complex items within our income tax expense is the determination of our annual research and experimentation income tax credit (“R&D tax credit”). We have incurred approximately $120 - $130 million annually in R&D expense over the last three years. The calculation of the R&D tax credit involves the identification of qualifying projects, as well as an estimation of the qualifying costs for such projects. Due to the size, nature, and the number of projects worked on in any given year, the calculation can become complex and certain judgments are necessary in determining the amount of the R&D tax credits claimed.
Loss Contingencies. In the ordinary course of business, we are subject to potential claims related to various items including but not limited to the following: (i) legal and regulatory matters; (ii) vendor contracts; (iii) solution and service delivery matters; and (iv) labor matters. Accounting and disclosure requirements for loss contingencies requires us to assess the likelihood of any adverse judgments in or range of potential outcomes for these matters. A determination of the amount of reserves for such contingencies, if any, is based on an analysis of the issues, often with the assistance of legal counsel. The evaluation of such issues, and our ultimate accounting and disclosure decisions, are by their nature, subject to various estimates and highly subjective judgments. Should any of the factors considered in determining the adequacy of any required reserves change significantly, an adjustment to the reserves may be necessary. Due to the potential significance of these issues, such an adjustment could be material.
Detailed Discussion of Results of Operations
The following discussion includes a comparison of our results of operations and liquidity for 2020 compared to 2019. For a discussion of the 2019 compared to 2018, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 21, 2020.
Total Revenue. Total revenue for 2020 was $990.5 million, a 1% decrease when compared to $996.8 million for 2019. The decrease in total revenue can be mainly attributed to pricing adjustments associated with the five-year Comcast extension effective January 1, 2020, as well as foreign currency headwinds, offset by the year-over-year growth in our revenue management solutions and strong professional services revenue, to include the revenue generated from the acquired Tekzenit business, discussed in Note 7 to the Financial Statements.
We use the location of the customer as the basis of attributing revenue to individual countries and corresponding geographic regions. Revenue by geographic regions for 2020 and 2019 were as follows (in thousands):
Total Operating Expenses. Our operating expenses for 2020 increased 2% to $885.0 million, from $870.7 million for 2019. The increase in operating expenses can be primarily attributed to: (i) the approximately $13 million of executive transition costs, discussed above; and (ii) an approximately $10 million impairment charge recorded in the second quarter of 2020 for the write-off of capitalized customer contract costs related to a discontinued project implementation. These costs were offset to a certain degree by lower employee-related costs and favorable foreign currency movements.
Cost of Revenue (Exclusive of Depreciation). Our cost of revenue consist principally of the following: (i) computing capacity and network communications costs; (ii) statement production costs (e.g., labor, paper, envelopes, equipment, equipment maintenance, etc.); (iii) transaction fees-interchange and other payment-related fees to third-party payment processors and financial institutions; (iv) customer support organizations (e.g., our customer support call center, account management, etc.); (v) professional services organization (vi) various product delivery and support organizations (e.g., managed services delivery, product management, product maintenance, etc.); (vii) third-party software costs and/or royalties related to certain software products; (viii) facilities and infrastructure costs related to the statement production and support organizations; and (ix) amortization of acquired intangibles. The costs related to new solution development (including significant enhancements to existing solutions and services) are included in R&D expense.
The cost of revenue for 2020 increased 2% to $535.6 million, from $525.1 million for 2019. This increase is mainly due to the approximately $10 million impairment charge, mentioned above. Additionally, during 2020, we had more internal resources reassigned to cost of revenues projects that had previously been assigned to R&D projects, however this was offset by lower employee-related costs. Total cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue for 2020 and 2019 was 54.1% and 52.7%, respectively.
R&D Expense (Exclusive of Depreciation). R&D expense for 2020 was $122.8 million, a 4% decrease when compared to $128.0 million for 2019, with the decrease mainly attributed to lower employee-related costs, to include personnel and the related costs previously assigned to R&D projects being reassigned to cost of revenue projects, mentioned above.
Our R&D efforts are focused on the continued evolution of our solutions that enable global service providers worldwide to provide a more personalized customer experience while introducing new digital products and services. This includes the continued investment in our cloud-based solutions.
As a percentage of total revenue, R&D expense for 2020 and 2019 was 12.4% and 12.8%, respectively. We anticipate the level of R&D investment in the near-term to be relatively consistent with 2020.
SG&A Expense (Exclusive of Depreciation). SG&A expense for 2020 increased 4% to $198.3 million, from $191.3 million for 2019. The increase in SG&A expense between 2020 and 2019 is primarily due to the $13.0 million of executive transition costs, discussed above, offset to a certain degree by lower employee-related costs. As a percentage of total revenue, SG&A expense for 2020 and 2019 was 20.0% and 19.2%, respectively.
Depreciation Expense. Depreciation expense for all property and equipment is reflected separately from cost of revenue or the other components of operating expenses. Depreciation expense for 2020 was $22.9 million, a 7% increase from $21.4 million for 2019. The increase can be primarily attributed to our increased level of capital expenditures on items such as technology, security, infrastructure, and modernization of equipment.
Restructuring and Reorganization Charges. In 2020 and 2019, we implemented cost reduction and efficiency initiatives that resulted in restructuring and reorganization charges of $5.3 million and $4.8 million, respectively. These initiatives were primarily made up of organizational changes made to pursue global opportunities and efficiencies.
See Note 8 to our Financial Statements for additional information regarding these initiatives.
Operating Income. Operating income and operating income margin for 2020 was $105.6 million, or 10.7% of total revenue, compared to $126.1 million, or 12.7% of total revenue for 2019. Operating income for 2020 was negatively impacted by the $13.0 million of executive transition costs and the $10 million impairment charge, discussed above, and the lower revenue generated in 2020, which were offset to a certain extent by the benefit of the lower employee-related costs.
Interest Expense and Amortization of Original Issue Discount (“OID”). Our interest expense relates primarily to our 2016 Convertible Notes and our 2018 Credit Agreement. See Note 5 to our Financial Statements for additional discussion of our long-term debt, to include the non-cash interest expense related to the amortization of the convertible debt OID.
Income Tax Provision. Our effective income tax rates for 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
(1)
The 2020 effective income tax rate reflects an adjustment for the income tax impact related to the executive transition costs, discussed above (see Note 9 to our Financial Statements).
(2)
As a result of Comcast’s exercise of their remaining 0.4 million of vested stock warrants in December 2019 (see Note 12 to our Financial Statements), we received an additional income tax benefit of approximately $4 million (see Note 9 to our Financial Statements) due to the stock warrants appreciating in value since the grant date.
Liquidity
Cash and Liquidity. As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity included cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $240.3 million, compared to $182.7 million as of December 31, 2019. We generally invest our excess cash balances in low-risk, short-term investments to limit our exposure to market and credit risks.
As part of our 2018 Credit Agreement, we have a $200 million senior secured revolving loan facility with a syndicate of financial institutions that expires in March 2023. As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding on the 2018 Revolver. The 2018 Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative covenants and financial covenants. As of December 31, 2020, and the date of this filing, we believe we are in compliance with the provisions of the 2018 Credit Agreement.
Our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investment balances as of the end of the indicated periods were located in the following geographical regions (in thousands):
We generally have ready access to substantially all of our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investment balances, but may face limitations on moving cash out of certain foreign jurisdictions due to currency controls and potential negative economic consequences. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.7 million of cash restricted as to use to collateralize guarantees and outstanding letters of credit.
Cash Flows From Operating Activities. We calculate our cash flows from operating activities beginning with net income, adding back the impact of non-cash items or non-operating activity (e.g., depreciation, amortization, amortization of OID, impairments, gain/loss from debt extinguishments, deferred income taxes, stock-based compensation, etc.), and then factoring in the impact of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Our primary source of cash is from our operating activities. Our current business model consists of a significant amount of recurring revenue sources related to our long-term cloud-based and managed services arrangements (primarily billed monthly), payment process transaction services (primarily billed monthly), and software maintenance agreements (which may be billed monthly, quarterly, or annually). This recurring revenue base provides us with a reliable and predictable source of cash. In addition, software license fees and professional services revenue are sources of cash, but the payment streams for these items are less predictable.
The primary use of our cash is to fund our operating activities. Over half of our total operating costs relate to labor costs (both employees and contracted labor) for the following: (i) compensation; (ii) related fringe benefits; and (iii) reimbursements for travel and entertainment expenses. Other operating expenses consist of: (i) computing capacity and related services and communication lines for our outsourced cloud-based business; (ii) paper, envelopes, and related supplies for our statement processing solutions; (iii) transaction fees paid in conjunction with the delivery of services under our payment services contracts; (iv) hardware and software maintenance; and (v) rent and related facility costs. These items are purchased under a variety of both short-term and long-term contractual commitments. A summary of our material contractual obligations is provided below.
Our 2020 and 2019 net cash flows from operating activities, broken out between operations and changes in operating assets and liabilities, for the indicated quarterly periods are as follows (in thousands):
(1)
Cash flows from operating activities for the first quarter of 2020 and 2019 reflect the negative impacts of the payment of the 2019 and 2018 year-end accrued employee incentive compensation in the first quarter subsequent to the year-end accrual for those items.
(2)
Cash flows from operating activities for the first and second quarters of 2020 and 2019 were negatively impacted by the timing of certain recurring key customer payments that were delayed and received subsequent to quarter-end, of approximately $33 million and $26 million for the first and second quarters of 2020, respectively, and $14 million and $25 million for the first and second quarters of 2019, respectively. As of the end of the third quarters of 2020 and 2019, these recurring key customer payments were current, resulting in the third quarters of 2020 and 2019 cash flows from operating activities having the benefit of an additional payment due to the timing delays in previous quarters.
We believe the above table illustrates our ability to generate recurring quarterly cash flows from our operations, and the importance of managing our working capital items. The quarterly and annual variations in our net cash provided by operating activities are related mostly to the changes in our operating assets and liabilities (related mostly to fluctuations in timing at quarter-end of customer payments and changes in accrued expenses), and generally over longer periods of time, do not significantly impact our cash flows from operations.
Significant fluctuations in key operating assets and liabilities between 2020 and 2019 that impacted our cash flows from operating activities are as follows:
Billed Trade Accounts Receivable
Management of our billed accounts receivable is one of the primary factors in maintaining strong cash flows from operating activities. Our billed trade accounts receivable balance includes significant billings for several non-revenue items (primarily postage, sales tax, and deferred revenue items). As a result, we evaluate our performance in collecting our accounts receivable through our calculation of Days Billings Outstanding (“DBO”) rather than a typical Days Sales Outstanding (“DSO”) calculation.
Our gross and net billed trade accounts receivable and related allowance for doubtful accounts receivable (“Allowance”) as of the end of the indicated quarterly periods, and the related DBOs for the quarters then ended, are as follows (in thousands, except DBOs):
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, approximately 96% and 95%, respectively, of our billed accounts receivable balance, were less than 60 days past due.
The increase in DBOs during the first and second quarter of 2020 can be directly attributed to the delay of certain recurring key customer payments, as noted above. We may experience future adverse impacts to our DBOs if we experience payment delays. However, these recurring monthly payments that cross a reporting period-end do not raise any collectability concerns, as payment is generally received subsequent to quarter-end. All other changes in our gross and net billed accounts receivable reflect the normal fluctuations in the timing of customer payments at quarter-end, as evidenced by our relatively consistent DBO metric over the past several quarters.
As a global provider of software and professional services, a portion of our accounts receivable balance relates to international customers. This diversity in the geographic composition of our customer base may adversely impact our DBOs as longer billing cycles (i.e., billing terms and cash collection cycles) are an inherent characteristic of international software and professional services transactions. For example, our ability to invoice and collect arrangement fees may be dependent upon, among other things: (i) the completion of various customer administrative matters, local country billing protocols and processes (including local cultural differences), and non-customer administrative matters; (ii) meeting certain contractual invoicing milestones; or (iii) the overall project status in certain situations in which we act as a subcontractor to another vendor on a project.
Cash Flows From Investing Activities. Our typical investing activities consist of purchases and sales of short-term investments and purchases of software, property and equipment, which are discussed below. Additionally, our recent investing activities also include acquisition and investment activities related to: (i) the acquisition of the Tekzenit business in 2020 that resulted in payments of $10.0 million; (ii) the acquisition of the Forte business in 2018 that resulted in payments in 2019 of $13.2 million; and (iii) investments in a payment technology and services company in 2020 and 2019 of $1.5 million and $4.0 million, respectively (see Note 2 and 7 of our Financial Statements). All of these activities are included in our cash flows from investing activities.
Purchases/Sales of Short-term Investments
During 2020 and 2019 we purchased $81.8 million and $54.3 million, respectively, and sold or had mature $56.5 million and $52.1 million, respectively, of short-term investments. We continually evaluate the possible uses of our excess cash balances and will likely purchase and sell additional short-term investments in the future.
Software, Property and Equipment
Our annual capital expenditures for software, property and equipment for 2020 and 2019 were $29.4 million and $37.3 million, respectively. Our capital expenditures for these periods consisted principally of investments in: (i) computer hardware, software, and related equipment; (ii) statement production equipment; and (iii) facilities and internal infrastructure items.
Cash Flows From Financing Activities. Our financing activities typically consist of various debt-related transactions and activities with our common stock, which are discussed below.
Issuance of Common Stock
Proceeds from the issuance of common stock for 2020 and 2019 were $2.5 million and $2.2 million, respectively, and relate primarily to our employee stock purchase plan.
Repurchase of Common Stock
During 2020 and 2019 we repurchased approximately 624,000 shares and 576,000 shares of our common stock under the guidelines of our Stock Repurchase Program for $26.3 million and $25.5 million, respectively.
Additionally, outside of our Stock Repurchase Program, during 2020 and 2019, we repurchased from our employees and then canceled approximately 254,000 shares and 117,000 shares, of our common stock for $11.9 million and $5.1 million, respectively, in connection with minimum tax withholding requirements resulting from the vesting of restricted stock under our stock incentive plans.
Through December 31, 2020 and 2019, we have paid $38.1 million and $30.9 million, respectively, for our total repurchases of common stock, with the differences when compared to the amounts accrued attributed to the timing of the settlement.
Cash Dividends Paid on Common Stock
During 2020 and 2019, the Board approved dividend payments totaling $30.9 million and $29.4 million, respectively. During 2020 and 2019, we paid dividends of $31.1 million and $29.1 million, respectively, with the differences between the amount approved and paid attributed to dividends accrued on unvested incentive shares that are paid upon vesting.
Common Stock Warrants
During the fourth quarter of 2019, Comcast exercised the remaining 0.4 million of their vested common stock warrants, which we net cash settled under the provisions of the warrant agreement for $12.9 million. See Note 12 to our Financial Statements for further discussion of Comcast’s exercise of their common stock warrants.
Long-term Debt
During 2020 and 2019 we made principal repayments of $10.3 million and $7.5 million, respectively, on our long-term debt balance. See Note 5 to our Financial Statements for additional discussion of our long-term debt.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments and Contingencies
We have various contractual obligations that are recorded as liabilities in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Other items, such as certain purchase commitments and other executory contracts, are not recognized as liabilities in our Balance Sheets but are required to be disclosed.
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020, and the future periods in which such obligations are expected to be settled in cash (in thousands).
The contractual obligation amounts reflected for our long-term debt are based upon the following assumptions:
(i)
Our 2016 Convertible Notes will remain outstanding through their maturity date of March 15, 2036 (although the 2016 Convertible Notes can be converted during the period from, and including, December 15, 2021 to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding March 15, 2022 and holders may require us to repurchase the 2016 Convertible Notes for cash on each of March 15, 2022, March 14, 2026, and March 15, 2031); upon settlement, our cash obligation will not exceed the principal amount; and interest paid through maturity is at a rate of 4.25%; and
(ii)
Our 2018 Credit Agreement includes the mandatory quarterly amortization payments on the term loan as of December 31, 2020, and the interest paid throughout the life of the term loan is based upon the interest rate applicable as of December 31, 2020.
Our long-term debt obligations are discussed in more detail in Note 5 to our Financial Statements.
Our operating leases are discussed in Note 6 to our Financial Statements. As of December 31, 2020, our purchase obligations consist primarily of our expected minimum base fees under the Ensono service agreement, which includes embedded lease components related to processors at our outsourced data center environment (discussed in Notes 6 and 11 to our Financial Statements).
Of the total contractual obligations and commercial commitments above, approximately $507 million is reflected on our Balance Sheet.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Our off-balance sheet arrangements are mainly limited to money transmitter bonds, bid bonds, and performance bonds. These arrangements do not have a material impact and are not reasonably likely to have a material future impact to our financial condition, results of operation, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources. See Note 11 to our Financial Statements for additional information on these guarantees.
Capital Resources
The following are the key items to consider in assessing our sources and uses of capital resources:
Current Sources of Capital Resources.
•
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Short-term Investments. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $240.3 million, of which approximately 73% is in U.S. Dollars and held in the U.S. We have $1.7 million of restricted cash included in cash and cash equivalents, used primarily to collateralize guarantees and outstanding letters of credit. For the remainder of the monies denominated in foreign currencies or located outside the U.S., we do not anticipate any material amounts being unavailable for use in running our business.
•
Operating Cash Flows. As described in the Liquidity section above, we believe we have the ability to generate strong cash flows to fund our operating activities and act as a source of funds to meet our capital resource requirements.
•
Revolving Loan Facility. We currently have a $200 million revolving loan facility, our 2018 Revolver. As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowing outstanding on our 2018 Revolver and had the entire $200 million available to us. Our long-term debt obligations are discussed in more detail in Note 5 to our Financial Statements.
Uses/Potential Uses of Capital Resources. Below are the key items to consider in assessing our uses/potential uses of capital resources:
•
Common Stock Repurchases. We have made repurchases of our common stock in the past under our Stock Repurchase Program. As of December 31, 2020, we had 4.3 million shares authorized for repurchase remaining under our Stock Repurchase Program. Our 2018 Credit Agreement places certain limitations on our ability to repurchase our common stock.
Under our Stock Repurchase Program, we may repurchase shares in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, including through an accelerated stock repurchase plan or under a SEC Rule 10b5-1 plan. The actual timing and amount of share repurchases are dependent on the current market conditions and other business-related factors. Our common stock repurchases are discussed in more detail in Note 11 to our Financial Statements.
During 2020, we repurchased 624,000 shares of our common stock for $26.3 million (weighted-average price of $42.13 per share) under our Stock Repurchase Program.
Outside of our Stock Repurchase Program, during 2020, we repurchased from our employees and then cancelled 254,000 shares of our common stock for $11.9 million in connection with minimum tax withholding requirements resulting from the vesting of restricted stock under our stock incentive plans.
•
Executive Transition. In August 2020, we entered into a Separation Agreement with our former President and CEO, and a subsequent amendment to the Separation Agreement dated December 31, 2020, which includes a commitment to pay additional compensation of approximately $7 million, for which approximately $5 million will be paid in 2021 and approximately $2 million will be paid in 2022.
•
Cash Dividends. During 2020, the Board declared dividends totaling $30.9 million. Going forward, we expect to pay cash dividends each year in March, June, September, and December, with the amount and timing subject to the Board’s approval.
•
Acquisitions. The 2018 Forte acquisition purchase agreement, which was subsequently amended in December 2020, includes provisions for $18.8 million of potential future earn-out payments over a measurement period through September 30, 2023. The earn-out payments are tied to performance-based goals and continued employment by the eligible recipients.
In January 2020, we acquired certain assets of Tekzenit for an initial purchase price of approximately $10 million. The purchase agreement includes provisions for additional purchase price payments in the form of earn-out and qualified sales payments for up to $10 million over a three-year measurement period upon meeting certain financial and sales criteria.
As of December 31, 2020, we have made no earn-out payments or qualified sales payments for either of these acquisitions.
These acquisitions were funded from currently available cash. Our acquisitions are discussed in more detail in Note 7 to our Financial Statements. As part of our growth strategy, we are continually evaluating potential business, asset acquisitions, and investments. Our strategy includes acquiring assets and businesses which provide the technology and personnel to expedite our solutions and services development efforts, provide complementary solutions and services, increase market share, and provide access to new markets and customers.
•
Equity Method Investment. During 2020 we made an additional $1.5 million investment in a payment technology and services company that enables omni-channel digital payments in Latin America. As of December 31, 2020, we held a 15% noncontrolling interest with a carrying value of $7.9 million. See Note 2 to our Financial Statements for additional discussion.
•
Capital Expenditures. During 2020, we spent $29.4 million on capital expenditures. As of December 31, 2020, we had committed to purchase $1.9 million of equipment.
•
Stock Warrants. We have issued Stock Warrants with an exercise price of $26.68 per warrant to Comcast as an incentive for Comcast to convert new customer accounts to ACP. Once vested, Comcast may exercise the Stock Warrants and elect either physical delivery of common shares or net share settlement (cashless exercise). Alternatively, the exercise of the Stock Warrants may be settled with cash based solely on our approval, or if Comcast were to beneficially own or control in excess of 19.99% of the common stock or voting of the Company. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 1.0 million Stock Warrants are outstanding, none of which are vested.
The Stock Warrants are discussed in more detail in Note 12 to our Financial Statements.
•
Long-Term Debt. As of December 31, 2020, our long-term debt consisted of the following: (i) 2016 Convertible Notes with a par value of $230.0 million; and (ii) 2018 Credit Agreement term loan borrowings of $126.6 million.
2016 Convertible Notes
Our 2016 Convertible Notes will be convertible at the option of the note holders during the period from December 15, 2021 to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding March 15, 2022. For notes presented during this time frame, the settlement amount will be equal to the sum of the daily settlement amounts for each of the following 40 consecutive trading days during the related observation period. As a result, we expect our required debt service cash outlay during the next twelve months for the 2016 Convertible Notes to be limited to interest payments of $9.8 million.
2018 Credit Agreement
Our 2018 Credit Agreement mandatory repayments and the cash interest expense (based upon current then interest rates) for the next twelve months is $14.1 million, and $2.2 million, respectively. We have the ability to make prepayments on our 2018 Credit Agreement without penalty.
Our long-term debt obligations are discussed in more detail in Note 5 to our Financial Statements.
In summary, we expect to continue to have material needs for capital resources going forward, as noted above. We believe that our current cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments balances and our 2018 Revolver, together with cash expected to be generated in the future from our current operating activities, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated capital resource requirements for at least the next twelve months. We believe we could obtain additional capital through other debt sources which may be available to us if deemed appropriate.