Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements about our business and operations, based on current expectations and related to future events and our future financial performance, that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those we currently anticipate as a result of many important factors, including the factors we describe under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
We are a medical technology company leading the way in the effort to successfully treat patients suffering from peripheral and coronary artery diseases, including those with arterial calcium, the most difficult form of arterial disease to treat. We are committed to clinical rigor, constant innovation and a defining drive to set the industry standard to deliver safe and effective medical devices that improve lives of patients facing these difficult disease states.
Peripheral
Our peripheral artery disease (“PAD”) products are catheter-based platforms capable of treating a broad range of plaque types in leg arteries both above and below the knee, including calcified plaque, and address many of the limitations associated with other existing surgical, catheter and pharmacological treatment alternatives. The micro-invasive devices use small access sheaths that can provide procedural benefits, allow physicians to treat PAD patients in even the small and tortuous vessels located below the knee, and facilitate access through alternative sites in the ankle, foot and wrist, as well as in the groin.
The United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) granted 510(k) clearance for various OAS devices as a therapy in patients with PAD. We refer to these products in this Form 10-K as the “Peripheral OAS.” In addition to our Peripheral OAS, we also offer support products within the peripheral space. Peripheral sales in the United States during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 represented approximately 68% of revenue.
Coronary
Our coronary artery disease (“CAD”) product, the Diamondback 360 Coronary OAS (“Coronary OAS”), is a catheter-based platform designed to facilitate stent delivery in patients with CAD who are acceptable candidates for percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty or stenting due to de novo, severely calcified coronary artery lesions. The Coronary OAS design is similar to technology used in our Peripheral OAS, customized specifically for the coronary application. In addition to the Coronary OAS, we also offer support products within the coronary space as we expand treatment to a broader patient population with complex coronary artery disease.
We have received premarket approval (“PMA”) from the FDA to market the Coronary OAS as a treatment for severely calcified coronary arteries. Coronary sales in the United States during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 represented approximately 28% of revenue.
International
We serve a growing patient population globally through an expanding distribution and sales network. Sales of our approved products in Japan are made through our exclusive Japan distributor, Medikit Co., Ltd. ("Medikit"). Sales of our products in the rest of the world, which primarily includes certain countries in Southeast Asia, Europe and the Middle East, are primarily made through OrbusNeich. OrbusNeich previously held exclusive rights to sell our OAS outside of the United States and Japan, but in fiscal 2021, we amended our international distribution agreement with OrbusNeich and OrbusNeich has retained exclusive or non-exclusive rights to distribute our products in the territories in which it had been selling our products, as well as certain additional territories, with all other territorial distribution rights reverting to us. We subsequently engaged additional distributors to sell our products in Australia, New Zealand and Indonesia, and we intend to seek additional distributors or commence direct sales in certain territories in which OrbusNeich has non-exclusive distribution rights or no further distribution rights
International sales during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 represented approximately 4% of revenue.
Impact of COVID-19
Refer to Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K for a discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
FINANCIAL OVERVIEW
Net Revenues. We derive substantially all of our revenues from the sale of the Peripheral OAS, the Coronary OAS and other products in the United States. The Peripheral OAS and the Coronary OAS each use a disposable, single-use, low-profile catheter that travels over our proprietary ViperWire guide wire. The OAS uses a saline infusion pump as a power supply for the operation of the catheter. Additional products include catheters, guidewires, balloons, embolic protection devices and other OAS support devices.
In the past, we have observed some degree of seasonality in our business, as there tends to be a lower number of procedures that use our products during the three months ending September 30. Interventional procedure volume usually grows throughout the course of the fiscal year, with the quarter ending June 30 representing the highest volume of cases and, therefore, the highest amount of revenue generated by us during the course of the fiscal year. With the COVID-19 pandemic in fiscal 2020, we did not experience this same pattern of seasonality due to the significant decrease in procedure volumes in the quarter ended June 30, 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold. We assemble the single-use catheter with components purchased from third-party suppliers, as well as with components manufactured in-house. Balloons, guidewires, embolic protection devices and certain catheters are purchased from third-party suppliers. Our cost of goods sold consists primarily of raw materials, direct labor, manufacturing overhead, and purchased finished goods.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses include compensation for executive, sales, marketing, finance, information technology, human resources and administrative personnel, including stock-based compensation and facilities overhead. Other significant expenses include insurance, information technology, marketing costs, professional fees and professional education.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses include costs associated with the design, development, testing, enhancement and regulatory approval of our products. Research and development expenses include employee compensation (including stock-based compensation), supplies and materials, consulting expenses, patent expenses, write-offs of capitalized patent costs, travel and facilities overhead. We also incur significant expenses to operate clinical trials, including trial design, third-party fees, clinical site reimbursement, data management and travel expenses. Research and development expenses are expensed as incurred. Costs of in process research and development (“IPR&D”) projects acquired as part of an asset acquisition that have no alternative future use are expensed when incurred.
Other (Income) and Expense, Net. Other (income) and expense, net primarily includes interest expense from amounts owed under the lease of our headquarters facility and interest income from money market funds and other investments in marketable securities.
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards. We have established valuation allowances to fully offset our deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty about our ability to generate the future taxable income necessary to realize these deferred assets, particularly in light of our historical losses. The future use of net operating loss carryforwards is dependent on us attaining profitable operations and will be limited in any one year under Internal Revenue Code Section 382 due to significant ownership changes (as defined in Section 382) resulting from our equity financings. At June 30, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards for federal and state income tax reporting purposes of approximately $299.9 million. Those resulting from losses incurred prior to fiscal 2019 will expire at various dates through fiscal 2037, while those resulting from losses incurred subsequent to fiscal 2019 are eligible to be carried forward indefinitely.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT JUDGMENTS AND ESTIMATES
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect amounts reported in those statements. Our estimates, assumptions and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, deferred revenue, stock-based compensation and legal proceedings are updated as appropriate at least quarterly. We use authoritative pronouncements, our technical accounting knowledge, cumulative business experience, valuation specialists, judgment and other factors in the selection and application of our accounting policies. While we believe that the estimates, assumptions and judgments that we use in preparing our consolidated financial statements are appropriate, these estimates, assumptions and judgments are subject to factors and uncertainties regarding their outcome. For example, we have been impacted by the outbreak of COVID-19. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly
impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including sales, expenses, reserves and allowances, manufacturing, clinical trials, research and development costs and employee-related amounts, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions taken to contain or treat COVID-19, as well as the economic impact on our customers and markets. We have made estimates of the impact of COVID-19 within our consolidated financial statements and there may be changes to those estimates in future periods. Therefore, actual results may materially differ from these estimates.
Some of our significant accounting policies require us to make subjective or complex judgments or estimates. An accounting estimate is considered to be critical if it meets both of the following criteria: (1) the estimate requires assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate is made, and (2) different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period, would have a material impact on the presentation of our financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
Revenue Recognition. We sell our peripheral and coronary products to customers through a direct sales force in the United States and through distributors internationally. We have no material concentration of credit risk or significant payment terms extended to customers for periods in excess of one year and, therefore, we do not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component. Sales, use, value-added, and other excise taxes are not recognized in revenue. We have elected to present revenue net of sales taxes and other similar taxes.
Performance Obligations
The majority of our revenues are from customer arrangements containing a single performance obligation to transfer control of peripheral and coronary products, and thus revenue is recognized at a point in time when control is transferred to customers. This generally occurs upon shipment or upon delivery to the customer site, based on the contract terms. Shipping and handling activities are considered to be fulfillment activities and are not considered to be a separate performance obligation. We do not assess whether promised goods or services are performance obligations if they are immaterial in the context of the contract with the customer and we do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for contracts with an original expected length of one year or less.
Significant Judgments
We have an exclusive distribution agreement with Medikit to sell our Coronary and Peripheral OAS in Japan. To secure exclusive distribution rights, Medikit made an upfront payment of $10.0 million, which is partially refundable based on the occurrence of certain events during the term of the agreement. The payment is classified as current or long-term based on its expectation of when revenue will be recognized and this expectation is re-evaluated on a quarterly basis. Medikit also provides advance payments for orders under the terms of the agreement, and, therefore, deferred revenue is recorded until products are accepted by Medikit.
Revenue is recognized at the transaction price to which we expect to be entitled. We offer customers certain volume-based rebates, discounts, and incentives. Estimates of variable consideration from these items are taken into account using the most-likely amount method based on contractual provisions, our historical experience, and forecasted customer buying patterns. These items are recognized as a reduction to revenue in the period the revenue is recognized and recorded as a liability.
Return and warranty obligations vary by the specific terms of agreements with customers. We generally do not provide customers with a right of return. We have a limited warranty provision for goods that are nonconforming or defective at the time of shipment, which is estimated based on historical experience.
Contract Costs
Commissions are earned by our direct sales force based on booked orders. We apply the practical expedient and recognize commissions as an expense when incurred because the amortization period of the asset that we would have otherwise recognized is one year or less.
Stock-Based Compensation. We have stock-based compensation plans that include nonvested share awards and stock options and an employee stock purchase plan. We determine the fair value of nonvested share awards with market conditions using the Monte Carlo simulation. Fair value of nonvested share awards that vest based upon performance or time conditions is determined by the closing market price of our stock on the date of grant. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized ratably over the requisite service period for the awards expected to vest. Fair value of shares purchased under the employee stock purchase plan is estimated on the grant date, which is the first date in the six-month purchase period. Stock-compensation expense is recognized over the purchase period based on the anticipated amount of shares to be purchased. Management’s key assumptions are developed with input from independent third-party valuation specialists. During the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we recorded stock-based compensation expense of $16.2 million, $13.6 million, and $11.3 million, respectively.
Legal Proceedings. In accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) guidance, we record a liability in our consolidated financial statements related to legal proceedings when a loss is known or considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. If the reasonable estimate of a known or probable loss is a range, and no amount within the range is a better estimate than any other, the minimum amount of the range is accrued. If a loss is reasonably possible, but not known or probable, and can be reasonably estimated, the estimated loss or range of loss is disclosed in the notes to the consolidated financial statements. In most cases, significant judgment is required to estimate the amount and timing of a loss to be recorded.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our results of operations expressed as dollar amounts (in thousands), and, for certain line items, the changes between the specified periods:
Comparison of Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2021 with Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2020
Net Revenues. Net revenues increased by $22.4 million, or 9.5%, from $236.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2020 to $259.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. For much of the fiscal year, our fiscal 2021 revenues lagged the prior year period as a result of the ongoing recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. However, our fiscal fourth quarter revenues in 2021 exceeded our fiscal fourth quarter 2020 revenues by $28.4 million, or 67%. This year-over-year revenue increase was largely due to declining COVID-19-related hospitalizations in the current year period and an increase in procedure volumes using our products, coupled with the severe impact of the pandemic in the prior year period. In the latter half of fiscal 2021, we also launched new products and expanded product offerings to new markets. Our worldwide peripheral revenues grew by $10.5 million, or 6.3%, to $176.9 million. Our worldwide coronary revenues grew by $11.9 million, or 17.0%, to $82.0 million. International revenues grew 8.3% to $11.3 million.
Subject to the potential impact that the continuing COVID-19 pandemic may have, we expect to continue growing revenue driven by increasing the number of physicians using the devices; increasing the usage per physician; the use of new and improved products such as the JADE balloons, ViperCross Microcatheters, and the WIRION Embolic Protection System;
generating additional clinical data; and continuing expansion into new geographies, partially offset by potential decreases in average selling prices.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold increased 25.4%, from $48.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2020 to $61.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. These amounts represent the cost of materials, labor and overhead for single-use catheters, guidewires, pumps, and other ancillary products. The increase in cost of goods sold was due to greater unit volumes of OAS sold to the office-based lab site of service and international markets, as well as interventional support products. These products also carry a lower gross margin profile, as gross margin decreased to 76.4% for the year ended June 30, 2021 from 79.4% for the year ended June 30, 2020. In addition to the impact of our product mix, we incurred non-recurring charges to our cost of goods sold in fiscal 2021 related to committed future customer pump replacements and other inventory and production-related matters. While these charges are not expected to occur in fiscal 2022, we expect that gross margin for the year ending June 30, 2022 will be similar to the year ended June 30, 2021, as we continue to expand into the OBL site of service, introduce new products with a lower margin profile, expand into international markets, and see slight declines in our average selling prices. Quarterly gross margin fluctuations could also occur based on production volumes, timing of new product introductions, sales mix, pricing changes, or other unanticipated circumstances. If the pandemic extends longer than we anticipate or we experience lingering factors previously described leading to depressed unit volumes, this would negatively impact gross margin in the form of higher unit costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased by $2.5 million, or 1.5%, from $170.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2020 to $167.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. These decreases were primarily driven by reduced travel and costs associated with substantially reduced live meetings and events as a result of COVID-19. We also did not incur any bad debt expense during the year ended June 30, 2021. These decreases were partially offset by increased sales commissions, bonus, and stock-based compensation. Selling, general, and administrative expenses for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 include $13.4 million and $11.3 million, respectively, for stock-based compensation. We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase slightly as revenue grows in fiscal 2022, but at a rate less than the rate of revenue growth.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses decreased by $2.3 million, or 5.3%, from $43.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2020 to $41.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. Research and development expenses relate to the specific programs to develop new products or expand into new markets, such as the development of new versions of and support products for our Peripheral and Coronary OAS, as well as PAD and CAD clinical studies. The decrease was primarily due to decreased activity on the ECLIPSE clinical trial as enrollments were paused at the onset of COVID-19 and only began to recommence in October 2020. In fiscal 2020, research and development expenses also included $4.2 million of charges related to patents within our product portfolio and pipeline that were no longer tied to current or future commercial activities. These decreases were partially offset by IPR&D charges incurred with our asset acquisition of a line of peripheral microcatheters which we intend to commercialize in fiscal 2022, as well as increased costs relating to our percutaneous ventricular assist device program. Research and development expenses for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 include $2.1 million and $1.7 million, respectively, for stock-based compensation. We expect to incur a greater amount of research and development expenses in fiscal 2022 than was incurred for the year ended June 30, 2021, as we expect a full year of activity on the ECLIPSE clinical trial and as we make further investments in expanding our product portfolio. Fluctuations could occur based on the number of projects and studies, the timing of expenditures and further delays brought on by COVID-19.
Please refer to Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 for a comparative discussion of our financial results for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 as compared with the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL INFORMATION
To supplement our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP, our management uses a non-GAAP financial measure referred to as “Adjusted EBITDA.” Reconciliations of this non-GAAP measure to the most comparable U.S. GAAP measure for the respective periods can be found in the following tables. In addition, an explanation of the manner in which our management uses this measure to conduct and evaluate our business, the economic substance behind our management’s decision to use this measure, the substantive reasons why our management believes that this measure provides useful information to investors, the material limitations associated with the use of this measure and the manner in which our management compensates for those limitations is included following the reconciliation table.
Adjusted EBITDA increased as compared to the prior year due to a smaller loss from operations excluding the IPR&D charge and increased stock-based compensation in the current year.
Use and Economic Substance of Non-GAAP Financial Measures Used and Usefulness of Such Non-GAAP Financial Measures to Investors
We use Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure of performance and believe this measure facilitates operating performance comparisons from period to period and company to company by factoring out potential differences caused by depreciation and amortization expense, stock-based compensation and IPR&D charges. Our management uses Adjusted EBITDA to analyze the underlying trends in our business, assess the performance of our core operations, establish operational goals and forecasts that are used to allocate resources and evaluate our performance period over period and in relation to our competitors’ operating results. Additionally, our management is partially evaluated on the basis of Adjusted EBITDA when determining achievement of their incentive compensation performance targets. Management does not use this Adjusted EBITDA measure as a liquidity measure or in the calculation of our financial covenants under the revolving credit facility with Silicon Valley Bank.
We believe that presenting Adjusted EBITDA provides investors greater transparency to the information used by our management for its financial and operational decision-making and allows investors to see our results “through the eyes” of management. We also believe that providing this information better enables our investors to understand our operating performance and evaluate the methodology used by our management to evaluate and measure such performance.
The following is an explanation of each of the items that management excluded from Adjusted EBITDA and the reasons for excluding each of these individual items:
•Stock-based compensation. We exclude stock-based compensation expense from our non-GAAP financial measures primarily because such expense, while constituting an ongoing and recurring expense, is not an expense that requires cash settlement. Our management believes that excluding this item from our non-GAAP results is useful to investors to understand the application of stock-based compensation guidance and its impact on our operational performance, liquidity and ability to make additional investments in our company, and it allows for greater transparency to certain line items in our financial statements.
•IPR&D charges incurred in connection with asset acquisitions. We exclude charges incurred in connection with acquired IPR&D in asset acquisitions from our non-GAAP financial measures given the one-time nature of such expense, which is not used by our management to assess the core profitability of our business operations.
•Depreciation and amortization expense. We exclude depreciation and amortization expense from our non-GAAP financial measures primarily because such expenses, while constituting ongoing and recurring expenses, are not
expenses that require cash settlement and are not used by our management to assess the core profitability of our business operations. Our management also believes that excluding these items from our non-GAAP results is useful to investors to understand our operational performance, liquidity and ability to make additional investments in our company.
Material Limitations Associated with the Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Manner in which We Compensate for these Limitations
Non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for our financial results prepared in accordance with GAAP. Some of the limitations associated with our use of these non-GAAP financial measures are:
•Items such as stock-based compensation do not directly affect our cash flow position; however, such items reflect economic costs to us and are not reflected in our Adjusted EBITDA, and therefore these non-GAAP measures do not reflect the full economic effect of these items.
•Non-GAAP financial measures are not based on any comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles and therefore other companies may calculate similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes.
•Our management exercises judgment in determining which types of charges or other items should be excluded from the non-GAAP financial measures we use. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily upon our GAAP results and using non-GAAP financial measures only supplementally.
We provide detailed reconciliations of each non-GAAP measure to its most directly comparable GAAP measure. We encourage investors to review these reconciliations. We qualify our use of non-GAAP financial measures with cautionary statements as set forth above.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We had cash and cash equivalents of $71.1 million and $185.5 million at June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of June 30, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $381.4 million. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents is primarily attributable to investing of excess cash into short-term marketable securities.
A summary of our cash flow activities is as follows:
Changes in Liquidity
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $884,000 for the year ended June 30, 2021, primarily due to the net loss of $13.4 million, and $13.1 million relating to changes in working capital as a result of the ongoing recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic in our business, partially offset by non-cash expenditures such as stock-based compensation and the charges incurred in connection with our acquisition of peripheral microcatheters.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $(12.8) million for the year ended June 30, 2020, largely driven by our net loss of $27.2 million. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted our revenues, which adversely affected our cash flows from operations. Operating cash flows were less than our net loss due to the impact of non-cash expense items such as stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, and patent cost write-offs. Operating cash flows were also impacted by changes in working capital accounts, which were largely driven by the impact of COVID-19 on our operations. These include reduced accounts receivable and higher inventories as of June 30, 2020 as a result of lower sales volumes in our fiscal fourth quarter.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $112.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, primarily due to investing cash from our equity offering into marketable securities. We also deployed cash into strategic investments, product acquisitions and capital expenditures as we continue to grow our business. These uses of cash were partially offset by maturities and sales of marketable securities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $8.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, primarily due to cash paid of $5.7 million for our asset acquisition of the WIRION embolic protection system and investments in property and equipment of $3.4 million. Cash used in investing activities was partially offset by cash provided from maturities and sales of marketable securities slightly outweighing cash used for purchases of marketable securities.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $800,000 for the year ended June 30, 2021, primarily due to the payment of payroll taxes on the employee vesting of stock awards, partially offset by proceeds from employee stock purchases.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $132.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, primarily from net proceeds of $135.0 million received from our offering of common stock and $4.1 million from the employee stock purchase plan. These amounts were partially offset by $6.3 million of payroll tax payments we made on behalf of our employees associated with the vesting of employee restricted stock.
Our future liquidity and capital requirements will be influenced by numerous factors, including the extent and duration of future operating losses, the level and timing of future sales and expenditures, the results and scope of ongoing research and product development programs, working capital required to support our business operations, the receipt of and time required to obtain regulatory clearances and approvals, our sales and marketing programs, the continuing acceptance of our products in the marketplace, competing technologies, market and regulatory developments, ongoing facility requirements, potential strategic transactions (including the potential acquisition of, or investments in, businesses, technologies and products), international expansion, the existence, defense and resolution of legal proceedings, and the severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic. As discussed in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K, the total impact of disruptions from COVID-19 has had a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations, but once the pandemic subsides we expect our U.S. business to return to a more normalized pre-pandemic level of operations and activity. We will continue to closely monitor our liquidity and capital resources through the disruption caused by COVID-19 and will continue to evaluate our financial position to assess additional spending reductions and our liquidity needs. As of June 30, 2021, we believe our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to fund working capital requirements, including open purchase commitments, capital expenditures and operations for the foreseeable future, including at least the next twelve months, as well as to fund payments under our lease agreements, payments under development agreements and future payments relating to our asset acquisitions of the WIRION embolic protection system and peripheral microcatheters. If needed, we have the ability to borrow under our senior, secured revolving credit facility. We intend to retain any future earnings to support operations and to finance the growth and development of our business. We do not anticipate paying any dividends in the foreseeable future.
Revolving Credit Facility
In March 2017, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”). In March 2020, we entered into the First Amendment to the Loan Agreement (the “Amendment”). The Amendment extended the maturity date of the Loan Agreement by two years, to March 31, 2022, and increased the maximum amount available under the senior, secured revolving credit facility (the “Revolver”) to $50.0 million (the “Maximum Dollar Amount”).
Advances under the Revolver may be made from time to time up to the Maximum Dollar Amount, subject to certain borrowing limitations. The Revolver bears interest at a floating per annum rate equal to the Wall Street Journal prime rate, less 0.75%. Interest on borrowings is due monthly and the principal balance is due at maturity. Upon the Revolver’s maturity, any
outstanding principal balance, unpaid accrued interest, and all other obligations under the Revolver will be due and payable. We will incur a fee equal to 3% of the Maximum Dollar Amount upon termination of the Loan Agreement, as amended by the Amendment (the “Amended Loan Agreement”), or the Revolver for any reason prior to the date that is fifteen days prior to the maturity date, unless refinanced with SVB.
Our obligations under the Amended Loan Agreement are secured by certain of our assets, including, among other things, accounts receivable, deposit accounts, inventory, equipment, general intangibles and records pertaining to the foregoing. The collateral does not include our intellectual property, but we agreed not to encumber our intellectual property without the consent of SVB. The Amended Loan Agreement contains customary covenants limiting our ability to, among other things, incur debt or liens, make certain investments and loans, enter into transactions with affiliates, undergo certain fundamental changes, dispose of assets, or change the nature of our business. In addition, the Amended Loan Agreement contains financial covenants requiring us to maintain, at all times when any amounts are outstanding under the Revolver, either (i) minimum unrestricted cash at SVB and unused availability on the Revolver of at least $10.0 million or (ii) minimum trailing three-month Adjusted EBITDA (as defined in the Amended Loan Agreement) of $1.0 million. If we do not comply with the various covenants under the Amended Loan Agreement or an event of default under the Amended Loan Agreement occurs, such as a material adverse change, the interest rate on outstanding amounts will increase by 5% and SVB may, subject to various customary cure rights and the other terms and conditions of the Amended Loan Agreement, decline to provide additional advances under the Revolver, require the immediate payment of all amounts outstanding under the Revolver, and foreclose on all collateral.
We are required to pay a fee equal to 0.15% per annum on the unused portion of the Revolver, payable quarterly in arrears. We are not obligated to draw any funds under the Revolver and no amounts are outstanding as of June 30, 2021. We currently do not have plans of borrowing under the Amended Loan Agreement.
INFLATION
We do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our business and operating results during the periods presented.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Since inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
No recently issued accounting standards are expected to have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations or financial position.
PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT
The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 provides a “safe harbor” for forward-looking statements. Such “forward-looking” information is included in this Form 10-K and in other materials filed or to be filed by us with the Securities and Exchange Commission (as well as information included in oral statements or other written statements made or to be made by the Company). Forward-looking statements include all statements based on future expectations. This Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, (i) the expectation of selling our products, including recently approved products, future products and products we distribute, domestically and internationally in the future, the timing and structure of our plans to do so, regulatory approval of such products, and the specific countries and products to be sold, either by us or through distributors; (ii) our strategy and growth; (iii) the competitive benefits of our products; (iv) potential strategic acquisitions and partnerships; (v) our products in development and product development activities; (vi) our sustainability efforts; (vii) seasonality in our business; (viii) reimbursement of our products; (ix) our current and anticipated clinical studies, including the results and timing of such studies; (x) our expectation that our revenue will continue to grow; (xi) our expectation of increased selling, general and administrative expenses and the rate of such growth; (xii) our expectation that gross margin in fiscal 2022 will be similar to fiscal 2021; (xiii) our expectation that our current facilities will be adequate for the foreseeable future; (xiv) our plans to continue to expand our sales and marketing efforts as well as our product portfolio and clinical studies; (xv) our intention to file additional patents and our efforts to protect our intellectual property; (xvi) our expectation that we will incur research and development expenses in fiscal 2022 greater than amounts incurred for fiscal 2021; (xvii) our belief that our current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund working capital requirements, capital expenditures and operations for the foreseeable future, as well as to fund certain other anticipated expenses; (xviii) our intention to retain any future earnings to support operations and to finance the growth and development of our business; (xix) our dividend expectations; (xx) our ability to obtain regulatory approvals to market our products; (xxi) our plan not to borrow under our loan and security agreement; (xxii) the anticipated impact of adoption of recent accounting
pronouncements on our financial statements; and (xxiii) our overall expectations regarding the impact of COVID-19 on our business.
In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by the following words: “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “ongoing,” “plan,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “should,” “will,” “would,” or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology, although not all forward-looking statements contain these words. Forward-looking statements are only predictions and are not guarantees of performance. These statements are based on our management’s beliefs and assumptions, which in turn are based on their interpretation of currently available information.
These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our results or our industry’s actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from the information expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements.
These factors include the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the impact and scope thereof on us, our distribution partners, the supply chain and physicians and facilities, including government actions related to the COVID-19 outbreak, material delays and cancellations of procedures, delayed spending by healthcare providers, and distributor and supply chain disruptions; regulatory developments, clearances and approvals; approval of our products for distribution outside of the United States; approval of products for reimbursement and the level of reimbursement in the U.S., Japan and other foreign countries; dependence on market growth; agreements with third parties to sell their products; the ability of us and our distribution partners to successfully launch our products outside of the United States; our ability to maintain third-party supplier relationships and renew existing purchase agreements; our ability to maintain our relationships with distribution partners; the experience of physicians regarding the effectiveness and reliability of the products we sell; the reluctance of physicians, hospitals and other organizations to accept new products; the potential for unanticipated delays in enrolling medical centers and patients for clinical trials; actual clinical trial and study results; the impact of competitive products and pricing; our ability to comply with the financial covenants in our loan and security agreement and to make payments under and comply with the lease agreement for our corporate headquarters; unanticipated developments affecting our estimates regarding expenses, future revenues and capital requirements; the difficulty of successfully managing operating costs; our ability to manage our sales force strategy; actual research and development efforts and needs, including the timing of product development programs; our ability to obtain and maintain intellectual property protection for product candidates; fluctuations in results and expenses based on new product introductions, sales mix, unanticipated warranty claims, and the timing of project expenditures; our ability to manage costs; our actual financial resources and our ability to obtain additional financing; investigations or litigation threatened or initiated against us; court rulings and future actions by the FDA and other regulatory bodies; international trade developments; the effects of hurricanes, flooding, and other natural disasters on our business; the impact of federal corporate tax reform on our business, operations and financial statements; shutdowns of the U.S. federal government; the potential impact of any future strategic transactions; and general economic conditions.
These and additional risks and uncertainties are described more fully in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under “Risk Factors.”
You should read these risk factors and the other cautionary statements made in this Form 10-K as being applicable to all related forward-looking statements wherever they appear in this Form 10-K. We cannot assure you that the forward looking statements in this Form 10-K will prove to be accurate. Furthermore, if our forward-looking statements prove to be inaccurate, the inaccuracy may be material. You should read this Form 10-K completely. Other than as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements, even though our situation may change in the future.