Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Carlisle Companies Incorporated (“Carlisle”, the “Company”, “we”, “us” or “our”) is a diversified manufacturer of highly engineered products. Carlisle is committed to generating superior shareholder returns by combining a unique management style of decentralization, entrepreneurial spirit, active mergers and acquisitions, and a balanced and disciplined approach to capital deployment, all with a culture of continuous improvement as embodied in the Carlisle Operating System ("COS"). Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is designed to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of Company management. All references to “Notes” refer to our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For more information regarding our consolidated results, segment results, and liquidity and capital resources for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to "Part II-Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in the Company's 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
Executive Overview
2020 demonstrated yet again the strong earnings power of Carlisle's business model and our proven ability to deliver sustainable earnings even in significant downturns. Carlisle Construction Materials ("CCM") once again drove the majority of positives in Carlisle's results, supported by strong re-roofing trends, continued price discipline and management of raw material costs. CCM also made significant strides in integrating and improving our newer platforms of architectural metals and polyurethanes. CCM's sustainable cash generating abilities, combined with the Carlisle Experience, provide us with the financial and strategic flexibility that supports our conviction in achieving Vision 2025.
Our other business platforms made important improvements despite being impacted significantly in a challenging year. Carlisle Interconnect Technologies ("CIT") delivered results in line with our expectations in a year of record declines in the aerospace industry by focusing on delivering new products to increase our content per plane, rightsizing its manufacturing footprint, further integrating its medical platform, and continuing to invest in our test and measurement and sensors product lines. Carlisle Fluid Technologies ("CFT") exceeded expectations, leveraging a strong focus on execution while introducing exciting, innovative new products. Finally, Carlisle Brake & Friction ("CBF") enters 2021 looking to benefit from our recent restructuring activities and with solid end-market tailwinds in core markets of construction, mining and agriculture, further reinforced by an improved outlook for dealer inventory replenishment after reductions in the last several years.
We remain balanced in our capital deployment approach. We are increasing our capital expenditures in 2021 to drive future growth. We continue to manage an active merger and acquisition pipeline focused on synergistic businesses that complement our high-margin product lines. Finally, we will remain active in returning capital to shareholders. Notably, we raised our dividend in 2020 for the 44th consecutive year and returned $495 million to shareholders in the form of share repurchases and dividends.
Vision 2025 gave us clear direction and consistency of mission during 2020 and will continue to guide our efforts as we accelerate into the expected economic recovery in 2021.
Summary Financial Results
(1)Items affecting comparability primarily include exit and disposal and facility rationalization charges, costs of and related to acquisitions, idle capacity and labor costs, net of subsidies, asset impairments, litigation settlement costs, insurance settlements, (gains) losses from and costs related to divestitures, losses on debt extinguishment and non-comparable tax items. The tax effect is based on the rate of the jurisdiction where the expense is deductible. Refer to Items Affecting Comparability in this MD&A for further discussion.
Revenues decreased in 2020 primarily reflecting lower volumes in all of our segments, which have continued to be impacted by the global economic slowdown due to the coronavirus pandemic ("COVID-19"). Contributions from acquisitions, primarily Providien, LLC ("Providien"), partially offset the decrease in volume.
The decrease in operating income in 2020 primarily reflected lower volumes as well as lower production levels increasing per unit costs and wage inflation. The decrease in operating income was partially offset by raw material savings, particularly in our CCM segment, lower incentive compensation and travel costs, and savings from COS.
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations decreased primarily from the above operating income performance ($2.27 per share) and higher interest expense ($0.14 per share), partially offset by reduced average shares outstanding ($0.26 per share) resulting from our share repurchase program.
We generated $696.7 million in operating cash flows during 2020 and utilized cash on hand and cash provided by operations to return capital to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases, and fund capital expenditures.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Revenues
The decrease in revenues in 2020 primarily reflected lower sales volumes in all segments, which continue to be impacted by the global economic slowdown due to COVID-19. CIT's volume decline was led by lower sales in the commercial aerospace market, and CCM, CBF and CFT experienced declines in sales volumes across all markets in which they operate. Partially offsetting the decline was a contribution from acquisitions of $101.4 million in 2020, primarily from Providien in the CIT segment.
Revenues by Geographic Area
Gross Margin
Gross margin percentage (gross margin expressed as a percentage of revenues) declined in 2020, driven by lower sales volumes in all segments, as well as lower production levels increasing per unit costs and wage inflation, partially offset by favorable raw material pricing at CCM and purchase savings from COS. Also included in cost of goods sold were exit and disposal costs totaling $12.9 million in 2020, primarily at CIT, attributable to our restructuring initiatives, compared with $7.1 million in 2019. Refer to Note 8 for further information on exit and disposal activities.
Selling and Administrative Expenses
The decrease in selling and administrative expenses in 2020 primarily reflected lower travel, incentive compensation and medical costs. The decreases were partially offset by higher legal and consulting fees, termination costs associated with the expiration of the agreement to acquire Draka Fileca SAS and wage inflation. Also included in selling and administrative expenses were exit and disposal costs totaling $9.5 million in 2020, primarily at CBF, CFT and CIT, attributable to our restructuring initiatives, compared with $5.6 million in 2019. Refer to Note 8 for further information on exit and disposal activities.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were lower in 2020 primarily reflecting lower new product development at our CIT and CFT segments.
Other Operating Expense (Income), net
(1)Items affecting comparability include impairment charges, (gains) losses from divestitures, insurance recoveries and gain from contingent consideration. Refer to Items Affecting Comparability.
Other operating expense, net in 2020 primarily reflected $6.0 million of impairment charges and $4.0 million of losses on sales of fixed assets, primarily at CBF, CCM and CIT. Partially offsetting the expense was $2.5 million of rebates, $1.7 million of rental income, $1.4 million of royalty income and $0.7 million gain from insurance recoveries.
Other operating income, net in 2019 primarily reflected a $5.0 million gain on contingent consideration at CFT, $2.3 million of rebates and $1.9 million of gains on sales of assets.
Operating Income
Refer to Segment Results of Operations within this MD&A for further information related to segment operating income results.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, during 2020 primarily reflected higher long-term debt balances associated with our public offering of $750.0 million of 2.75% unsecured senior notes completed in February 2020, and draws on our Revolving Credit Facility (the "Facility") in the first quarter of 2020, which were repaid in the second quarter of 2020. Refer to Note 14 for further information on our long-term debt.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt related to the early redemption in full of our $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 5.125% notes due December 15, 2020 (the “2020 Notes”). The 2020 Notes were redeemed on March 29, 2020 at the redemption price of $262.1 million. The redemption price included a premium of $8.4 million, along with $0.4 million of deferred issuance costs and resulted in a loss of $8.8 million. Refer to Note 14 for further discussion.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased during 2020 primarily related to lower yields.
Other Non-operating Expense, net
(1)Items affecting comparability include income tax related indemnification losses and (gains) losses on divestitures. Refer to Items Affecting Comparability.
Other non-operating expense, net in 2020 primarily reflected the release of a portion of the indemnification asset related to the Petersen Aluminum Corporation ("Petersen") acquisition resulting from escrow expirations, and net impact of the resolution of certain tax uncertainties related to the Accella Holdings, LLC ("Accella") acquisition and release of the corresponding indemnification assets, partially offset by foreign exchange gains and a gain on sale of a business at CFT.
Other non-operating expense, net in 2019 primarily reflected the net impact of the resolution of certain tax uncertainties related to the Accella acquisition and release of the corresponding indemnification assets, and foreign exchange gains.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes on continuing operations for 2020 is lower than 2019 primarily reflecting lower pre-tax income in the U.S., and to a lesser extent in foreign jurisdictions. This equated to lower taxes of $42.7 million, with approximately $1.8 million of net lower taxes related to other permanent differences and the impact of prior year taxes in the current year, primarily related to:
•Favorable change of $8.7 million primarily related to the lapse of statutes on uncertain tax positions;
•Unfavorable of $4.9 million related to reduction in return to provision adjustments; and
•Unfavorable change of $2.1 million related to windfall tax benefits for current year stock-based compensation.
Refer to Note 9 for further information related to income taxes.
Loss from Discontinued Operations
The loss from discontinued operations of $4.1 million in 2020 relates to workers' compensation accruals associated with a former business disposed of in 2005.
The loss from discontinued operations of $0.9 million in 2019 relates to an environmental remediation accrual associated with a former business disposed of in 2009, partially offset by the settlement of prior income tax positions in the current year related to the sale of Carlisle FoodService Products.
Refer to Note 4 for additional information related to discontinued operations.
Segment Results of Operations
We continue to operate our facilities as essential business operations, while adhering to all health and safety measures for onsite employees. We have taken several steps to address the overall effects of COVID-19 on Carlisle and continue to assess the risks and potential impacts on our businesses. We have developed plans and implemented actions to mitigate risks and enhance the performance of our businesses in an uncertain environment dependent largely on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Carlisle Construction Materials (“CCM”)
CCM delivered 1.0% year-over-year improvement in operating income despite a 7.4% decline in revenue. Notably, there was sequential improvement in sales beginning in September, when sales increased year-over-year for the first time since the pandemic began that carried into the fourth quarter. CCM was able to expand operating margin through favorable raw materials pricing, maintained price discipline and improved operating efficiencies from COS.
We continue to invest in CCM Europe, evidenced by new regional leadership, expansion of our world-class facility in Waltershausen, Germany and several new product introductions planned for 2021. Within our architectural metals platform, we have set plans in motion for three new locations in underserved regions around the U.S. while making progress consolidating our teams to drive commercial synergies and operational efficiencies. Our polyurethane business is driving sustainable growth providing products and solutions with energy efficiency in both residential and commercial applications. The polyurethane team, in collaboration with CFT engineering, has introduced an industry-first integrated spray foam insulation equipment solution (IntelliSpray), which optimizes productivity and material savings when used with CCM's complete product portfolio of open and closed cell products.
(1)Items affecting comparability in 2020 include idle capacity and labor costs, net of subsidies, of $3.7 million, exit and disposal and facility rationalization costs of $1.0 million and acquisition related costs of $0.1 million, partially offset by a gain from divestiture of $0.8 million and a gain from insurance recoveries of $0.7 million. Items affecting comparability in 2019 include acquisition related costs of $2.6 million and exit and disposal and facility rationalization costs of $0.3 million, partially offset by a gain from divestiture of $0.7 million. Refer to Items Affecting Comparability.
CCM’s revenue decline in 2020 primarily reflected lower volumes across all of our product lines due to delays in customer demand and in new construction projects attributable to COVID-19.
CCM’s operating margin percentage growth in 2020 was driven by favorable raw material pricing, lower travel and administrative costs and savings from COS, partially offset by lower volumes, unfavorable price and wage inflation.
Carlisle Interconnect Technologies (“CIT”)
CIT delivered results in line with our expectations in a year of record declines in the aerospace industry by focusing on delivering new products to increase our content per plane, rightsizing its manufacturing footprint, further integrating its medical platform, and continuing to invest in our test and measurement and sensors product lines.
In August 2020, as a result of the market declines caused by COVID-19, we announced the closure of our manufacturing operations in Kent, Washington, and the relocation of selected operations to our existing facilities primarily in North America. This project is estimated to take 12 to 18 months to complete. Total project costs are expected to approximate $18.3 million, with approximately $11.5 million remaining to be incurred.
In April 2020, we announced plans to exit our manufacturing operations in Mobile, Alabama, and relocate the majority of those operations to CIT's existing manufacturing facility in Franklin, Wisconsin. This project is substantially complete with cumulative costs of $1.6 million recognized through December 31, 2020.
In January 2019, we announced the relocation of our connectors manufacturing operations in El Segundo, California, and Riverside, California, to our existing lower cost facilities in North America. This project is complete with cumulative costs of $20.8 million recognized through December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 8 for further information regarding exit and disposal activities.
(1)Items affecting comparability in 2020 include exit and disposal and facility rationalization costs of $16.4 million, an impairment charge of $6.0 million, idle capacity and labor costs, net of subsidies, of $3.9 million and acquisition related costs of $0.4 million. Items affecting comparability in 2019 include exit and disposal and facility rationalization costs of $13.6 million and acquisition related costs of $3.1 million. Refer to Items Affecting Comparability.
CIT's revenue decline in 2020 primarily reflected lower volumes, led by the commercial aerospace market as a result of continued delays in the 737 Max production and lower build rates on narrow and wide body aircraft by OEMs, given steep declines in airline travel and customer plant shutdowns. The decline was partially offset by acquired medical device product lines.
CIT’s operating margin percentage decrease in 2020 was driven by lower volumes, unfavorable mix, higher restructuring and facility rationalization costs, and wage and raw material inflation, partially offset by savings from COS and lower incentive compensation and travel costs.
Carlisle Fluid Technologies (“CFT”)
(1)Items affecting comparability in 2020 include exit and disposal and facility rationalization costs of $3.7 million and acquisition related costs of $0.5 million. Items affecting comparability in 2019 includes acquisition related costs of $3.1 million and exit and disposal and facility rationalization costs $2.7 million, partially offset by a contingent consideration gain of $5.0 million. Refer to Items Affecting Comparability.
CFT's revenue decline in 2020 primarily reflected volume declines due to COVID-19 across all markets in which they operate, partially offset by contributions from acquisitions and price realization.
CFT’s operating margin percentage decrease in 2020 was driven by lower volumes and wage and raw material inflation, partially offset by lower incentive compensation and travel costs, savings from COS and price realization.
Carlisle Brake & Friction (“CBF”)
During the first quarter of 2020, we initiated plans to consolidate certain operations globally to reduce costs and streamline processes by consolidating certain positions within selling, general and administrative, and manufacturing functions and exited less profitable product lines that resulted in asset write-offs. This project is substantially complete with cumulative costs of $5.5 million recognized through December 31, 2020.
(1)Items affecting comparability in 2020 include exit and disposal and facility rationalization costs of $5.5 million and idle capacity and labor costs, net of subsidies, of $1.2 million. Items affecting comparability in 2019 include exit and disposal and facility rationalization costs of $2.8 million. Refer to Items Affecting Comparability.
CBF's revenue decline in 2020 primarily reflected lower volumes due to plant closures from COVID-19 in the heavy equipment, aerospace and transportation markets.
CBF's operating margin percentage decrease in 2020 was driven by lower volumes, unfavorable mix, higher restructuring and facility rationalization costs, and wage inflation, partially offset by savings from COS.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
A summary of our cash and cash equivalents by region follows:
We maintain liquidity sources primarily consisting of cash and cash equivalents as well as availability under our Facility. In the near term, cash on hand is our primary source of liquidity. The increase in cash and cash equivalents compared with December 31, 2019, was primarily related to cash generated from operations and proceeds from our public offering of $750.0 million of unsecured senior notes due in March 2030, partially offset by the early redemption of our $250.0 million notes due in December 2020. Additionally, during 2020 we utilized cash on hand to fund share repurchases, capital expenditures and pay dividends to shareholders.
In certain countries, primarily China, our cash is subject to local laws and regulations that require government approval for conversion of such cash to U.S. Dollars, as well as for transfer of such cash, both temporarily and permanently outside of that jurisdiction. In addition, upon permanent transfer of cash outside of certain jurisdictions, primarily in China, we may be subject to withholding taxes, and as such we have accrued $4.6 million in anticipation of those taxes as of December 31, 2020.
Despite the continued uncertainty in global markets resulting from COVID-19, we believe we have sufficient cash on hand, availability under the Facility and operating cash flows to meet our business requirements for at least the next 12 months. At the discretion of management, the Company may use available cash on capital expenditures, dividends, common stock repurchases, acquisitions and strategic investments.
We also anticipate we will have sufficient cash on hand, as well as available liquidity under the Facility, to pay outstanding principal balances of our existing notes by the respective maturity dates. Another potential source of liquidity is access to public capital markets, subject to market conditions. We may access the capital markets to
repay the outstanding balance, if our sources of liquidity have been used for other strategic purposes by the time of maturity. Refer to Debt Instruments below.
Sources and Uses of Cash and Cash Equivalents
Operating Activities
We generated operating cash flows totaling $696.7 million for 2020 (including working capital sources of $81.5 million), compared with $703.1 million for 2019 (including working capital uses of $9.5 million). Lower operating cash flows in 2020 primarily reflect lower cash earnings, partially offset by a decline in working capital, both as a result of a decline in volumes.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities of $122.6 million for 2020 primarily reflected capital expenditures of $95.5 million and the acquisition of Motion Tech Automation, LLC ("MTA"), net of cash acquired, for $33.0 million. Cash used in investing activities of $694.9 million for 2019 primarily reflected the acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of Providien for $328.7 million, Petersen for $202.0 million, MicroConnex Corporation ("MicroConnex") for $45.4 million and other acquisitions for $40.3 million, and capital expenditures of $88.9 million.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was $24.7 million for 2020. Net proceeds from our February notes offering, partially offset by the early redemption of our senior notes due December 15, 2020, and financing costs associated with our February notes offering, totaled $458.0 million. Additionally, we used cash of $382.4 million for share repurchases and $112.4 million for cash dividend payments, reflecting the increased annual dividend of $2.05 per share. Cash used in financing activities of $461.2 million for 2019 primarily reflected $382.1 million of share repurchases and $102.9 million of cash dividend payments.
Share Repurchases
On February 5, 2019, the Board of Directors (the "Board") approved a 5 million share increase in the Company's stock repurchase program. We repurchased approximately 3.1 million shares in 2020 as part of our plan to return capital to shareholders, utilizing $382.4 million of our cash on hand. As of December 31, 2020, we had authority to repurchase 1.9 million shares.
On February 2, 2021, the Board approved an additional 5 million share increase in the Company's stock repurchase program. Purchases may occur from time to time in the open market and no maximum purchase price has been set. The decision to repurchase shares depends on price, availability and other corporate developments. The Company plans to continue to repurchase shares in 2021 on an opportunistic basis.
We intend to pay dividends to our shareholders and have increased our dividend rate annually for the past 44 years. On February 2, 2021, the Board declared a regular quarterly dividend of $0.525 per share, payable on March 1, 2021, to shareholders of record at the close of business on February 19, 2021.
Debt Instruments
Senior Notes
On February 28, 2020, the Company completed a public offering of $750.0 million of unsecured senior notes with a stated interest rate of 2.75% due March 1, 2030 (the “2030 Notes”). The 2030 Notes were issued at a discount of $9.3 million, resulting in proceeds to the Company of $740.7 million. The Company incurred costs to issue the 2030 Notes of approximately $22.9 million, inclusive of underwriters’, credit rating agencies’ and attorneys’ fees, loss on treasury lock contracts and other costs. The discount, issuance costs and loss on treasury locks are amortized to interest expense over the life of the 2030 Notes. Interest is payable each March 1 and September 1, and commenced on September 1, 2020.
On February 28, 2020, we issued a notice for the redemption in full of our $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 5.125% notes due December 15, 2020 (the “2020 Notes”). The 2020 Notes were redeemed on March 29, 2020 at the redemption price of $262.1 million. We recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt totaling $8.8 million in the first quarter of 2020.
We also have senior unsecured notes outstanding of $350.0 million due November 15, 2022 (at a stated interest rate of 3.75%), $400.0 million due December 1, 2024 (at a stated interest rate of 3.5%) and $600.0 million due December 1, 2027 (at a stated interest rate of 3.75%) that are rated BBB by Standard & Poor’s and Baa2 by Moody’s.
Revolving Credit Facility
On February 5, 2020, we entered into our Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Amendment”) administered by JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. Among other things, the Amendment extended the maturity date of the Facility from February 21, 2022, to February 5, 2025.
During 2020, borrowings under the Facility totaled $500.0 million with a weighted average interest rate of 1.9%, and repayments totaled $500.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings under the Facility and $1.0 billion of availability. During the year ended and as of December 31, 2019 there were no borrowings under the Facility.
Debt Covenants
We are required to meet various restrictive covenants and limitations under our senior notes and revolving credit facility including certain leverage ratios, interest coverage ratios and limits on outstanding debt balances held by certain subsidiaries. We were in compliance with all covenants and limitations as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Refer to Note 14 for further information on our debt instruments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1. In preparing the Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”), the Company’s management must make informed decisions which impact the reported amounts and related disclosures. Such decisions include the selection of the appropriate accounting principles to be applied and assumptions on which to base estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates, including those related to goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, valuation of long-lived assets, revenue recognition, income taxes and extended product warranties on an ongoing basis. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our observation of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other outside sources, that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Business Combinations
As noted in Executive Overview we have a history and a strategy of acquiring businesses. We account for these business combinations as required by GAAP under the acquisition method of accounting, which requires us to recognize the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at their acquisition date fair values. Deferred taxes are recorded for any differences between fair value and tax basis of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and can
vary based on the structure of the acquisition as to whether it is a taxable or non-taxable transaction. To the extent the purchase price of the acquired business exceeds the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including deferred income taxes recorded in connection with the transaction, such excess is recognized as goodwill (see further below for our critical accounting estimate regarding post-acquisition accounting for goodwill). The most critical areas of judgment in applying the acquisition method include selecting the appropriate valuation techniques and assumptions that are used to measure the acquired assets and assumed liabilities at fair value, particularly for intangible assets, contingent consideration, acquired tangible assets such as property, plant and equipment, and inventory.
The key techniques and assumptions utilized by type of major acquired asset or liability generally include:
In selecting techniques and assumptions noted above, we generally engage third-party, independent valuation professionals to assist us in developing the assumptions and applying the valuation techniques to a particular business combination transaction. In particular, the discount rates selected are compared to and evaluated with (i) the industry weighted-average cost of capital, (ii) the inherent risks associated with each type of asset and (iii) the level and timing of future cash flows appropriately reflecting market participant assumptions.
As noted above, goodwill represents a residual amount of purchase price. However, the primary items that generate goodwill include the value of the synergies between the acquired company and our existing businesses and the value of the acquired assembled workforce, neither of which qualifies for recognition as an intangible asset. Refer to Note 3 for more information regarding business combinations, specifically the items that generated goodwill in our recent acquisitions.
Subsequent Measurement of Goodwill
Goodwill is not amortized but is tested annually, or more often if impairment indicators are present, for impairment at a reporting unit level. Goodwill is tested for impairment via a one-step process by comparing the fair value of goodwill with its carrying value. We recognize an impairment for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value. We estimate the fair value of our reporting units based on the income approach utilizing the
discounted cash flow method ("DCF") and the market approach utilizing the public company market multiple method. The key techniques and assumptions generally include:
We have determined that we have four reporting units and have allocated goodwill to those reporting units as follows:
Annual Impairment Test
We test our goodwill for impairment annually as of October 1. For the 2020 impairment test, the CCM reporting unit was tested for impairment using a qualitative approach. Under this approach, an entity may assess qualitative factors as well as relevant events and circumstances to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Through the results of our analysis, we determined that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the CCM reporting unit was less than its carrying value and thus, a quantitative analysis was not performed. The CIT, CFT and CBF reporting units were tested for impairment using the quantitative approach described above, resulting in fair value that substantially exceeded the carrying value for each of the reporting units.
We will continue to closely monitor actual results versus expectations as well as whether and to what extent any significant changes in current events or conditions, including changes to the impacts of COVID-19 on our business, result in corresponding changes to our expectations about future estimated cash flows, discount rates and market multiples. If our adjusted expectations of the operating results, both in size and timing, of CIT, CFT and CBF do not materialize, if the discount rate increases (based on increases in interest rates, market rates of return or market volatility) or if market multiples decline, we may be required to record goodwill impairment charges, which may be material.
While we believe our conclusions regarding the estimates of fair value of our reporting units are appropriate, these estimates are subject to uncertainty and by nature include judgments and estimates regarding various factors. These factors include the rate and extent of growth in the markets that our reporting units serve, the realization of future sales price and volume increases, fluctuations in exchange rates, fluctuations in price and availability of key raw materials, future operating efficiencies and, as it pertains to discount rates, the volatility in interest rates and costs of equity.
Refer to Note 12 for more information regarding goodwill.
Subsequent Measurement of Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
As discussed above, indefinite-lived intangible assets are recognized and recorded at their acquisition-date fair value. Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized but are tested annually at the appropriate unit of account, which generally equals the individual asset, or more often if impairment indicators are present. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment via a one-step process by comparing the fair value of the intangible asset with its carrying value. We recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the intangible asset's fair value. We generally estimate the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets consistent with the techniques noted above using our expectations about future cash flows, discount rates and royalty rates for purposes of the annual test. We monitor for significant changes in those
assumptions during interim reporting periods. We also periodically re-assess indefinite-lived intangible assets as to whether its useful lives can be determined, and if so, we would begin amortizing any applicable intangible asset.
Annual Impairment Test
We test our indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually as of October 1. For the 2020 impairment test, the CCM indefinite-lived intangible assets were tested for impairment using a qualitative approach. The CIT, CFT and CBF indefinite-lived intangible assets were tested for impairment using the quantitative approach described above, resulting in fair values that substantially exceeded the carrying values, with the exception of four trade names with an aggregate carrying value of $68.0 million that exceeded their carrying amounts by less than 5%.
We will continue to closely monitor actual results versus expectations as well as whether and to what extent any significant changes in current events or conditions, including changes to the impacts of COVID-19 on our business, result in corresponding changes to our expectations about future estimated revenues and discount rates. If our adjusted expectations of the revenues, both in size and timing, of CIT, CFT and CBF trade names do not materialize or if the discount rate increases (based on increases in interest rates, market rates of return or market volatility), we may be required to record trade name impairment charges, which may be material.
Refer to Note 12 for more information regarding intangible assets.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets or asset groups, including amortizable intangible assets, are tested for recoverability whenever events or circumstances indicate that the undiscounted future cash flows do not exceed the carrying amount of the asset or asset group. For purposes of testing for impairment, we group our long-lived assets classified as held and used at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows from other assets and liabilities, which means that in many cases multiple assets are tested for recovery as a group. Our asset groupings vary based on the related business in which the long-lived assets are employed and the interrelationship between those long-lived assets in producing net cash flows; for example, multiple manufacturing facilities may work in concert with one another or may work on a stand-alone basis to produce net cash flows. We utilize our long-lived assets in multiple industries and economic environments and our asset groupings reflect these various factors.
We monitor the operating and cash flow results of our long-lived assets or asset groups classified as held and used to identify whether events and circumstances indicate the remaining useful lives of those assets should be adjusted, or if the carrying value of those assets or asset groups may not be recoverable. Undiscounted estimated future cash flows are compared to the carrying value of the long-lived asset or asset group in the event indicators of impairment are identified. In developing our estimates of future undiscounted cash flows, we utilize our internal estimates of future revenues, costs and other net cash flows from operating the long-lived asset or asset group over the life of the asset or primary asset, if an asset group. This requires us to make judgments about future levels of sales volume, pricing, raw material costs and other operating expenses.
If the undiscounted estimated future cash flows are less than the carrying amount, we determine the fair value of the asset or asset group and record an impairment charge in current earnings to the extent carrying value exceeds fair value. Fair values may be determined based on estimated discounted cash flows, by prices for like or similar assets in similar markets or a combination of both. All of our asset groups were recoverable as of December 31, 2020.
Long-lived assets or asset groups that are part of a disposal group that meets the criteria to be classified as held for sale are not assessed for impairment, but rather a loss on sale is recorded against the disposal group if fair value, less cost to sell, of the disposal group is less than its carrying value. If the disposal group’s fair value exceeds its carrying value, we record a gain, assuming all other criteria for a sale are met, when the transaction closes.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when obligations under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied; generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of our products or services. Revenue is measured as the amount of total consideration expected to be received in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Total expected consideration, in certain cases, is estimated at each reporting period, including interim periods, and is subject to change with variability dependent on future events, such as customer behavior related to future purchase volumes, returns, early payment discounts and other customer allowances. Estimates for rights of return, discounts and rebates to customers, and other adjustments for variable consideration are provided for at the time of sale as a deduction to revenue, based on an analysis of historical experience and actual sales data. Changes in these
estimates are reflected as an adjustment to revenue in the period identified. Sales, value added and other taxes collected concurrently with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
We receive payment at the inception of the contract for separately priced extended service warranties, and revenue is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the life of the contracts. The term of these warranties ranges from five to 40 years. The weighted average life of the contracts as of December 31, 2020, is approximately 20 years.
Additionally, critical judgments and estimates related to revenue recognition relative to certain customer contracts in our CIT and CFT segments, in which they are contract manufacturers or where they have entered into an agreement to provide both services (engineering and design) and products resulting from those services, include the following:
•Determination of whether revenue is earned at a "point-in-time" or "over time": Where contracts provide for the manufacture of highly customized products with no alternative use and provide CIT or CFT the right to payment for work performed to date, including a normal margin for that effort, we have concluded those contracts require the recognition of revenue over time.
•Measurement of revenue using the key inputs of expected gross margin and inventory in our possession. We utilize an estimate of expected gross margin based on historical margin patterns and management’s experience, which vary based on the customers and end markets being evaluated. There are multiple unique customer contracts at CIT or CFT. Accordingly, the estimate of expected margin is done for each customer discretely. We review the margins for these categories as contracts, customers and product profiles change over time to ensure that the margin expectations reflect the best available data for each category.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in the determination of the consolidated income tax expense.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and its reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets in the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies and results of recent operations.
We believe that it is more likely than not that the benefit from certain U.S. federal, state and foreign net operating loss ("NOL"), and credit carryforwards will not be realized. In recognition of this risk, we have provided a valuation allowance of $7.1 million on the deferred tax assets related to these carryforwards.
We (1) record unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 740, Income Taxes ("ASC 740") and (2) adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which new information is available.
Extended Product Warranty Reserves
We offer extended warranty contracts on sales of certain products, the most significant being those offered on our installed roofing systems within the CCM segment. Current costs of services performed under these contracts are expensed as incurred. We also record an additional loss and a corresponding reserve if the total expected costs of providing services under the contract exceed unamortized deferred revenues equal to such excess. We estimate total expected warranty costs using actuarially derived estimates of future costs of servicing the warranties. The key inputs that are utilized to develop these estimates include historical claims experience by type of roofing membrane, location, and labor and material costs. The estimates of the volume and severity of these claims and associated costs are dependent upon the above assumptions and future results could differ from our current expectations. We currently do not have any material loss reserves recorded associated with our extended product warranties.
New Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 1 for information regarding new accounting standards.
Items Affecting Comparability
Items affecting comparability include costs, and losses or gains related to, among other things, growth and profitability improvement initiatives and other events outside of core business operations (such as exit and disposal and facility rationalization charges, costs of and related to acquisitions, idle capacity and labor costs, asset impairments, net of subsidies, litigation settlement costs, insurance settlements, gains and losses from and costs related to divestitures, losses on debt extinguishment, and non-comparable tax items). Because these items affect our, or any particular operating segment's, financial condition or results in a specific period in which they are recognized, we believe it is appropriate to present the total of these items to provide information regarding the comparability of results of operations period to period. The components of items affecting comparability follows:
(1)Excludes $(4.6) million of tax items related to indemnification asset write-offs which had zero impact to income from continuing operations and diluted EPS from continuing operations.
(1)Excludes $(1.9) million of tax items related to indemnification asset write-offs which had zero impact to income from continuing operations and diluted EPS from continuing operations.
The impact to income from continuing operations reflects the tax effect of items affecting comparability, which is based on the statutory rate in the jurisdiction in which the expense or income is deductible or taxable. The per share impact of items affecting comparability to each period is based on diluted shares outstanding using the two-class method (refer to Note 5).
Outlook
Revenues
Our expectations for segment revenues in 2021 follows:
Cash Flows
Our priorities for the use of cash are to invest in growth and performance improvement opportunities for our existing businesses through capital expenditures, pursue strategic acquisitions that meet shareholder return criteria, pay dividends to shareholders and return value to shareholders through share repurchases.
Capital expenditures in 2021 are expected to be between $150 million and $175 million, which primarily includes continued investments in CCM. Planned capital expenditures for 2021 include new product and capacity expansion, business sustaining projects, and cost reduction efforts.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, including statements regarding the potential or expected impacts of the global COVID-19 pandemic. Forward-looking statements generally use words such as "expect," "foresee," "anticipate," "believe," "project," "should," "estimate," "will," "plans," "intends," "forecast," and similar expressions, and reflect our expectations concerning the future. Such statements are made based on known events and circumstances at the time of publication and, as such, are subject in the future to unforeseen risks and uncertainties. It is possible that our future performance may differ materially from current expectations expressed in these forward-looking statements, due to a variety of factors such as: risks from the global COVID-19 pandemic, including, for example, expectations regarding the impact of COVID-19 on our businesses, including on customer demand, supply chains and distribution systems, production, our ability to maintain appropriate labor levels, our ability to ship products to our customers, our future results, or our full-year financial outlook; increasing price and product/service competition by foreign and domestic competitors, including new entrants; technological developments and changes; the ability to continue to introduce competitive new products and services on a timely, cost-effective basis; our mix of products/services; increases in raw material costs which cannot be recovered in product pricing; domestic and foreign governmental and public policy changes including environmental and industry regulations; threats associated with and efforts to combat terrorism; protection and validity of patent and other intellectual property rights; the identification of strategic acquisition targets and our successful completion of any transaction and integration of our strategic acquisitions; the cyclical nature of our businesses; and the outcome of pending and future litigation and governmental proceedings; and the other factors discussed in the reports we file with or furnish to the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") from time to time. In addition, such statements could be affected by general industry and market conditions and growth rates, the condition of the financial and credit markets and general domestic and international economic conditions including interest rate and currency exchange rate fluctuations. Further, any conflict in the international arena may adversely affect general market conditions and our future performance. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which that statement is made, and we undertake no duty to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events or circumstances, including unanticipated events, after the date on which that statement is made, unless otherwise required by law. New factors emerge from time to time and it is not possible for management to predict all of those factors, nor can it assess the impact of each of those factors on the business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statement.