ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion of our financial condition and our results of operations as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. The purpose of this discussion is to focus on information about our financial condition and results of operations which is not otherwise apparent from the Consolidated Financial Statements appearing under the caption “Part II., Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Report. The following discussion and analysis should be read together with our Consolidated Financial Statements, the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements and the other financial information included elsewhere in this Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, estimates and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from our current expectations. Factors that could cause such differences are discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Report. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements except to the extent required by applicable law.
The following discussion and analysis pertains to our historical results on a consolidated basis. However, because we conduct all of our material business operations through our wholly-owned subsidiary, CapStar Bank, the following discussion and analysis relates to activities primarily conducted at the subsidiary level.
All dollar amounts in the tables in this section are in thousands of dollars, except per share data or when otherwise specifically noted. Unless specifically noted in this Report, all references in this section to the fiscal years 2018, 2019 and 2020 mean our fiscal years ended December 31, 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively.
Overview
We completed 2020 with net income of $24.7 million, or $1.22 diluted net income per share, compared to net income of $22.4 million, or $1.20 diluted net income per share, for 2019. Average loans for 2020 were $1.70 billion, a 16.8% increase over 2019, and average deposits for 2020 were $2.26 billion, a 35.2% increase over 2019. The comparability of our financial condition and performance has been impacted by our acquisitions of FCB and BOW discussed below.
We acquired FCB and BOW on July 1, 2020. On the acquisition date, the fair market value of the acquired net assets was $67.3 million, including $294.7 million in loans and $442.7 million in deposits. Net income for 2020 was reduced by $5.4 million of pretax merger related charges related to this acquisition. The FCB and BOW acquisitions further expanded our franchise within the Tennessee market.
The outbreak of a novel coronavirus, COVID-19, has resulted in a global pandemic causing the extended shutdown of certain businesses in the region. The recent developments to contain COVID-19 has adversely affected economic conditions in the United States generally and our markets in particular. The Company expects the effects of this health crisis, which include disruptions or restrictions in clients’ supply chains, closures of clients’ facilities or decreases in demand for clients’ products and services, to continue to adversely impact economic conditions. Also related to the health crisis, the U.S. has been operating under a presidential declared emergency since March 13, 2020, with various actions by the U.S. Congress and regulatory agencies. As a result of COVID-19, the Company experienced the decline of asset prices, reduction in interest rates, widening of credit spreads, borrower credit deterioration and market volatility. Although the Company is unable to estimate the extent of the impact, the continuing pandemic and related global economic crisis is likely to adversely impact its future operating results. Management is actively monitoring the situation and taking necessary actions to adjust operations to protect the health and well-being of employees and clients. Despite the uncertainty the Company is well positioned to continue delivering on its strategic initiatives in a responsible manner by prioritizing things such as business continuity, liquidity management and maintaining an adequate allowance for loan losses.
The Company has taken a proactive approach to protecting our team members and their families as a result of COVID-19. The Company was an early adopter of a work from home strategy having previously made significant investments in laptops, virtual private network access, and bandwidth. Through its business continuity procedures, employees tested remote access the first week of March and all non-financial center employees have been working remotely since March 11, 2020. Management has organized a Committee (“Pandemic Committee”) which meets regularly to ensure the health of employees, discuss the state of operations, and ensure we are providing the best possible client service and support during this challenging time. Additionally, non-essential business travel has been suspended and company-wide cleaning efforts have been enhanced.
As of March 23, 2020, the Company expanded its social distancing practice by modifying the operations of its financial center network to support the efforts of public health authorities and to help curtail the spread of COVID-19.
When appropriate the Company has temporarily redirected clients to its digital channels, drive-thrus, and ATMs which can handle most financial transactions. The pandemic is constantly evolving, and the Company is making every effort to ensure its response is aligned with its priority to protect the health and safety of employees, clients and the communities we serve.
The redirect model for the financial center network was phased out after ongoing monitoring of CDC, state, local COVID-19 guidelines and area COVID-19 statistics. The reopening of the financial center network was handled in a controlled reopening model at the recommendation of the Pandemic Committee. The key to this reopening was the implementation of safety protocols in the COVID-19 environment for the bank staff and customers based on geographic area results of the state. Currently, all financial centers are open to the public.
On October 1, 2020, support service staff working remotely for the bank began to return to the workplace in limited numbers on a rotation schedule. This return from the remote work environment was by design and a direct result of the number of employees housed in these areas. Best practices around social distancing, mask usage and cleaning of work areas has been incorporated into the daily work practice. Staff rotation of the support services teams will continue as needed to accommodate CDC and local gathering guidelines.
The Pandemic Committee continues to meet to review changes in guidelines with staff and customer safety related to COVID-19 at the forefront. The Pandemic Committee reports on developments within the bank footprint and the possible impact on the banks business model. As a result, adjustments to the protocol are made as needed.
While the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is largely uncertain, based on an initial assessment of the impact to our loan portfolio we increased our allowance for loan losses through a provision for loan losses of $7.6 million during the first quarter of 2020, and an additional $1.6 million, $2.1 million, and $0.2 million during the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2020, respectively. In an effort to provide relief to clients most impacted by the pandemic, CapStar Bank proactively offered a 90-day full deferment of all loan payments to CapStar borrowers that were less than 30 days past due. As a result, approximately 700 loans (representing approximately $452 million in outstanding loan balances) were approved for payment deferment during the second quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining loans still under deferment had been reduced to 13 borrowers (representing approximately $62 million in outstanding loan balances). CapStar Bank was actively involved in assisting clients applying for loans under the SBA’s Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). Through this program we have approved approximately 1,334 PPP loans or $185.5 million which were outstanding and recorded in total loans on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. As the pandemic continues, we will continue to assess the impact on our market. While it is likely losses will materialize in the future, we continue to proactively work with our clients and evaluate the potential impact of the pandemic on them and us.
Furthermore, we currently do not anticipate a significant adverse liquidity impact related to the COVID-19 pandemic. In fact, since the start of the pandemic, deposit inflows have increased sharply, significantly strengthening liquidity. Nonetheless, the Company has a comprehensive contingency funding plan that addresses potential adverse liquidity events and emergency cash flow requirements that may arise from the COVID-19 pandemic. See further discussion regarding the Company’s management of liquidity risk in the subsequent section titled “Liquidity”.
Our primary revenue source is net interest income and fees from various financial services provided to customers. Net interest income is the difference between interest income earned on loans, investment securities and other interest earning assets less interest expense on deposit accounts and other interest bearing liabilities. Loan volume and interest rates earned on those loans are critical to our overall profitability. Similarly, deposit volume is crucial to funding loans and the rates paid on deposits directly impact our profitability. Business volumes are influenced by competition, new business acquisition efforts and economic factors including market interest rates, business spending and consumer confidence.
Net interest income increased $8.6 million, or 12.7%, to $76.3 million for 2020 compared to $67.7 million for 2019. The increase was largely attributable to the FCB and BOW acquisitions, which was partially offset by the adverse impact of lower interest rates in 2020 when compared to 2019. Net interest margin decreased to 3.10% for 2020, compared with 3.64% for 2019.
Provision for loan losses was $11.5 million in 2020 compared to $0.8 million in 2019. This increase was primarily the result of credit deterioration associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. The provision for loan losses represents a charge to earnings necessary to establish an allowance for loan losses that, in management’s evaluation, is adequate to provide coverage for the estimated probable inherent losses on outstanding loans. Our allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020 was 1.23% of total loans, compared with 0.89% of total loans at December 31, 2019.
Total noninterest income for 2020 increased $19.0 million, or 78.2%, to $43.2 million compared to $24.3 million for 2019, and comprised 32.0% of total revenues.
Total noninterest expense for 2020 increased $15.4 million, or 24.8%, to $77.4 million compared to $62.0 million for 2019. Our efficiency ratio for 2020 was 64.7% compared to 67.4% for 2019. Despite the increase in noninterest expense, including acquisition related costs, the improvement in efficiency ratio for 2020 is primarily attributable to operational improvements and synergies achieved through the FCB and BOW acquisitions.
The Company’s effective tax rate decreased to 19.6% for 2020 from 23.4% for 2019. The lower effective tax rate in 2020 compared to 2019 is mainly the result of net operating loss carryback provisions associated with the CARES Act and the establishment of a Real Estate Investment Trust in 2020.
Tangible common equity, a non-GAAP measure, is a measure of a company's capital which is useful in evaluating the quality and adequacy of capital. Our ratio of tangible common equity to total tangible assets was 10.01% as of December 31, 2020, compared with 11.47% at December 31, 2019. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a discussion of and reconciliation to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure.
The following sections provide more details on subjects presented in this overview.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared based on the application of certain accounting policies, the most significant of which are described in Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, which are contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain of these policies require numerous estimates and strategic or economic assumptions that may prove inaccurate or subject to variation and may materially and adversely affect our reported results and financial position for the current period or future periods. The use of estimates, assumptions, and judgments are necessary when financial assets and liabilities are required to be recorded at, or adjusted to reflect, fair value. Assets carried at fair value inherently result in more financial statement volatility. Fair values and information used to record valuation adjustments for certain assets and liabilities are either based on quoted market prices or are provided by other independent third-party sources, when available. When such information is not available, management estimates valuation adjustments based upon historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Management evaluates our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Changes in underlying factors, assumptions or estimates in any of these areas could have a material impact on our future financial condition and results of operations.
We have identified the following accounting policies and estimates that, due to the difficult, subjective or complex judgments and assumptions inherent in those policies and estimates and the potential sensitivity of our financial statements to those judgments and assumptions, are critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe that the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our financial statements are reasonable and appropriate.
Allowance for Loan Losses
We record estimated probable inherent credit losses in the loan portfolio as an allowance for loan losses. The methodologies and assumptions for determining the adequacy of the overall allowance for loan losses involve significant judgments to be made by management. Some of the more critical judgments supporting our allowance for loan losses include judgments about the credit-worthiness of borrowers, estimated value of underlying collateral, assumptions about cash flow, determination of loss factors for estimating credit losses, and the impact of current events, conditions, and other factors impacting the level of inherent losses, particularly the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Under different conditions or using different assumptions, the actual or estimated credit losses ultimately realized by us may be different from our estimates. In determining the allowance, we estimate losses on individual impaired loans and on groups of loans that are not impaired, where the probable loss can be identified and reasonably estimated. On a quarterly basis, we assess the risk inherent in our loan portfolio based on qualitative and quantitative trends in the portfolio, including the internal risk classification of loans, historical loss rates, changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, industry or borrower concentrations, delinquency trends, detailed reviews of significant loans with identified weaknesses, and the impacts of local, regional, and national economic factors on the quality of the loan portfolio. Based on this analysis, we may record a provision for loan losses in order to maintain the allowance at appropriate levels. For a more complete discussion of the methodology employed to calculate the allowance for loan losses, see Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is included elsewhere in this Report.
Investment Securities Impairment
We assess on a quarterly basis whether there have been any events or economic circumstances to indicate that a security with respect to which there is an unrealized loss is impaired on an other-than-temporary basis. In any instance, we would consider many factors, including the severity and duration of the impairment, our intent and ability to hold the security for a period of time sufficient for a recovery in value, recent events specific to the issuer or industry, and, for debt securities, external credit ratings and recent downgrades. Securities with respect to which there is an unrealized loss that is deemed to be other-than-temporary are written down to fair value with the write-down recorded in earnings.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed using the asset and liability method, which recognizes a liability or asset representing the tax effects, based on current tax law, of future deductible or taxable amounts attributable to events recognized in the financial statements. A valuation allowance may be established to the extent necessary to reduce the deferred tax asset to a level at which it is “more likely than not” that the tax asset or benefit will be realized. Realization of tax benefits depends on having sufficient taxable income, available tax loss carrybacks or credits, the reversal of taxable temporary differences and/or tax planning strategies within the reversal period, and that current tax law allows for the realization of recorded tax benefits.
Business Combinations
Assets purchased and liabilities assumed in a business combination are recorded at their fair value. The fair value of a loan portfolio acquired in a business combination requires greater levels of management estimates and judgment than the remainder of purchased assets or assumed liabilities. When the loans have evidence of credit deterioration since origination and it is probable at the date of acquisition that the Company will not collect all contractually required principal and interest payments, the loans are considered impaired, and the expected cash flows in excess of the amount paid are recorded as interest income over the remaining life of the loan. The excess of the loan’s contractual principal and interest over expected cash flows is not recorded. We must estimate expected cash flows at each reporting date. Subsequent decreases to the expected cash flows will generally result in a provision for loan losses. Subsequent increases in cash flows result in a reversal of the provision for loan losses to the extent of prior charges and adjusted accretable yield which will have a positive impact on interest income. Purchased loans without evidence of credit deterioration are recorded at their initial fair value and adjusted as necessary for subsequent advances, pay downs, amortization or accretion of any premium or discount on purchase, charge-offs and additional provisions that may be required.
Results of Operations
The following is a summary of our results of operations:
Return on average assets was 0.94%, 1.12% and 0.63% for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Return on average shareholders’ equity was 8.08%, 8.49% and 5.50% for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The following sections provide a more detailed analysis of significant factors affecting our operating results.
Net Interest Income
The largest component of our net income is net interest income - the difference between the income earned on loans, investment securities and other interest earning assets and interest expense on deposit accounts and other interest bearing liabilities. Net interest income calculated on a tax-equivalent basis divided by total average interest-earning assets represents our net interest margin. The major factors that affect net interest income and net interest margin are changes in volumes, the yield on interest-earning assets and the cost of interest-bearing liabilities. Our margin can also be affected by economic conditions, the competitive environment, loan demand and deposit flow. Our ability to respond to changes in these factors by using effective asset-liability management techniques is critical to maintaining the stability of the net interest margin and our net interest income.
The following table sets forth the amount of our average balances, interest income or interest expense for each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the average interest rate for interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, net interest spread and net interest margin for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1)
Average loan balances include nonaccrual loans. Interest income on loans includes amortization of deferred loan fees, net of deferred loan costs.
(2)
Taxable investment securities include restricted equity securities.
(3)
Yields on tax exempt securities are shown on a tax equivalent basis.
(4)
Net interest spread is the average yield on total interest-earning assets minus the average rate on total interest-bearing liabilities.
(5)
Net interest margin is net interest income calculated on a tax equivalent basis divided by total average interest-earning assets.
The following table reflects, for the periods indicated, the changes in our net interest income due to changes in the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the associated rates earned or paid on these assets and liabilities.
2020 compared to 2019
Our net interest income increased $8.6 million, or 12.7%, from 2019 to 2020 due to a 32% increase in average earning assets, which was offset by a 54 basis point or 148.4% decline in the net interest margin average yield rate.
Our net interest margin was 3.10% and 3.64% for 2020 and 2019, respectively, with the decline triggered by two factors related to the pandemic - first, the Federal Reserve reducing the Federal Funds target rate by 1.50% in March 2020, one of numerous actions intended to offset the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. economy, and second, the sharp increase in deposits near the start of the pandemic, with deposits increasing $332 million or 19% in the 2nd quarter. Additionally, included in interest expense for savings and money market deposits in 2020 is a loss on previously terminated interest rate swaps of $1.9 million.
For 2020 compared to 2019, loan volumes increased 16.8% while loan yields declined from 5.41% to 4.61% due to the impact of lower market interest rates on yields of new loan originations and yields of existing variable rate loans.
Average loans for 2020 increased 16.8% compared to 2019 as a result of the FCB and BOW acquisitions, the Company’s active participation in the SBA’s Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), additional bankers in the Nashville and Knoxville MSA, and continued focus on attracting new clients.
Average security yields decreased from 3.14% to 2.38% for 2019 and 2020, respectively, primarily due to decreases in the LIBOR rate on the variable rate portion of our securities portfolio, the impact of lower market interest rates on the yields of securities purchased to replace security maturities and paydowns, and the Company’s purchase of additional conservative lower yield securities to deploy a portion of pandemic-related deposit growth.
We funded our growth in loans through an increase in funding sources of 33.0% from 2019 to 2020. The primary driver of our increased funding sources was growth in our deposits of 35.2% from 2019 to 2020, driven by the FCB and BOW acquisitions and the sharp increase in deposits near the start of the pandemic. Average non-interest bearing deposits increased 77.3% from 2019 to 2020.
The average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities was 0.90% for 2020 compared to 1.69% for 2019. The majority of this decrease was due to decreases in the Federal Funds rate in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
2019 compared to 2018
Our net interest income increased $16.1 million, or 31.1%, from 2018 to 2019 primarily due to increasing loan volumes and interest rates rising at a faster pace than interest bearing liabilities. Our net interest margin was 3.64% and 3.55% for 2019 and 2018, respectively.
For 2019 and 2018, average loan yields increased from 5.11% to 5.41% which was primarily driven by increases in short-term interest rate indexes affecting the variable rate portion of our loan portfolio, offset by competitive pricing pressures, as well as realizing a full year of additional interest income related to the acquisition of Athens, including additional interest income as a result of accretable yield. The full year average LIBOR - 1 month interest rate increased from 2.02% in 2018 to 2.23% in 2019. Similarly, the full year average Bank Prime Loan Rate increased from 4.90% in 2018 to 5.28% in 2019. Approximately 55% of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2019 was variable in nature, a significant portion of which is indexed to 1 month LIBOR and the Bank Prime Loan Rate.
Average loans for 2019 increased 27.9% compared to 2018 as a result of the Athens acquisition, adding new bankers in the Nashville MSA and continued focus on attracting new clients.
Average security yields increased from 2.94% to 3.14% for 2018 and 2019, respectively, primarily due to increases in the LIBOR rate on the variable rate portion of our securities portfolio. The resulting yield on average interest-earning assets increased 27 basis points for 2019 compared to 2018.
We funded our growth in loans through an increase in funding sources of 27.9% from 2018 to 2019. The primary driver of our increased funding sources was growth in our deposits of 34.2% from 2018 to 2019 which was largely driven by the Athens acquisition. Average non-interest bearing deposits increased 20.1% from 2018 to 2019.
Provision for Loan losses
Our policy is to maintain an allowance for loan losses at a level sufficient to absorb estimated probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio. The allowance is increased by a provision for loan losses, which is a charge to earnings, and is decreased by charge-offs and increased by loan recoveries. Our allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans was 1.23%, 0.89% and 0.85% at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
2020 compared to 2019
The provision for loan losses amounted to $11.5 million and $0.8 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Provision expense is impacted by macroeconomic factors, the absolute level of loans, loan growth, the credit quality of the loan portfolio and the amount of net charge-offs.
Provision expense increased for 2020 compared to 2019 due to significantly increased qualitative factors in our allowance for loan losses methodology in anticipation of credit deterioration associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Although losses have not yet materialized as a direct result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our overall reserves are deemed to be adequate in light of the economic uncertainty of the pandemic. Charge-offs for 2020 were $1.2 million compared to $0.8 million for 2019.
Our allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans increased from 0.89% at December 31, 2019 to 1.23% at December 31, 2020. This increase was largely due to our assessment of risk generally related to macro-economic, geo-political conditions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the related impact on asset quality.
Based upon our evaluation of the loan portfolio, we believe the allowance for loan losses to be adequate to absorb our estimate of probable losses existing in the loan portfolio at December 31, 2020. While our policies and procedures used to estimate the allowance for loan losses, as well as the resultant provision for loan losses charged to operations,
are considered adequate by management, they are necessarily approximate and imprecise. There are factors beyond our control, such as conditions in the local and national economy, local real estate markets, or particular industry or borrower-specific conditions, which may materially and negatively impact our asset quality and the adequacy of our allowance for loan losses and, thus, the resulting provision for loan losses.
2019 compared to 2018
The provision for loan losses amounted to $0.8 million and $2.8 million for 2019 and 2018, respectively. Provision expense is impacted by the absolute level of loans, loan growth, the credit quality of the loan portfolio and the amount of net charge-offs.
Provision expense decreased for 2019 compared to 2018 due to decreased charge-offs. Charge-offs for 2019 were $0.8 million compared to $5.0 million for 2018. Of the $5.0 million in charge offs during 2018, $4.6 million was attributable to a single borrower.
Our allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans increased from 0.85% at December 31, 2018 to 0.89% at December 31, 2019. This increase was largely due to our assessment of risk generally related to macro-economic, geo-political conditions and asset quality. In addition, during 2019, we increased the look-back period, from which we calculate peer bank historical loss experience, from 37 to 41 quarters. Our look-back period is utilized to calculate peer historical loss experience, adjusted for current factors, to comprise the general component of the allowance for loan losses. In the current economic environment, management believes the extension of the look-back period is necessary in order to capture sufficient loss observations to develop a reliable loss estimate of credit losses. The extension of the historical look-back period to capture the historical loss experience of peer banks was applied to all classes and segments of our loan portfolio.
Based upon our evaluation of the loan portfolio, we believe the allowance for loan losses to be adequate to absorb our estimate of probable losses existing in the loan portfolio at December 31, 2019. While our policies and procedures used to estimate the allowance for loan losses, as well as the resultant provision for loan losses charged to operations, are considered adequate by management, they are necessarily approximate and imprecise. There are factors beyond our control, such as conditions in the local and national economy, local real estate markets, or particular industry or borrower-specific conditions, which may materially and negatively impact our asset quality and the adequacy of our allowance for loan losses and, thus, the resulting provision for loan losses.
Noninterest Income
In addition to net interest income, we generate recurring noninterest income. Our banking operations generate revenue from service charges and fees on deposit accounts. We have mortgage banking activities that generate revenue from originating and selling mortgages, the origination and sale of commercial real estate loans, and wealth management fees. In addition to these types of recurring noninterest income, we own insurance on several key employees and record income on the increase in the cash surrender value of these policies.
The following table sets forth the principal components of noninterest income for the periods indicated.
2020 compared to 2019
The increase in treasury management and other deposit service charges for 2020 was driven primarily by the incremental increase in transaction volume related to our acquisition of FCB and BOW, as well as growth in the volume of our commercial and consumer deposit accounts.
Mortgage banking income consists of mortgage fee income from the origination and sale of mortgage loans. These mortgage fees are for loans originated in our markets that are subsequently sold to third-party investors. Mortgage origination fees will fluctuate from quarter to quarter as the rate environment changes. Mortgage banking income increased 164.4% from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to a significantly higher volume of originations from home buyers capitalizing on lower interest rates.
Tri-Net fees, implemented in the fourth quarter of 2016, is derived from the origination and sale of commercial real estate loans to third-party investors. All of these loan sales transfer servicing rights to the buyer. The volume of loan sales has increased through continued growth and development.
Other noninterest income primarily consists of loan related fees, bank-owned life insurance and other service-related fees. The increase of $1.2 million from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to organic growth and our acquisition of FCB and BOW.
2019 compared to 2018
The increase in treasury management and other deposit service charges for 2019 was driven primarily by the incremental increase in transaction volume related to our acquisition of Athens, as well as growth in the volume of our commercial and consumer deposit accounts.
Mortgage banking income consists of mortgage fee income from the origination and sale of mortgage loans. These mortgage fees are for loans originated in our markets that are subsequently sold to third-party investors. Mortgage origination fees will fluctuate from quarter to quarter as the rate environment changes. Mortgage banking income increased 67.5% from 2018 to 2019 primarily due to a significantly higher volume of originations. Additionally, during the second quarter of 2019, we implemented a hedging program for residential mortgage loans originated with the intent to sell. In connection with this program, we elected the fair value option for this portfolio. The fair value adjustments for applicable loans held for sale and related derivative instruments at December 31, 2019 resulted in a $1.1 million increase in mortgage banking income for 2019 when compared to 2018.
Noninterest Expense
Our total noninterest expense increase reflects expenses that we have incurred as we build the foundation to support our recent growth and enable us to execute our growth strategy. The following table presents the primary components of noninterest expense for the periods indicated.
2020 compared to 2019
The increase in salaries and employee benefits was driven primarily by the incremental increase in compensation costs related to our acquisitions of FCB and BOW, as well as increased compensation associated with strong revenue growth in mortgage banking. At December 31, 2020, our associate base increased to 380 compared to 289 at December 31, 2019.
Data processing and software expense increased from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to an increase in the volume of transactions from organic growth, costs associated with running dual systems related to our acquisitions of FCB and BOW and insourcing certain IT related functions. The acquisition related systems conversion was successfully completed during the third quarter of 2020.
The increase in occupancy expense from 2019 to 2020 was largely attributable to increased depreciation and other facilities related expenses associated with our acquisitions of FCB and BOW as well as the increasing cost of managing our IT network.
Amortization of intangibles increased from 2019 to 2020 due to the new core deposit intangible recorded in connection with the FCB and BOW acquisitions.
Our efficiency ratio was 64.7% and 67.4% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The efficiency ratio is the ratio of noninterest expense to the sum of net interest income and noninterest income and measures the amount of expense that is incurred to generate a dollar of revenue. The efficiency ratio decreased in 2020 due to operational improvements and synergies achieved through the FCB and BOW acquisitions.
2019 compared to 2018
The increase in salaries and employee benefits was driven primarily by the increase in compensation costs related to our acquisition of Athens and 2019 being the first full year of Athens’ related compensation costs being recognized. At December 31, 2019, our associate base had slightly decreased to 289 compared to 295 at December 31, 2018.
Data processing and software expense increased from 2018 to 2019 primarily due to an increase in the volume of transactions from organic growth, costs associated with running dual systems related to our acquisition of Athens and insourcing certain IT related functions. The Athens related systems conversion was successfully completed during the second quarter of 2019.
The increase in occupancy and equipment expense from 2018 to 2019 was largely attributable to increased depreciation and other facilities related expenses associated with our acquisition of Athens as well as the increasing cost of managing our IT network.
Amortization of intangibles increased from 2018 to 2019 due to the new core deposit intangible recorded in connection with the Athens acquisition.
Our efficiency ratio was 67.4% and 79.7% for 2019 and 2018, respectively. The efficiency ratio is the ratio of noninterest expense to the sum of net interest income and noninterest income and measures the amount of expense that is incurred to generate a dollar of revenue. As expected, the efficiency ratio improved in 2019 due to the majority of the non-recurring merger expenses incurred in 2018.
Income Taxes
2020 compared to 2019
We recorded income tax expense of $6.0 million and $6.8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our effective income tax rate for 2020 and 2019 was 19.6% and 23.4%, respectively. Our effective tax rate differs from the statutory tax rate by our investments in municipal securities, company owned life insurance, state tax credits, net of the effect of certain non-deductible expenses and the recognition of excess tax benefits related to stock compensation. The lower effective tax rate in 2020 compared to 2019 is mainly the result of net operating loss carryback provisions associated with the CARES Act and the establishment of a Real Estate Investment Trust in 2020.
2019 compared to 2018
We recorded income tax expense of $6.8 million and $1.2 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively. Our effective income tax rate for 2019 and 2018 was 23.4% and 10.8%, respectively. Our effective tax rate differs from the statutory tax rate by our investments in municipal securities, company owned life insurance, state tax credits, net of the effect of
certain non-deductible expenses and the recognition of excess tax benefits related to stock compensation. The higher effective tax rate in 2019 compared to 2018 is mainly the result of the nontaxable life insurance death benefit proceeds received in 2018 as well as a larger amount of excess tax benefits related to stock compensation in 2018.
Financial Condition
2020 compared to 2019
Total assets increased $946.9 million, or 46.5%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Loans grew from $1.420 billion at December 31, 2019 to $1.891 billion at December 31, 2020, a 33.2% increase. Loans held for sale increased $11.4 million, or 6.8%, during 2020 which is primarily related to the timing of selling residential and commercial real estate loans. Available for sale securities increased $278.1 million, or 128%, as the Company deployed excess capital into such investments. Also, included in these changes is growth from our acquisitions of FCB and BOW which included $514.7 million in total assets, primarily made up of $294.7 million in loans and $98.7 million in securities.
Total liabilities increased $876.5 million, or 49.7%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Deposits increased from $1.729 billion at December 31, 2019 to $2.568 billion at December 31, 2020, a 48.5% increase. Included in liabilities is the third quarter issuance of $29.4 million in subordinated debt during the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, total liabilities and deposits acquired in our FCB and BOW acquisitions were $447.4 million and $442.7 million, respectively.
2019 compared to 2018
Total assets increased $73.3 million, or 3.7%, from December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019. Loans decreased from $1.430 billion at December 31, 2018 to $1.420 billion at December 31, 2019, a 0.7% decrease. Loans held for sale increased $110.6 million, or 192.0%, during 2019 which is primarily related to transaction volume of selling residential and commercial real estate loans as a result of continued strong growth. Securities decreased $31.1 million, or 12.6%.
Total liabilities increased $54.7 million, or 3.2%, from December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019. Deposits increased from $1.570 billion at December 31, 2018 to $1.729 billion at December 31, 2019, a 10.2% increase. We paid down our Federal Home Loan Bank advances $115.0 million, or 92.0%, from December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019 as we were able to rely more on deposit funding.
Investment Securities
The primary purpose of our investment portfolio is to provide another source of interest income, as well as liquidity management. In managing the composition of the balance sheet, we seek a balance between earnings sources and credit and liquidity considerations. We manage our investment portfolio according to a written investment policy approved by our board of directors. Balances in our investment portfolio are subject to change over time based on our funding needs and interest rate risk management objectives. Our liquidity levels take into account anticipated future cash flows and all available sources of funds, and are maintained at levels we believe are appropriate to assure future flexibility in meeting our anticipated funding needs.
Our investment portfolio consists primarily of securities issued by U.S. government-sponsored agencies, obligations of states and political subdivisions, agency mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities and other debt securities, all with varying contractual maturities. However, these maturities do not necessarily represent the expected life of the securities as some of these securities may be called or paid down without penalty prior to their stated maturities. The investment portfolio is regularly reviewed by the Asset Liability Management committee, or ALCO, of the bank to ensure an appropriate risk and return profile as well as for adherence to the investment policy.
Our investment portfolio totaled $488.6 million, $216.4 million, and $247.5 million at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Excluding investment securities acquired in our acquisitions of FCB and BOW, our investment portfolio increased significantly as part of our efforts to improve balance sheet management through investing in high quality securities and deploying excess liquidity resulting from increased deposits. See “Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information on our investment securities.
The following table presents the fair value of our securities as of December 31, 2020 by their stated maturities (this maturity schedule excludes security prepayment and call features), as well as the weighted average yields for each maturity range.
Loans and Leases
Loans and leases are our largest category of earning assets and typically provide higher yields than other types of earning assets. Associated with the higher loan yields are the inherent credit and liquidity risks that we attempt to control and counterbalance.
The composition of gross loans and leases at December 31 for each of the past five years and the percentage of each classification to total loans are summarized as follows:
Over the past five years, we have experienced significant growth in our loan portfolio. During 2016 and continuing through 2020, we recognized growth in the commercial real estate loan classifications reflecting the development of the Target Market in which we operate. The acquisitions of FCB and BOW have increased various loan balance classifications and provided further diversity in our loan portfolio through more consumer-oriented loan products.
Our primary focus has been on commercial and industrial and commercial real estate lending, which constituted 67% of our loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020. Although we expect continued growth with respect to our loan portfolio, we do not expect any significant changes over the foreseeable future in the composition of our loan portfolio or in our emphasis on commercial lending. Our loan growth since inception has been reflective of the Target Market in which we serve. The commercial real estate category includes owner-occupied commercial real estate loans which are similar in many ways to our commercial and industrial lending in that these loans are generally made to businesses on the basis of the cash flows of the affiliated business rather than on the valuation and cash flows of the real estate from unaffiliated tenants. Since 2009, our commercial and industrial and commercial real estate portfolios have continued to experience strong growth, primarily due to implementation of our relationship-based banking model and the success of our relationship managers in transitioning commercial banking relationships from other local financial institutions and in competing for new business from attractive small to mid-sized commercial clients. Many of our larger commercial clients have lengthy relationships with members of our senior management team or our relationship managers that date back to their employment by other financial institutions.
The repayment of loans is a source of additional liquidity for us. The following table details maturities and sensitivity to interest rate changes for our loan portfolio at December 31, 2020.
The information presented in the table above is based upon the contractual maturities of the individual loans, which may be subject to renewal at their contractual maturity. Renewal of such loans is subject to review and credit approval, as well as modification of terms at their maturity. Consequently, we believe that this treatment presents fairly the maturity structure of the loan portfolio.
Asset Quality
One of our key objectives is to maintain a high level of asset quality in our loan portfolio. We utilize disciplined and thorough underwriting processes that collaboratively engage our seasoned and experienced business bankers, credit underwriters and portfolio managers in the analysis of each loan request. Based upon our aggregate exposure to any given borrower relationship, we employ scaled review of loan originations that may involve senior credit officers, our Chief Credit Officer, our bank’s Credit Committee or, ultimately, our full board of directors. In addition, we have adopted underwriting guidelines to be followed by our lending officers that require senior management review of proposed extensions of credit exceeding certain thresholds. When delinquencies exist, we monitor the levels of such delinquencies for any negative or adverse trends. Our loan review procedures include approval of lending policies and underwriting guidelines by the board of directors of our bank, an independent loan review, approval of larger credit relationships by our bank’s Credit Committee and loan quality documentation procedures. Like other financial institutions, we are subject to the risk that our loan portfolio will be subject to increasing pressures from deteriorating borrower credit due to general economic conditions.
We target small and medium sized businesses, the owners and operators of such businesses and other consumers and high net worth individuals as loan clients. Because of their size, these borrowers may be less able to withstand competitive or economic pressures than larger borrowers in periods of economic weakness. If loan losses occur at a level where the allowance for loan losses is not sufficient to cover actual loan losses, our earnings will decrease. We use an independent consulting firm to review our loans for quality in addition to the reviews that may be conducted internally and by bank regulatory agencies as part of their examination process. Our bank has procedures and processes in place intended to assess whether losses exceed the potential amounts documented in our bank’s impairment analyses and to reduce potential losses in the remaining performing loans within our loan portfolio. These procedures and processes include the following:
•
we monitor the past due and overdraft reports on a weekly basis to identify deterioration as early as possible and the placement of identified loans on the watch list;
•
we perform quarterly credit reviews for all watch list/classified loans, including formulation of action plans. When a workout is not achievable, we move to collection/foreclosure proceedings to obtain control of the underlying collateral as rapidly as possible to minimize the deterioration of collateral and/or the loss of its value;
•
we require updated financial information, global inventory aging and interest carry analysis where appropriate for existing borrowers to help identify potential future loan payment problems; and
•
we generally limit loans for new construction to established builders and developers that have an established record of turning their inventories, and we restrict our funding of undeveloped lots and land.
Our bank categorizes loans into risk categories based on relevant information about the ability of borrowers to service their debt such as: current financial information, historical payment experience, credit documentation, public information, and current economic trends, among other factors. Our bank analyzes loans individually by classifying each loan as to credit risk. This analysis includes all commercial loans and consumer relationships with an outstanding balance greater than $500,000, individually. This analysis is performed on a regular basis by the relationship managers and credit department personnel. On at least an annual basis an independent party performs a formal credit risk review of a sample of the loan portfolio. Among other things, this review assesses the appropriateness of the risk rating of each loan in the sample. See “Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements” for a table that provides the risk category of loans by applicable class of loans.
Non-Performing Loans and Assets
Information summarizing non-performing assets, including non-accrual loans follows.
The balance of non-performing assets can fluctuate due to changes in economic conditions. We have established a policy to discontinue accruing interest on loans (that is, place the loans on non-accrual status) after they have become 90 days delinquent as to payment of principal or interest, unless the loans are considered to be well-collateralized and are in the process of collection. Consumer loans and any accrued interest are typically charged off no later than 180 days past due. In addition, a loan will not be placed on non-accrual status before it becomes 90 days delinquent unless management believes that the collection of all principal and interest is not expected in a timely manner. Interest previously accrued but uncollected on such loans is reversed and charged against interest income when the receivable is determined to be uncollectible. If we believe that a loan will not be collected in full, we will increase the allowance for loan losses to reflect management’s estimate of any potential exposure or loss. Generally, payments received on non-accrual loans are applied directly to principal. As of December 31, 2020, there were not any loans, outside of those included in the table above, that cause management to have serious doubts as to the ability of borrowers to comply with present repayment terms.
Due to the weakening credit status of a borrower, we may elect to formally restructure certain loans to facilitate a repayment plan that seeks to minimize the potential losses, if any, that we might incur. The effect of these changes is assessed to determine if the loan should be classified as a Troubled Debt Restructure. Loans that have been restructured that are on non-accruing status as of the date of restructuring, are included in the nonperforming loan balances as discussed above and are classified as impaired loans. Loans that have been restructured that are on accrual status as of the restructure date are not included in nonperforming loans; however, such loans are still considered impaired.
Allowance for Loan Losses (allowance)
Our allowance for loan losses represents our estimate of probable inherent credit losses in the loan portfolio. We determine the allowance based on an ongoing evaluation of risk as it correlates to potential losses within the portfolio. Increases in the allowance are made by charges to the provision for loan losses. Loans deemed to be uncollectible are charged against the allowance. Recoveries of previously charged-off amounts are credited to our allowance. The judgments and estimates associated with our allowance determination are described under “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” above and in Notes 1 and 4 to the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.”
The following table presents a summary of changes in the allowance for loan losses for the periods and dates indicated.
See “Provision for Loan losses” above for discussion of the changes in the provision for loan losses.
While no portion of our allowance is in any way restricted to any individual loan or group of loans and the entire allowance is available to absorb losses from any and all loans, the following tables represent management’s allocation of our allowance to specific loan categories for the periods indicated.
Changes in the allocation of the allowance from year to year in various categories are influenced by the level of net charge-offs in respective categories and other factors including, but not limited to, an evaluation of the impact of current economic conditions and trends, risk allocations tied to specific loans or groups of loans and changes in qualitative allocations. Management believes that allocations for each loan category are reasonable and reflective of risk inherent in the portfolio.
Deposits
Client deposits are the primary funding source for our loan growth. The following table presents the average balance and average rate paid on deposits for each of the following categories for the periods indicated.
Total average deposits increased 35.2% in 2020 compared to 2019 and increased 34.2% in 2019 compared to 2018. Much of the growth in deposits in 2020 is related to our acquisitions of FCB and BOW. However, we have been able to increase average noninterest-bearing demand deposits each year as we focus on building and expanding client relationships. The Target Market is an already competitive market, which has been further impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic has led to liquidity concerns and excess deposits, as consumer confidence is low and the future economy remains uncertain.
The following table presents the maturities of our time deposits as of December 31, 2020.
Capital Adequacy
As of December 31, 2020, CapStar Financial’s capital ratios were as follows.
See Note 16 to the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information related to our capital position.
Market and Liquidity Risk Management
Our objective is to manage assets and liabilities to provide a satisfactory, consistent level of profitability within the framework of our established liquidity, loan, investment, borrowing, and capital policies. Our ALCO is charged with the responsibility of monitoring these policies, which are designed to ensure an acceptable composition of asset/liability mix. Two critical areas of focus for ALCO are interest rate sensitivity and liquidity risk management.
Interest Rate Simulation Sensitivity Analysis
Managing interest rate risk is fundamental for the financial services industry. By considering both on and off-balance sheet financial instruments, management evaluates interest rate sensitivity while attempting to optimize net interest income within the constraints of prudent capital adequacy, liquidity needs, market opportunities and customer requirements.
We use earnings at risk, or EAR, simulations to assess the impact of changing rates on earnings under a variety of scenarios and time horizons. The simulation model is designed to reflect the dynamics of interest earning assets, interest bearing liabilities and off-balance sheet financial instruments. These simulations utilize both instantaneous and parallel changes in the level of interest rates, as well as non-parallel changes such as changing slopes and twists of the yield curve. Static simulation models are based on current exposures and assume a constant balance sheet with no new growth. Dynamic simulation models are also utilized that rely on detailed assumptions regarding changes in existing products, new business, and changes in management and client behavior. By estimating the effects of interest rate increases and decreases, the model can reveal approximate interest rate risk exposure. The simulation model is used by management to gauge approximate results given a specific change in interest rates at a given point in time. The model is therefore a tool to indicate earnings trends in given interest rate scenarios and does not indicate actual expected results.
At December 31, 2020, our EAR static simulation results indicated that our balance sheet is asset sensitive to parallel shifts in interest rates. This indicates that our assets generally reprice faster than our liabilities, which results in a favorable impact to net interest income when market interest rates increase and an unfavorable impact to net interest income when market interest rates decline. Many assumptions are used to calculate the impact of interest rate fluctuations on our net interest income, such as asset prepayments, non-maturity deposit price sensitivity and decay rates, and key rate drivers. Because of the inherent use of these estimates and assumptions in the model, our actual results may, and most likely will, differ from our static EAR results. In addition, static EAR results do not include actions that our management may undertake to manage the risks in response to anticipated changes in interest rates or client behavior. For example, as part of our asset/liability management strategy, management has the ability to increase asset duration and/or decrease liability duration in order to reduce asset sensitivity, or to decrease asset duration and/or increase liability duration in order to increase asset sensitivity.
The following table illustrates the results of our EAR analysis to determine the extent to which our net interest income over the next 12 months would change if prevailing interest rates increased or decreased by the specified amounts.
Liquidity Risk Management
Liquidity risk is the risk that we will be unable to meet our obligations as they become due because of an inability to liquidate assets or obtain adequate funding. To manage liquidity risk, management has established a comprehensive management process for identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling liquidity risk. Because of its critical importance to the viability of the Bank, liquidity risk management is fully integrated into our risk management processes. Critical elements of our liquidity risk management include: effective corporate governance consisting of oversight by the board of directors and active involvement by management; appropriate strategies, policies, procedures, and limits used to manage and mitigate liquidity risk; comprehensive liquidity risk measurement and monitoring systems (including assessments of the current and prospective cash flows or sources and uses of funds) that are commensurate with the complexity and business activities of the Bank; active management of intraday liquidity and collateral; an appropriately diverse mix of existing and potential future funding sources; adequate levels of highly liquid marketable securities free of legal, regulatory, or operational impediments, that can be used to meet liquidity needs in stressful situations; comprehensive contingency funding plans that sufficiently address potential adverse liquidity events and emergency cash flow requirements; and internal controls and internal audit processes sufficient to determine the adequacy of the institution’s liquidity risk management process.
The role of liquidity management is to ensure funds are available to meet depositors’ withdrawal and borrowers’ credit demands while at the same time optimizing financial results within our corporate guidelines. This is accomplished by balancing changes in demand for funds with changes in the supply of those funds. Liquidity is provided by short-term liquid assets that can be converted to cash, investment securities available-for-sale, various lines of credit available to us, and the ability to attract funds from external sources, principally deposits.
Our most liquid assets are comprised of cash and due from banks, available-for-sale marketable investment securities and federal funds sold. The fair value of the available-for-sale investment portfolio was $486.2 million at December 31, 2020. We pledge portions of our investment securities portfolio to secure public fund deposits, derivative positions and Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) advances. At December 31, 2020, total investment securities pledged for these purposes comprised 33% of the estimated fair value of the entire investment portfolio, leaving $325.2 million of unpledged securities.
We have a large base of non-maturity customer deposits, defined as demand, savings, and money market deposit accounts. At December 31, 2020, such deposits totaled $2.1 billion and represented 82% of our total deposits.
Other sources of funds available to meet daily needs include FHLB advances. As a member of the FHLB of Cincinnati, the Company has access to credit products offered by the FHLB. The Company views these borrowings as a low cost alternative to other time deposits. At December 31, 2020, available credit from the FHLB totaled $433.9 million. Additionally, we had available federal funds purchased lines with correspondent banks totaling $125 million at December 31, 2020.
The principal source of cash for CapStar Financial is dividends paid to it as the sole shareholder of the Bank. At December 31, 2020, the Bank was able to pay up to $49.6 million in dividends to CapStar Financial without regulatory approval subject to the ongoing capital requirements of the Bank.
Accordingly, management believes that our funding sources are at sufficient levels to satisfy our short-term and long-term liquidity needs.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents additional information about contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, which by their terms have contractual maturity and termination dates subsequent to December 31, 2020.
Borrowings
The following table outlines our sources of short-term and long-term borrowed funds during the year ended December 31, 2020, and the amount outstanding at the end of each period, the maximum amount, average amount and average interest rate that we paid for each borrowing source during the period. The maximum month end balance represents the high indebtedness of borrowed funds at any time during each of the periods shown. Stated period end rates are contractual rates.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we enter into various transactions that, in accordance with GAAP, are not included in our consolidated balance sheets. We enter into these transactions to meet the financing needs of our clients. These transactions include commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in our consolidated balance sheets. Most of these commitments mature within two years and are expected to expire without being drawn upon. Standby letters of credit are included in the determination of the amount of risk-based capital that the Company and the Bank are required to hold.
We enter into contractual loan commitments to extend credit, normally with fixed expiration dates or termination clauses, at specified rates and for specific purposes. Substantially all of our commitments to extend credit are contingent upon clients maintaining specific credit standards until the time of loan funding.
Standby letters of credit are written conditional commitments issued by us to guarantee the performance of a client to a third party. In the event that the client does not perform in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the third party, we would be required to fund the commitment. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make is represented by the contractual amount of the commitment. If the commitment is funded, we would be entitled to seek recovery from the client. Our policies generally require that standby letter of credit arrangements contain security and debt covenants similar to those contained in loan agreements.
We minimize our exposure to loss under loan commitments and standby letters of credit by subjecting them to the same credit approval and monitoring procedures as we do for on-balance sheet instruments. We assess the credit risk associated with certain commitments to extend credit and establish a liability for probable credit losses. The effect on our revenue, expenses, cash flows and liquidity of the unused portions of these commitments cannot be reasonably predicted because there is no guarantee that the lines of credit will be used.
Our off-balance sheet arrangements are summarized in the following table for the periods indicated.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This Report includes the following financial measures that have been prepared other than in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“non-GAAP financial measures”): tangible common equity, tangible common equity to total tangible assets and tangible common equity per share. The Company believes that these non-GAAP financial measures (i) provide useful information to management and investors that is supplementary to its financial condition, results of operations and cash flows computed in accordance with GAAP, (ii) enable a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting the Company’s business, and (iii) allow investors to evaluate the Company’s performance in a manner similar to management, the financial services industry, bank stock analysts and bank regulators; however, the Company acknowledges that its non-GAAP financial measures have a number of limitations. As such, you should not view these disclosures as a substitute for results determined in accordance with GAAP, and they are not necessarily comparable to non-GAAP financial measures that other companies use.
The following table presents a reconciliation of tangible common equity, tangible common equity to total tangible assets and tangible book value per share of common stock to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements are discussed in Note 1 to the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in this Report.
Impact of Inflation
The consolidated financial statements and related consolidated financial data presented herein have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and practices within the banking industry which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering the changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on a financial institution's performance than the effects of general levels of inflation.