ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
OVERVIEW
General
We operate in two business segments: funeral home operations, which accounts for approximately 75% of our revenue, and cemetery operations, which accounts for approximately 25% of our revenue. Our funeral homes offer a complete range of high value personal services to meet a family’s funeral needs, including consultation, the removal and preparation of remains, the sale of caskets and related funeral merchandise, the use of funeral home facilities for visitation and remembrance services and transportation services. Our cemeteries provide interment rights (grave sites and mausoleum spaces) and related merchandise, such as markers and outer burial containers. We provide funeral and cemetery services and products on both an “atneed” (time of death) and “preneed” (planned prior to death) basis.
At December 31, 2020, we operated 178 funeral homes in 26 states and 32 cemeteries in 12 states within the United States. For additional discussion about our overall business strategy, see Part I, Item 1, Business - Business Strategy.
Funeral Home Operations
Factors affecting our funeral operating results include: demographic trends relating to population growth and average age, which impact death rates and number of deaths; establishing and maintaining leading market share positions supported by strong local heritage and relationships; effectively responding to increasing cremation trends by selling complementary services and merchandise; controlling salary and merchandise costs; and exercising pricing leverage related to our atneed business to increase average revenue per contract. In simple terms, volume and price are the two variables that affect funeral revenue. The average revenue per contract is influenced by the mix of traditional and cremation services because our average cremation service revenue is approximately one-third of the average revenue earned from a traditional burial service. Funeral homes have a relatively fixed cost structure.
Cemetery Operations
Factors affecting our cemetery operating results include: the size and success of our sales organization; local perceptions and heritage of our cemeteries; our ability to adapt to changes in the economy and consumer confidence; and our response to fluctuations in capital markets and interest rates, which affect investment earnings on trust funds, finance charges on installment contracts and our securities portfolio within the trust funds.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources are internally generated cash flows from operating activities and availability under our Credit Facility.
We generate cash in our operations primarily from atneed sales and delivery of preneed sales. We also generate cash from earnings on our cemetery perpetual care trusts. Based on our recent operating results, current cash position and anticipated future cash flows, we do not anticipate any significant liquidity constraints in the foreseeable future. We have the ability to draw on our Credit Facility, subject to its customary terms and conditions. However, if our capital expenditures or acquisition plans change, we may need to access the capital markets to obtain additional funding. Further, to the extent operating cash flow or access to and cost of financing sources are materially different than expected, future liquidity may be adversely affected. Please read Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors.
For 2021, our plan is to remain focused on integrating our newly acquired businesses and to use cash on hand and borrowings under our Credit Facility primarily for general corporate purposes, payment of dividends and debt obligations and the redemption of our Convertible Notes due March 2021. However, if we were to refinance our Senior Notes when they become callable, it may provide us the ability, from a capital allocation perspective, to potentially resume strategic acquisitions, internal growth capital expenditures, share repurchases, dividend increases and further debt repayments. We also expect continued divestiture activity for the next 6-12 months, which could yield approximately $10-11 million of cash from the proceeds of the sale. From time to time we may also use available cash resources (including borrowings under our Credit
Facility) to repurchase shares of our common stock, subject to satisfying certain financial covenants in our Credit Facility. We believe that our existing and anticipated cash resources will be sufficient to meet our anticipated working capital requirements, capital expenditures, scheduled debt payments, commitments and dividends for the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
We began 2020 with $0.7 million in cash and ended the year with $0.9 million in cash. At December 31, 2020, we had borrowings of $47.2 million outstanding on our Credit Facility compared to $83.8 million as of December 31, 2019 and $27.1 million as of December 31, 2018.
The following table sets forth the elements of cash flow (in thousands):
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $82.9 million compared to $43.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and $49.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $39.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is a reflection of the resilient cash generating ability of our portfolio of high-quality funeral home and cemetery operations. Our operating income (excluding the non-cash impact of the divestitures and impairment charges) increased $26.4 million in addition to other favorable working capital changes.
The decrease of $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily due to approximately $5.0 million in more cash interest paid in 2019 compared to 2018, as well as additional unfavorable working capital changes.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities resulted in a net cash outflow of $34.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $158.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and $51.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Acquisition and Divestiture Activity
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we acquired one funeral home and cemetery combination business in Lafayette, California for $33.0 million in cash, of which $5.0 million was deposited in escrow in 2019 and $28.0 million was paid at closing in 2020. In addition, we sold eight funeral homes for $8.4 million and we sold real property for $0.1 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we acquired, in three separate transactions, two funeral home and cemetery combination businesses, seven funeral home businesses and three ancillary service businesses for an aggregate purchase price of $140.9 million. In addition, we also paid a $5.0 million deposit for a funeral home and cemetery combination business that we acquired in January 2020. In addition, we sold a funeral home business for $0.9 million and we sold real property for $0.1 million related to a funeral home we merged with another business in an existing market.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we acquired four funeral home businesses for an aggregate purchase price of $38.0 million.
Capital Expenditures
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our capital expenditures (comprising of growth and maintenance spend) totaled $15.2 million compared to $15.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The following tables present our growth and maintenance capital expenditures (in thousands):
(1) During the year ended December 31, 2019, we spent $1.6 million for renovations on four businesses that were affected by Hurricane Michael, of which $1.4 million was reimbursed by our property insurance policy.
Financing Activities
Our financing activities resulted in a net cash outflow of $48.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash inflow of $115.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and net cash inflow of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net payments on our Credit Facility, acquisition debt and finance leases of $38.3 million. In addition, we paid $6.0 million in dividends and $4.6 million for the repurchase of a portion of our Convertibles Notes.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had net proceeds related to the issuance of our Additional Senior Notes of $75.7 million and net borrowing on our long-term debt obligations of $53.5 million. In addition, we purchased treasury stock for $9.2 million and paid $5.4 million in dividends on our common stock.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, we had net proceeds related to the issuance of our Initial Senior Notes of $318.8 million, offset by net payments on our long-term debt obligations of $196.1 million and payments of $99.2 million in connection with our exchange of a portion of our Convertible Notes. In addition, we purchased treasury stock for $16.3 million and paid $5.5 million in dividends on our common stock.
Dividends
On May 19, 2020, the Board approved an increase of $0.05 per share to our annual dividend beginning with the dividend declaration in the third quarter. On October 27, 2020, the Board approved an additional increase of $0.0125 per share for a total annual dividend of $0.40 per share beginning with the dividend declaration in the fourth quarter.
Our Board declared the following dividends payable on the dates below (in thousands, except per share amounts):
Share Repurchases
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we repurchased 1,101,969 shares of common stock for a total cost of $17.7 million at an average cost of $16.03 per share pursuant to our share repurchase program. On July 31, 2019, our Board approved an additional $25.0 million under our share repurchase program in accordance with Rule 10b-18 of the Exchange Act. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we repurchased 400,000 shares of common stock for a total cost of $7.8 million at an average cost of $19.39 per share pursuant to our share repurchase program. Our shares were purchased in the open market at times and in amounts as management determined appropriate based on factors such as market conditions, legal requirements and other business considerations. Shares purchased pursuant to the repurchase program are currently held as treasury shares.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not repurchase any common shares. At December 31, 2020, we had approximately $25.6 million available for repurchase under our share repurchase program.
Credit Facility, Lease Obligations and Acquisition Debt
The outstanding principal of our long-term debt and lease obligations is as follows (in thousands):
Credit Facility
On December 19, 2019, we entered into a third amendment and commitment increase to our $150.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility (“Credit Facility”) with the financial institutions party thereto, as lenders, and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent (in such capacity, the “Administrative Agent”) to increase our commitment to $190.0 million and incurred $0.9 million in transactions costs, which were capitalized and will be amortized over the remaining term of the related debt using the straight-line method.
At December 31, 2020, our Credit Facility was comprised of: (i) a $190.0 million revolving credit facility, including a $15.0 million subfacility for letters of credit and a $10.0 million swingline, and (ii) an accordion or incremental option allowing for future increases in the facility size by an additional amount of up to $75.0 million in the form of increased revolving commitments or incremental term loans. The final maturity of the Credit Facility will occur on May 31, 2023.
The Company’s obligations under the Credit Facility are unconditionally guaranteed on a joint and several basis by the same subsidiaries which guarantee the Senior Notes (as defined in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 14) and certain of the Company’s Credit Facility Guarantors.
The Credit Facility is secured by a first-priority perfected security interest in and lien on substantially all of the Company’s personal property assets and those of the Credit Facility Guarantors. In the event the Company’s actual Total Leverage Ratio is not at least 0.25 less than the required Total Leverage Ratio covenant level, at the discretion of the Administrative Agent, the Administrative Agent may unilaterally compel the Company and the Credit Facility Guarantors to grant and perfect first-priority mortgage liens on fee-owned real property assets which account for no less than 50% of funeral operations EBITDA.
The Credit Facility contains customary affirmative covenants, including, but not limited to, covenants with respect to the use of proceeds, payment of taxes and other obligations, continuation of the Company’s business and the maintenance of existing rights and privileges, the maintenance of property and insurance, amongst others.
In addition, the Credit Facility also contains customary negative covenants, including, but not limited to, covenants that restrict (subject to certain exceptions) the ability of the Company and its subsidiaries and party thereto as guarantors (the “Credit Facility Guarantors”) to incur additional indebtedness, grant liens on assets, make investments, engage in mergers and acquisitions, and pay dividends and other restricted payments, and certain financial covenants. At December 31, 2020, we were subject to the following financial covenants under our Credit Facility: (A) a Total Leverage Ratio not to exceed, (i) 5.75 to 1.00 for the quarters ended March 31, 2020, June 30, 2020 and September 30, 2020 and (ii) 5.50 to 1.00 for the quarter ended December 31, 2020 and each quarter ended thereafter, (B) a Senior Secured Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility) not to exceed 2.00 to 1.00 as of the end of any period of four consecutive fiscal quarters, and (C) a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility) of not less than 1.20 to 1.00 as of the end of any period of four consecutive fiscal quarters. These financial maintenance covenants are calculated for the Company and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis.
On May 18 2020, we received a limited waiver under our Credit Facility for the failure to comply with the Total Leverage Ratio covenant for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2020. In connection with the waiver, we also entered into a fourth amendment to the Credit Facility which increased the interest rate margin applicable to borrowings by up to 0.625% at each pricing level based on the Total Leverage Ratio. We did not incur any transaction costs related to the limited waiver and fourth amendment to the Credit Facility.
On August 7, 2020, we obtained a limited consent from the lenders under our Credit Facility in connection with our privately-negotiated repurchases of our Convertible Notes (as defined in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 13). See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 13 for a discussion of our privately-negotiated repurchases.
We were in compliance with the total leverage ratio, fixed charge coverage ratio and senior secured leverage ratio covenants contained in our Credit Facility at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility of $47.2 million. We had one letter of credit for $2.0 million issued on November 30, 2019 and outstanding under the Credit Facility, which was increased to $2.1 million on September 29, 2020. The letter of credit bears interest at 3.125% and will expire on November 26, 2021. The letter of credit automatically renews annually and secures our obligations under our various self-insured policies. Outstanding borrowings under our Credit Facility bear interest at either a prime rate or a LIBOR rate, plus an applicable margin based upon our leverage ratio. At December 31, 2020, the prime rate margin was equivalent to 1.5% and the LIBOR rate margin was 2.5%. The weighted average interest rate on our Credit Facility for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 was 2.9% and 3.8%, respectively.
We have no material assets or operations independent of our subsidiaries. All assets and operations are held and conducted by subsidiaries, each of which have fully and unconditionally guaranteed our obligations under the Credit Facility.
Additionally, we do not currently have any significant restrictions on our ability to receive dividends or loans from any Credit Facility Guarantors.
The interest expense and amortization of debt issuance costs related to our Credit Facility are as follows (in thousands):
Lease Obligations
Our lease obligations consist of operating and finance leases. We lease certain office facilities, certain funeral homes and equipment under operating leases with original terms ranging from one to nineteen years. Many leases include one or more options to renew, some of which include options to extend the leases for up to 26 years. We lease certain funeral homes under finance leases with original terms ranging from ten to forty years.
The lease cost related to our operating leases and short-term leases and depreciation expense and interest expense related to our finance leases are as follows (in thousands):
Acquisition Debt
Acquisition debt consists of deferred purchase price and promissory notes payable to sellers. A majority of the deferred purchase price and notes bear no interest and are discounted at imputed interest rates ranging from 7.3% to 10.0%. Original maturities range from five to twenty years.
The imputed interest expense related to our acquisition debt is as follows (in thousands):
Convertible Subordinated Notes due 2021
On March 19, 2014, we issued $143.75 million aggregate principal amount of our 2.75% convertible subordinated notes due 2021 (the “Convertible Notes”). The Convertible Notes are due on March 15, 2021 and bear interest at 2.75% per year, which is payable semi-annually in arrears on March 15 and September 15 of each year.
On May 7, 2018, we completed our exchange of approximately $115.0 million in aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes in a privately-negotiated exchange agreement with a limited number of convertible noteholders. On December 24, 2018, we completed privately-negotiated repurchases of an additional $22.4 million in aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes. On April 4, 2019, we completed a privately-negotiated repurchase of $25,000 in aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes then outstanding for $27,163.
On September 9, 2020, we completed privately-negotiated repurchases of $3.8 million in aggregate principal amount of our Convertible Notes for $4.6 million in cash (which included accrued interest of $0.1 million) and recorded $0.8 million for the reacquisition of the equity component. The September 2020 repurchases represented approximately 60% of the aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes then outstanding. Following the settlement of the September 2020 repurchases, the aggregate principal amount of the Convertible Notes was reduced to approximately $2.6 million.
The fair value of the Convertible Notes, which are Level 2 measurements, was $3.7 million at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, the adjusted conversion rate of the Convertible Notes is 45.9712 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Convertible Notes, equivalent to an adjusted conversion price of $21.75 per share of common stock.
The interest expense and accretion of debt discount and debt issuance costs related to our Convertible Notes are as follows (in thousands):
The remaining unamortized debt discount and the remaining unamortized debt issuance costs are being amortized using the effective interest method over the remaining term of approximately two months of the Convertible Notes. The effective interest rate on the unamortized debt discount for both years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 was 11.4%. The effective interest rate on the debt issuance costs for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 was 3.2% and 3.1%, respectively.
Senior Notes due 2026
On May 31, 2018, we issued $325.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our 6.625% senior notes due 2026 (the “Initial Senior Notes”) and related guarantees in a private offering under Rule 144A and Regulations S under the Securities Act. The Initial Senior Notes were issued under an indenture, dated as of May 31, 2018 (the “Indenture”), among us, certain of our existing subsidiaries (collectively, the “Subsidiary Guarantors”), as guarantors, and Wilmington Trust, National Association., as trustee.
On December 19, 2019, we issued an additional $75.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our Initial Senior Notes (the “Additional Senior Notes” and, together with the Initial Senior Notes, the “Senior Notes”) and related guarantees by the Subsidiary Guarantors in a private offering under Rule 144A and Regulation S of the Securities Act. The Additional Senior Notes were issued as additional securities under the Indenture.
We received proceeds of $76.9 million from the issuance of Additional Senior Notes, net of a debt premium of $1.7 million (plus accrued interest of $0.2 million). We incurred $1.0 million in debt issuance costs related to the Additional Senior Notes. The Senior Notes are treated as a single class of securities under the Indenture, and the Additional Senior Notes have identical terms to the Initial Senior Notes, except with respect to the date of issuance, the issue price, the initial interest accrual date and the initial interest payment date.
The Senior Notes bear interest at 6.625% per year. Interest on the Senior Notes began to accrue on May 31, 2018 and is payable semi-annually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year, beginning on December 1, 2018 with respect to the Initial Senior Notes and June 1, 2020 with respect to the Additional Senior Notes to holders of record on each May 15 and November 15 preceding an interest payment date. The Senior Notes mature on June 1, 2026, unless earlier redeemed or repurchased. The Senior Notes are unsecured, senior obligations and are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis, jointly and severally, by each of the Subsidiary Guarantors.
We may redeem all or part of the Senior Notes at any time prior to June 1, 2021 at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of Senior Notes redeemed, plus a “make whole” premium, and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption. We have the right to redeem the Senior Notes at any time on or after June 1, 2021 at the redemption prices described in the Indenture, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption. Additionally, at any time before June 1, 2021, we may redeem up to 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the Senior Notes issued with an amount equal to the net proceeds of certain equity offerings, at a price equal to 106.625% of the principal amount of the Senior Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption; provided that (1) at least 60% of the aggregate principal amount of the Senior Notes (including any additional Senior Notes ) originally issued under the Indenture remain outstanding immediately after the occurrence of such redemption (excluding Senior Notes held by us); and (2) each such redemption must occur within 180 days of the date of the closing of each such equity offering.
If a “change of control” occurs, holders of the Senior Notes will have the option to require us to purchase for cash all or a portion of their Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the Senior Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, if we make certain asset sales and do not reinvest the proceeds thereof or use such proceeds to repay certain debt, we will be required to use the proceeds of such asset sales to make an offer to purchase the Senior Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Senior Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The Indenture contains restrictive covenants limiting our ability and our Restricted Subsidiaries (as defined in the Indenture) to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness or issue certain preferred shares, create liens on certain assets to secure debt, pay dividends or make other equity distributions, purchase or redeem capital stock, make certain investments, sell assets, agree to certain restrictions on the ability of Restricted Subsidiaries to make payments to us, consolidate, merge, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all assets, or engage in transactions with affiliates. The Indenture also contains customary events of default.
The interest expense and amortization of debt discount, debt premium and debt issuance costs related to our Senior Notes are as follows (in thousands):
The fair value of the Senior Notes, which are Level 2 measurements, was $427.9 million at December 31, 2020.
The debt discount, the debt premium and the debt issuance costs are being amortized using the effective interest method over the remaining term of approximately 65 months of the Senior Notes. The effective interest rate on the unamortized debt discount and the unamortized debt issuance costs for the Initial Senior Notes (issued in May 2018) was 6.87% and 6.69%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The effective interest rate on the unamortized debt premium and the unamortized debt issuance costs for the Additional Senior Notes (issued in December 2019) was 6.20% and 6.90%, respectively, for year ended December 31, 2020.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The following table summarizes the known future payments required for the debt on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020. Where appropriate we have indicated the footnote in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements where additional information is available.
(a) Based on interest rates in effect at December 31, 2020.
(b) Matures March 15, 2021.
(c) Matures June 1, 2026.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The following table summarizes our off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. Where appropriate, we have indicated the footnote in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements where additional information is available. We have various non-compete agreements with former owners and employees of businesses we have acquired. These agreements are generally for one to ten years and provide for periodic payments over the term of the agreements. We have various consulting agreements with former owners of businesses we have acquired. Payments for such agreements are generally not made in advance. These agreements are generally for one to five years and provide for bi-weekly or monthly payments. We have employment agreements with our executive officers and certain senior leadership. These agreements are generally for three to five years and provide for participation in various incentive compensation arrangements. These agreements generally renew automatically on an annual basis after their initial term has expired.
(a) Melvin C. Payne, our Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, has an employment agreement that does not renew after the initial term. See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 16 for additional information regarding Mr. Payne's employment agreement.
The obligations related to our off-balance sheet arrangements are significant to our future liquidity; however, although we can provide no assurances, we anticipate that these obligations will be funded from cash provided from our operating activities. If we are not able to meet these obligations with cash provided by our operating activities, we may be required to access the capital markets or draw down on our Credit Facility, both of which may be more difficult to access.
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
Below are our financial highlights (in thousands except for volumes and averages):
Revenue in 2020 increased $55.3 million compared to 2019, as we experienced a 21.2% increase in total funeral contracts primarily due to the funeral home acquisitions made in the fourth quarter of 2019 and first quarter of 2020, as well as increases from broad market share gains and increases in the number of deaths related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Volume growth was offset by a decrease in the average revenue per funeral contract of 6.4% primarily due to the decrease in services performed as restrictions mandated by state and local governments were placed on social gatherings. In addition, we experienced an increase of 31.9% in the number of preneed interment rights (property) sold primarily due to the cemetery acquisitions made in the fourth quarter of 2019 and first quarter of 2020, as well as an increase of 10.4% in the average price per interment right sold.
Revenue in 2019 increased $6.1 million compared to 2018, as we experienced a 5.8% increase in total funeral contracts, offset by a decrease in the average revenue per funeral contract of 3.1%. In addition, the average price per interment right (property) sold increased 5.2% and we experienced an increase of 2.0% in the number of preneed interment rights sold. Further discussion of Revenue for our funeral home and cemetery segments is presented herein under “Results of Operations.”
Gross profit in 2020 increased $26.3 million compared to 2019, primarily due to the increase in revenue from both our funeral home and cemetery segments due to the acquisitions made in the fourth quarter of 2019 and first quarter of 2020, as well disciplined expense and cost management by leaders at each business.
Gross profit in 2019 increased $3.6 million compared to 2018, primarily due to an increase in revenue from our funeral home segment due to the acquisitions made in the fourth quarter of 2019 and the second half of 2018. Further discussion of the components of Gross profit for our funeral home and cemetery segments, is presented herein under “Results of Operations.”
Net income in 2020 increased $1.6 million compared to 2019 primarily due to the increase in gross profit, offset by the $16.6 million increase in charges related to the net loss on divestitures and impairments and $7.0 million increase in interest expense related to our Senior Notes and Credit Facility.
Net income in 2019 increased $2.9 million compared to 2018 primarily due to the increase in gross profit, as well as a $5.0 million decrease in general and administrative expenses, offset by a $2.5 million increase in interest expense primarily related to our Senior Notes and a $2.9 million increase in the loss on divested businesses.
Further discussion of General, administrative and other expenses, Home office depreciation and amortization expense, Interest expense, Income taxes and other components of income and expenses are presented herein under “Other Financial Statement Items.”
REPORTING AND NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
We also present our financial performance in our “Operating and Financial Trend Report” (“Trend Report”) as reported in our earnings release for the year ending December 31, 2020, dated February 17, 2021 and discussed in the corresponding earnings conference call. This Trend Report is used as a supplemental financial statement by management and investors to compare our current financial performance with our previous results and with the performance of other companies. We do not intend for this information to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for other measures of performance prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The Trend Report is a non-GAAP statement that also provides insight into underlying trends in our business.
Below is a reconciliation of Net income (a GAAP measure) to Adjusted net income (a non-GAAP measure) (in thousands):
(1) Special items are defined as charges or credits included in our GAAP financial statements that can vary from period to period and are not reflective of costs incurred in the ordinary course of our operations. Special items are taxed at the federal statutory rate of 21.0% for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020, except for the Accretion of the discount on the Convertible Notes and the Tax adjustment related to certain discrete items and the Tax expense related to divested business, as these are non-tax deductible items and the Net impact of impairment of goodwill and other intangibles and the Net loss on divestitures and other costs (described below).
(2) The Net loss on divestitures and other costs and the Net impact of impairment of goodwill and other intangibles special items are net of the federal statutory rate of 21.0% in 2018 and 2019 and are net of the operating tax rate of 32.4% in 2020.
(3) Adjusted net income is defined as Net income plus adjustments for Special items and other expenses or gains that we believe do not directly reflect our core operations and may not be indicative of our normal business operations.
Below is a reconciliation of Gross profit (a GAAP measure) to Operating profit (a non-GAAP measure) (in thousands):
(1) Operating profit is defined as Gross profit less Cemetery property amortization, Field depreciation expense and Regional and unallocated funeral and cemetery costs.
Our operations are reported in two business segments: Funeral Home and Cemetery. Below is a breakdown of Operating profit (a non-GAAP measure) by Segment (in thousands):
(1) Operating profit margin is defined as Operating profit as a percentage of Revenue.
Further discussion of Operating profit for our funeral home and cemetery segments is presented herein under “Results of Operations.”
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
Results of Operations
The following is a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
The term “same store” refers to funeral homes and cemeteries acquired prior to January 1, 2016 and owned and operated for the entirety of each period being presented, excluding certain funeral homes and cemeteries that we intend to divest in the near future.
The term “acquired” refers to funeral homes and cemeteries purchased after December 31, 2015, excluding any funeral homes and cemeteries that we intend to divest in the near future. This classification of acquisitions has been important to management and investors in monitoring the results of these businesses and to gauge the leveraging performance contribution that a selective acquisition program can have on total company performance.
The term “divested” refers to the eight funeral homes we sold in 2020 and three funeral homes whose building leases expired, one funeral home we sold and a funeral home we merged with a funeral home in an existing market in 2019. “Planned divested” refers to funeral homes and cemeteries that we intend to divest in the near future.
“Ancillary” represents our flower shop, pet cremation business and online cremation business.
Cemetery property amortization, Field depreciation expense and Regional and unallocated funeral and cemetery costs, are not included in Operating profit, a non-GAAP financial measure. Adding back these items will result in Gross profit, a GAAP financial measure.
Funeral Home Segment
The following table sets forth certain information regarding our Revenue and Operating profit from our funeral home operations (in thousands):
The following measures reflect the significant metrics over this comparative period:
Funeral home same store operating revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $10.9 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in operating revenue is due to a 12.9% same store contract volume increase which is due to broad market share gains and increased deaths related to the COVID-19 pandemic. This increase was offset by a 5.7% decrease in average revenue per contract, excluding preneed interest, due to a 180 basis point decrease in the burial rate along with a decrease of both burial and cremation contracts with services.
Beginning in the latter half of March 2020, we saw a decrease in services performed due to the restrictions placed on gatherings mandated by state and local governments as the COVID-19 pandemic became more prominent and individuals began to practice social distancing to comply with applicable shelter in place and related orders. Although social distancing restrictions were gradually eased in certain jurisdictions during the latter half of 2020, these restrictions contributed to the
overall decrease in the average revenue per contract in the current year. Our Managing Partners continued to show innovation by creating high value, uniquely customized personal services and sales amid challenging restrictions in local environments.
Same store operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $9.7 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 and the comparable operating profit margin increased 300 basis points to 41.6%. The increase in operating margin is primarily due to the increase in same store operating revenue along with disciplined expense and cost management by leaders at each business. Although same store operating expenses increased $1.2 million primarily due to an increase of $1.0 million in group health care costs related to higher claims experience during the current year, we experienced decreases in the majority of our other operating costs as a percentage of operating revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019.
Funeral home acquired operating revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $19.4 million, as our funeral home acquired portfolio for the year ended December 31, 2020 included nine funeral home businesses added in the fourth quarter of 2019 and one business added in the first quarter of 2020 not fully present in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Acquired operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $8.0 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 and the comparable operating profit margin increased 130 basis points to 39.7%. The increase is primarily due to the increase in acquired operating revenue along with disciplined expense and cost management by leaders at each business.
Ancillary funeral services revenue, which is recorded in Other revenue, represents revenue from our flower shop, pet cremation business and online cremation business, which were acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019. Operating profit from our ancillary funeral service businesses for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $0.9 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, with an operating profit margin of 25.4%.
Preneed funeral insurance commissions and preneed funeral trust and insurance, also recorded in Other revenue, on a combined basis, increased $0.7 million or 8.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase is primarily due to an 11.5% increase in preneed contracts maturing to atneed during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, which triggers the recognition of trust earnings on the matured contracts. Operating profit for preneed funeral insurance commissions and preneed trust and insurance, on a combined basis, increased $0.8 million or 10.5% for the same comparative period in 2019, primarily due to the increase in revenue and reduction of preneed trust and insurance expenses.
Cemetery Segment
The following table sets forth certain information regarding our Revenue and Operating profit from our cemetery operations (in thousands):
The following measures reflect the significant metrics over this comparative period:
Cemetery same store operating revenue increased $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. We experienced a $0.4 million or 1.6% increase in preneed property revenue as a result of a 3.1% increase in the average price per interment right sold, slightly offset by a 0.5% decrease in the number of interment rights sold. The decrease in the number of preneed interment rights sold was primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic as individuals practiced social distancing to comply with applicable shelter in place and related orders in certain areas of the country, which limited our preneed sales employees from meeting with families in person. This was most evident in the second quarter of 2020 as these restrictions affected our ability to host certain annual events such as the Ching Ming festival during April and Memorial Day festivities during May. We also experienced an $0.8 million increase in preneed merchandise and service revenue due to a 22.9% increase in the deliveries of merchandise and service contracts during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cemetery same store atneed revenue, which represents 39% of our same store operating revenue, increased $1.3 million as we experienced a 10.2% increase in the number of atneed contracts due to the increased deaths related to the COVID-19 pandemic, offset by a 3.3% decrease in the average sales per contract.
Cemetery same store operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $2.4 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The comparable operating profit margin increased 290 basis points to 37.7%, primarily because of disciplined expense and cost management by leaders at each business throughout the year. Operating expense as a percentage of operating revenue decreased in categories such as promotional expense, general and administrative expenses and maintenance salary expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. We saw increases in two categories as a percentage of operating revenue, allowance for credit losses due to slower payments on financed receivables particularly in the states most affected by COVID-19 and atneed commissions due to the introduction of performance-based rewards and sales incentives in the current year.
Our acquired cemetery portfolio includes two cemeteries added during the fourth quarter of 2019 and one cemetery added during the first quarter of 2020. These three cemeteries contributed $17.6 million in revenue and $7.1 million in operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Preneed cemetery trust earnings and preneed cemetery finance charges, which are recorded in Other revenue, on a combined basis, increased $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $3.7 million increase in perpetual care trust fund earnings of which (1) $2.2 million was from our acquired cemeteries; (2) $0.9 million increase in earnings as a result of the execution of our trust fund repositioning strategy beginning at the height of the COVID-19 market crisis in March 2020; and (3) $0.6 million increase in realized gains. These increases were partially offset by a $0.5 million decrease in finance charge revenue. The decrease in finance charge revenue is primarily due to our enhanced preneed cemetery property sales strategy of reducing interest rates on preneed contracts.
Operating profit for the two categories of Other revenue, on a combined basis, increased $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the increase in our perpetual care trust fund earnings discussed above.
Cemetery property amortization. Cemetery property amortization totaled $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.0 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in property sold due to our recently acquired cemeteries, resulted in a $1.1 million increase in amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, while the amortization expense for our same store businesses decreased $0.1 million due to a decrease in property sales in the period.
Field depreciation. Depreciation expense for our field businesses totaled $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.6 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to additional depreciation expense from assets added as a result of our acquisitions during the fourth quarter of 2019 and first quarter of 2020.
Regional and unallocated funeral and cemetery costs. Regional and unallocated funeral and cemetery costs consist of salaries and benefits for regional management, field incentive compensation and other related costs for field infrastructure. Regional and unallocated funeral and cemetery costs totaled $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4.2 million primarily due to the following: (1) a $3.6 million increase in cash incentives and equity compensation, as a result of our improved performance, which reinforces our strategy of aligning incentives with long-term value creation; (2) a $1.0 million increase in health and safety expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic; and (3) a $0.7 million increase in salaries and benefits; offset by (4) a $1.1 million decrease in severance expense.
Other Financial Statement Items
General, administrative and other. General, administrative and other expenses totaled $25.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.1 million primarily due to the following: (1) a $2.0 million increase in cash incentives and equity compensation, as a result of our improved performance, which reinforces our strategy of aligning incentives with long-term value creation; and (2) a $0.2 million increase in salaries and benefits; offset by (3) a $2.3 million decrease in acquisition costs.
Home office depreciation and amortization. Home office depreciation and amortization expense remained flat at $1.4 million for both the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, primarily due to machinery and equipment at the home office becoming fully depreciated in the latter half of 2019, offset by additional software assets purchased during the fourth quarter of 2019.
Net loss on divestitures and impairment charges. The components of Net loss on divestitures and impairment charges are as follows (in thousands):
As a result of economic conditions caused by COVID-19, we performed a quantitative assessment of our goodwill and tradenames at March 31, 2020. We recorded an impairment for goodwill of $13.6 million as the carrying amount of our funeral homes in the Eastern Region Reporting Unit exceeded the fair value and we recorded an impairment for certain of our tradenames of $1.1 million as the carrying amount of these tradenames exceeded the fair value. In addition, we divested eight funeral homes at a net loss of $6.7 million.
During 2019, we recorded a goodwill impairment of $0.7 million related to two funeral homes that we divested. During 2019, we recorded an impairment to tradenames of $0.2 million as a result of our 2019 annual impairment test as the carrying amount of certain tradenames exceeded the fair value. In addition, we divested three funeral homes whose building leases expired and sold a funeral home at a net loss of $3.9 million.
Interest expense. Interest expense related to its respective debt arrangement is as follows (in thousands):
Accretion of discount on convertible subordinated notes. We recognized accretion of the discount on our Convertible Notes of $0.2 million for both years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019.
Other, net. The components of Other, net are as follows (in thousands):
Income taxes. Our income tax provision was $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to our income tax provision of $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our operating tax rate before discrete items was 32.4% and 33.0% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded tax expense of $0.8 million related to divested businesses. We also recorded discrete tax expense of $0.6 million and $0.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Discrete tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes expense related to equity compensation and other adjustments including return to provision analysis and state legislative changes. Our effective tax rate was 34.7% and 35.1% for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In connection with the CARES Act, we filed a claim for a refund on June 30, 2020, to carryback the net operating losses (“NOLs”) generated in the tax year ended December 31, 2018. The refund claim for $7.0 million from the 2018 tax year was received on August 7, 2020. An additional carryback claim for a refund of $1.2 million was filed on November 3, 2020 for the tax year ended December 31, 2019. The refund from this filing has not yet been received. The majority of the NOLs generated in tax year 2018 and 2019 are the result of filing non-automatic accounting method changes relating to the recognition of revenue from our cemetery property and merchandise and services sales. Due to the uncertainty of the timing of receiving Internal Revenue Service approval of the method change applications, a reserve has been recorded against the net cash tax benefit derived from carrying back the NOLs generated to tax years in which the enacted federal rate was 35%. The Company’s unrecognized tax benefit reserve for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $3.7 million and $0.7 million, respectively.
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 17 for additional information regarding income taxes.
OVERVIEW OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, realization of accounts receivable, inventories, goodwill, other intangible assets, property and equipment and deferred tax assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience, third party data and assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of these considerations form the basis for making judgments about the amount and timing of revenue and expenses, the carrying value of assets and the recorded amounts of liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such estimates may change if the underlying conditions or assumptions change. Historical performance should not be viewed as indicative of future performance because there can be no assurance the margins, operating income and net earnings, as a percentage of revenue, will be consistent from year to year.
“Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” (“MD&A”) is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements presented herewith, which have been prepared in accordance with United States GAAP. Our critical accounting policies are more fully described in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 1. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
Funeral and Cemetery Operations Revenue is recognized when control of the merchandise or services is transferred to the customer. Our performance obligations include the delivery of funeral and cemetery merchandise and services and cemetery property interment rights. Control transfers when merchandise is delivered or services are performed. For cemetery property interment rights, control transfers to the customer when the property is developed and the interment right has been sold and can no longer be marketed or sold to another customer. Sales taxes collected are recognized on a net basis on our Consolidated Financial Statements. On our atneed contracts, we generally deliver the merchandise and perform the services at the time of need.
Some of our contracts with customers include multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price, which is based on prices charged to customers per our general price list. Packages for service and ancillary items are offered to help the customer make decisions during emotional and stressful times. Package discounts are reflected net in Revenue. We recognize revenue when the merchandise is transferred or the service is performed, in satisfaction of the corresponding performance obligation. Sales taxes collected are recognized on a net basis on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 21 for additional information related to revenue.
Goodwill
The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of identifiable net assets of funeral home businesses and cemeteries acquired is recorded as goodwill. Goodwill has an indefinite life and is not subject to amortization. As such, we test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis as of August 31st each year. Under current guidance, we are permitted to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more-likely-than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test.
Our intent is to perform a quantitative impairment test at least once every three years and perform a qualitative assessment during the remaining two years. In addition to our annual test, we assess the impairment of goodwill whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of a reporting unit may be greater than fair value.
Our quantitative goodwill impairment test involves estimates and management judgment. In the quantitative analysis, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. We determine fair value for each reporting unit using both an income approach, weighted 90%, and a market approach, weighted 10%. Our methodology for determining an income-based fair value is based on discounting projected future cash flows. The discounted cash flow valuation uses projections of future cash flows and includes assumptions concerning future operating performance and economic conditions that may differ from actual future cash flows. Our methodology for determining a market approach fair value utilizes the guideline public company method, in which we rely on market multiples of comparable companies operating in the same industry as the individual reporting units. In accordance with the guidance, if the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount an impairment charge is recorded in an amount equal to the difference.
As a result of economic conditions caused by COVID-19, we performed a quantitative assessment of our goodwill at March 31, 2020 and we recorded an impairment to goodwill of $13.6 million during the quarter ended March 31, 2020, as the carrying amount of our funeral homes in the Eastern Region Reporting Unit exceeded the fair value.
For our 2020 annual impairment test, we performed a qualitative assessment and determined that there were no factors that would indicate the need to perform an additional quantitative goodwill impairment test. We concluded that it is more-likely-than not that the fair value of our reporting units is greater than their carrying value and thus there was no additional impairment to goodwill.
When we divest a portion of a reporting unit that constitutes a business in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we allocate goodwill associated with that business to be included in the gain or loss on divestiture. When divesting a business, goodwill is allocated based on the relative fair values of the business being divested and the portion of the reporting unit that will be retained. Additionally, after each divestiture, we will test the goodwill remaining in the portion of the reporting unit to be retained for impairment using a qualitative assessment unless we deem a quantitative assessment to be appropriate.
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 4 for additional information related to goodwill.
Intangible Assets
Our intangible assets include tradenames resulting from acquisitions and are included in Intangible and other non-current assets, net on our Consolidated Balance Sheet. Our tradenames are considered to have an indefinite life and are not subject to amortization. As such, we test our intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis as of August 31st each year. Under current guidance, we are permitted to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more-likely-than not that the fair value of the tradename is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test.
Our intent is to perform a quantitative impairment test at least once every three years and perform a qualitative assessment during the remaining two years. In addition to our annual test, we assess the impairment of intangible assets whenever certain events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the intangible asset may be greater than the fair value.
Our quantitative intangible asset impairment test involves estimates and management judgment. Our quantitative analysis is performed using the relief from royalty method, which measures the tradenames by determining the value of the royalties that we are relieved from paying due to our ownership of the asset. We determine the fair value of the asset by discounting the cash
flows that represent a savings in lieu of paying a royalty fee for use of the tradename. In accordance with the guidance, if the fair value of the tradename is less than its carrying amount, then an impairment charge is recorded in an amount equal to the difference.
As a result of economic conditions caused by COVID-19, we performed a quantitative assessment of our tradenames at March 31, 2020 and we recorded an impairment to tradenames for certain of our funeral homes of $1.1 million during the quarter ended March 31, 2020 as the carrying amount of these tradenames exceeded the fair value. The discounted cash flow valuation uses projections of future cash flows and includes assumptions concerning future operating performance and economic conditions that may differ from actual future cash flows and the determination and application of an appropriate royalty rate and discount rate.
For our 2020 annual impairment test, we performed a qualitative assessment and determined that there were no factors that would indicate the need to perform an additional quantitative impairment test. We concluded that it is more-likely-than not that the fair value of our intangible assets is greater than its carrying value and thus there was no additional impairment to our intangible assets.
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 11 for additional information related to intangible assets.
Funeral and Cemetery Receivables
Our funeral receivables are recorded in Accounts receivable, net and primarily consist of amounts due for funeral services already performed. Our cemetery receivables generally consist of preneed sales of cemetery interment rights and related products and services, which are typically financed through interest-bearing installment sales contracts, generally with terms of up to five years, with such interest income reflected as Other revenue. In substantially all cases, we receive an initial down payment at the time the contract is signed. Atneed cemetery receivables and preneed cemetery receivables with payments expected to be received within one year from the balance sheet date are recorded in Accounts receivable, net. Preneed cemetery receivables with payments expected to be received beyond one year from the balance sheet date are recorded in Preneed cemetery receivables, net.
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”), Financial Instruments - Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments and subsequent amendments collectively known as (“Topic 326”). Topic 326 applies to all entities holding financial assets measured at amortized cost, including loans, trade and financed receivables and other financial instruments. The guidance introduces a new credit reserving model known as Current Expected Credit Loss (“CECL”), which requires earlier recognition of credit losses, while also providing additional transparency about credit risk. The CECL model requires all expected credit losses to be measured based on historical experience, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts about collectability. Prior to adoption of Topic 326, we provided allowances for bad debt and contract cancellations on our receivables based on an analysis of historical trends of collection activity.
For both funeral and cemetery receivables, we determine our allowance for credit losses by using a loss-rate methodology, in which we assess our historical write-off of receivables against our total receivables over several years. From this historical loss-rate approach, we also consider the current and forecasted economic conditions expected to be in place over the life of our receivables. These estimates are impacted by a number of factors, including changes in the economy, demographics and competition in our local communities. We monitor any change in our historical write-off of receivables utilized in our loss-rate methodology and assess forecasted changes in market conditions within our credit reserve.
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 6 for additional information related to funeral and cemetery receivables.
Business Combinations
Tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at fair value and goodwill is recognized for any difference between the price of the acquisition and fair value. We recognize the assets acquired, the liabilities assumed and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree at the acquisition date, measured at the fair value as of that date. Acquisition related costs are recognized separately from the acquisition and are expensed as incurred. We customarily estimate related transaction costs known at closing. To the extent that information not available to us at the closing date subsequently becomes available during the allocation period, we may adjust goodwill, intangible assets, assets or liabilities associated with the acquisition.
When we acquire a cemetery, we utilize an internal and external approach to determine the fair value of the cemetery property. From an external perspective, we obtain an accredited appraisal to provide reasonable assurance for property existence, property availability (unrestricted) for development, property lines, available spaces to sell, identifiable obstacles or easements and general valuation inclusive of known variables in that market. From an internal perspective, we conduct a
detailed analysis of the acquired cemetery property using other cemeteries in our portfolio as a benchmark. This provides the added benefit of relevant data that is not available to third party appraisers. Through this thorough internal process, the Company is able to identify viable costs of property based on historical experience, particular markets and demographics, reasonable margins, practical retail prices and park infrastructure and condition.
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 3 for additional information related to business combinations.
Divested Operations
Prior to divesting a funeral home or cemetery, we first determine whether the sale of the net assets and activities (together referred to as a “set”) qualifies as a business. First, we perform a screen test to determine if the set is not a business. The principle of the screen is that a set is not a business if substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets sold resides in a single asset or group of similar assets. If the screen is not met then we evaluate whether the set has both inputs and a substantive process that together significantly contribute to the ability to create outputs. When both inputs and a substantive process are present then the set is determined to be a business and we apply the guidance in ASC 350 - Intangibles - Goodwill and Other to determine the accounting treatment of goodwill for that set (see discussion of Goodwill below). Goodwill is not allocated to the sale if the set is not considered to be a business.
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 5 for additional information related to divestitures.
Preneed and Perpetual Care Trust Funds
Preneed sales generally require deposits to a trust or purchase of a third-party insurance product. We have established a variety of trusts in connection with funeral home and cemetery operations as required under applicable state laws. Such trusts include (i) preneed funeral trusts; (ii) preneed cemetery merchandise and service trusts; and (iii) cemetery perpetual care trusts.
Our preneed and perpetual care trust funds are reported in accordance with the principles of consolidating Variable Interest Entities (“VIEs”). In the case of preneed trusts, the customers are the legal beneficiaries. In the case of perpetual care trusts, we do not have a right to access the corpus in the perpetual care trusts.
Our trust fund assets are reflected in our financial statements as Preneed cemetery trust investments, Preneed funeral trust investments and Cemetery perpetual care trust investments. We have recognized financial interests of third parties in the trust funds in our financial statements as Deferred preneed funeral and cemetery receipts held in trust and Care trusts’ corpus.
The fair value of our trust fund assets are accounted for as Collateralized Financing Entities (“CFEs”) in ASC 810. The accounting guidance for CFEs allows companies to elect to measure both the financial assets and financial liabilities using the more observable of the fair value of the financial assets or fair value of the financial liabilities. Pursuant to this guidance, we have determined the fair value of the financial assets of the trust are more observable and we first measure those financial assets at fair value. Our fair value of the financial liabilities mirror the fair value of the financial assets, in accordance with the ASC. Any changes in fair value are recognized in earnings.
Topic 326 made changes to the accounting for fixed income securities. One such change is to require credit losses to be presented as an allowance rather than as a write-down on fixed income securities management does not intend to sell or believes that it is more likely than not will be required to sell.
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 7 for additional related disclosures related to preneed and perpetual trust funds.
Fair Value Measurements
We measure the securities held by our funeral merchandise and service, cemetery merchandise and service, and cemetery perpetual care trusts at fair value on a recurring basis in accordance with the Fair Value Measurements Topic of the ASC. This guidance defines fair value as the price that would be received in the sale of an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date for items that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually). The guidance establishes a three-level valuation hierarchy for disclosure of fair value measurements. The valuation hierarchy is based upon the transparency of inputs to the valuation of an asset or liability as of the measurement date. The three levels are defined as follows:
• Level 1 - inputs to the valuation methodology are quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets;
• Level 2 - inputs to the valuation methodology include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, and inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the financial instrument; and
• Level 3 - inputs to the valuation methodology are unobservable and significant to the fair value measurement. We currently do not have any assets that have fair values determined by Level 3 inputs and no liabilities measured at fair value.
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Notes 7 and 10 for additional information related to fair value measurements.
Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment and right-of-use assets are reviewed for impairment at least annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable in accordance with ASC 360 - Property, Plant and Equipment. This guidance requires that long-lived assets to be held and used are reported at the lower of their carrying amount or fair value. We assess long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be greater than the fair value. We evaluate our long-lived assets for impairment when a funeral home or cemetery business has negative earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) for four consecutive years and if there has been a decline in EBITDA in that same period. We review our long-lived assets deemed held-for-sale to the point of recoverability. Assets to be disposed of and assets not expected to provide any future service potential are recorded at the lower of their carrying amount or fair value less estimated cost to sell. If we determine that the carrying value is not recoverable from the proceeds of the sale, we record an impairment at that time.
In connection with the goodwill impairment recorded for the Eastern Region Reporting Unit during the quarter ended March 31, 2020, we also evaluated the long-lived assets of our funeral homes in the Eastern Region Reporting Unit and concluded that there was no impairment to our long-lived assets. Subsequent to our impairment tests performed at March 31, 2020, we did not identify any new factors or events that would trigger us to perform an additional assessment of our long-lived assets. For our 2020 annual impairment test, no impairment was identified on our long-lived assets at December 31, 2020.
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 1 for additional information related to long-lived assets.
Income Taxes
We and our subsidiaries file a consolidated U. S. federal income tax return, separate income tax returns in 15 states and combined or unitary income tax returns in 14 states. We record deferred taxes for temporary differences between the tax basis and financial reporting basis of assets and liabilities. We classify our deferred tax liabilities and assets as non-current on our Consolidated Balance Sheet.
We record a valuation allowance to reflect the estimated amount of deferred tax assets for which realization is uncertain. Management reviews the valuation allowance at the end of each quarter and makes adjustments if it is determined that it is more likely than not that the tax benefits will be realized.
We analyze tax benefits for uncertain tax positions and how they are to be recognized, measured, and derecognized in the financial statements; provide certain disclosures of uncertain tax matters; and specify how reserves for uncertain tax positions should be classified on our Consolidated Balance Sheet.
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 17 for additional information related to income taxes.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS, ACCOUNTING CHANGES AND OTHER REGULATIONS
For discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and accounting changes, see Note 2 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
SEASONALITY
Our business can be affected by seasonal fluctuations in the death rate. Generally, the number of deaths is higher during the winter months because the incidences of death from influenza and pneumonia are higher during this period than other periods of the year.
INFLATION
Inflation has not had a material impact on our results of operations over the last three fiscal years.