Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand Community Trust Bancorp, Inc., our operations, and our present business environment. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to-and should be read in conjunction with-our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto contained in Item 8 of this annual report. The MD&A includes the following sections:
❖ Our Business
❖ Financial Goals and Performance
❖ Results of Operations and Financial Condition
❖ Contractual Obligations and Commitments
❖ Liquidity and Market Risk
❖ Interest Rate Risk
❖ Capital Resources
❖ Impact of Inflation, Changing Prices, and Economic Conditions
❖ Stock Repurchase Program
❖ Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Business
Community Trust Bancorp, Inc. (“CTBI”) is a bank holding company headquartered in Pikeville, Kentucky. Currently, we own one commercial bank, Community Trust Bank, Inc. (“CTB”) and one trust company, Community Trust and Investment Company. Through our subsidiaries, we have seventy-nine banking locations in eastern, northeastern, central, and south central Kentucky, southern West Virginia, and northeastern Tennessee, four trust offices across Kentucky, and one trust office in northeastern Tennessee. At December 31, 2020, we had total consolidated assets of $5.1 billion and total consolidated deposits, including repurchase agreements, of $4.4 billion. Total shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2020 was $654.9 million. Trust assets under management at December 31, 2020 were $2.8 billion, including CTB’s investment portfolio totaling $1.0 billion.
Through its subsidiaries, CTBI engages in a wide range of commercial and personal banking and trust and wealth management activities, which include accepting time and demand deposits; making secured and unsecured loans to corporations, individuals and others; providing cash management services to corporate and individual customers; issuing letters of credit; renting safe deposit boxes; and providing funds transfer services. The lending activities of CTB include making commercial, construction, mortgage, and personal loans. Lease-financing, lines of credit, revolving lines of credit, term loans, and other specialized loans, including asset-based financing, are also available. Our corporate subsidiaries act as trustees of personal trusts, as executors of estates, as trustees for employee benefit trusts, as paying agents for bond and stock issues, as investment agent, as depositories for securities, and as providers of full service brokerage and insurance services. For further information, see Item 1 of this annual report.
Financial Goals and Performance
The following table shows the primary measurements used by management to assess annual performance. The goals in the table below should not be viewed as a forecast of our performance for 2021. Rather, the goals represent a range of target performance for 2021. There is no assurance that any or all of these goals will be achieved. See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward Looking Statements.”
COVID-19, the CARES Act, and Related Regulatory Actions
Impact of COVID-19
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced that the outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) constituted a public health emergency of international concern. On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared COVID-19 to be a global pandemic. The health concerns relating to the COVID-19 outbreak and related governmental actions taken to reduce the spread of the virus have significantly impacted the global economy (including the states and local economies in which we operate), disrupted supply chains, caused additional volatility in equity market valuations, and created significant volatility and disruption in financial markets. The outbreak has resulted in authorities implementing numerous measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter in place or total lock-down orders, and business limitations and shutdowns. Such measures have significantly contributed to increased volatile unemployment and negatively impacted consumer and business spending. While quarantine and lock-down orders have been lifted and vaccination efforts are underway, COVID-19 has not yet been contained and commercial activity has not yet returned to the levels existing prior to the pandemic outbreak. As a result, the demand for CTBI’s products and services has been, and will continue to be, significantly impacted.
Interest Rates
On March 3, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee reduced the target federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 1.00% to 1.25%. This rate was further reduced to a target range of 0% to 0.25% on March 16, 2020. These reductions in interest rates and other effects of the COVID-19 outbreak have and may continue to negatively impact CTBI’s net interest income and noninterest income.
The CARES Act and the Paycheck Protection Program
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was signed into law, providing an approximately $2 trillion stimulus package that includes direct payments to individual taxpayers, economic stimulus to significantly impacted industry sectors, emergency funding for hospitals and providers, small business loans, increased unemployment benefits, and a variety of tax incentives.
For small businesses, eligible nonprofits and certain others, the CARES Act established a Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), which is administered by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”). On April 24, 2020, the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act was enacted. Among other things, this legislation amends the initial CARES Act program by raising the appropriation level for PPP loans from $349 billion to $670 billion. The PPP was further modified on June 5, 2020, with the adoption of the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act (the “Flexibility Act”), which extended the maturity date for PPP loans from two years to five years for loans disbursed on or after the date of enactment of the Flexibility Act. For PPP loans disbursed prior to such enactment, the Flexibility Act permits the borrower and lender to mutually agree to extend the term of the loan to five years. CTB actively participated in assisting its customers with applications for resources through the program. PPP loans earn interest at fixed rate of 1%. CTB anticipates that the majority of these loans will ultimately be forgiven by the SBA in accordance with the terms of the program. As of December 31, 2020, we closed 2,962 Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans totaling $277.0 million, stemming from the CARES Act passed by Congress as a stimulus response to the potential economic impacts of COVID-19. The initial phase of the PPP program expired on August 8, 2020, and the loan forgiveness process began shortly thereafter. Through December 31, 2020, we had $18.8 million of our PPP loans forgiven by the SBA. An additional stimulus package, included as part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act 2021, was signed into law in late December providing for an additional $284 billion in funding under the PPP, with authority to make loans under the program being extended through March 31, 2021. CTBI intends to participate in the second round of lending as soon as possible. As of February 15, 2021, CTBI has closed 437 loans totaling $42 million in new PPP loans stemming from the Consolidated Appropriations Act 2021.
Paycheck Protection Program Lending Facility
To provide liquidity to small business lenders and the broader credit markets, to help stabilize the financial system, and to provide economic relief to small businesses nationwide, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the “Federal Reserve Board”) authorized each of the Federal Reserve Banks to participate in the Paycheck Protection Program Lending Facility (the “PPPL Facility”), pursuant to the Federal Reserve Act. Under the PPPL Facility, each of the Federal Reserve Banks was authorized to extend non-recourse loans to eligible financial institutions such as CTB to fund loans guaranteed by the SBA under the PPP. CTB has not accessed funds under the PPPL Facility, but has until March 31, 2021 to do so, unless otherwise extended by the Federal Reserve and the Department of the Treasury.
Loan Modifications and Troubled Debt Restructurings
The CARES Act section 4013, which was signed into law on March 27, 2020, permitted financial institutions to suspend troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”) assessment and reporting requirements under generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) for loan modifications. On April 7, 2020, the Federal Reserve Board, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (the “OCC”), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (the “FDIC” and, together with the Federal Reserve Board and the OCC, the “federal banking regulators”) issued a revised Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions, in response to the CARES Act legislation, which, among other things, encouraged financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers who are or may be unable to meet their contractual payment obligations because of the effects of COVID-19. This guidance stated that institutions generally do not need to categorize COVID-19-related modifications as troubled debt restructurings as long as the loans were not 30 days past due at December 31, 2019 and that the agencies will not direct supervised institutions to automatically categorize all COVID-19 related loan modifications as troubled debt restructurings. This ability to exclude COVID-19-related modifications as troubled debt restructurings, which was set to expire on December 31, 2020, was extended under the Consolidated Appropriations Act 2021 to the earlier of (i) 60 days after the national emergency concerning the COVID-19 outbreak terminates, or (ii) January 1, 2022. See “Results of Operations and Financial Condition” of this MD&A for information relating to COVID-19 loan deferrals.
Regulatory Capital
Current Expected Credit Loss (“CECL”) Methodology. On March 27, 2020, federal banking regulators issued an interim final rule that delays the estimated impact on regulatory capital stemming from the implementation of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) for a transition period of up to five years (the “CECL IFR”). The CECL IFR provided banking organizations that were required (as of January 1, 2020) to adopt CECL for accounting purposes under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles during 2020 an option to delay an estimate of CECL’s impact on regulatory capital. The capital relief in the CECL IFR is calibrated to approximate the difference in allowances under CECL relative to the incurred loss methodology for the first two years of the transition period. The cumulative difference at the end of the second year of the transition period is then phased in to regulatory capital over a three-year transition period. In this way, the CECL IFR gradually phases in the full effect of CECL on regulatory capital, providing a five-year transition period. CTBI adopted CECL effective January 1, 2020 and chose the option to delay the estimated impact on regulatory capital using the relief options described above. See “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Allowance for Credit Losses” of this MD&A for additional information relating to CECL.
Community Bank Leverage Ratio. On April 6, 2020, federal banking regulators issued two interim final rules that made changes to the community bank leverage ratio (“CBLR”) framework and implemented certain directives of the CARES Act. Under the existing CBLR framework, which became effective as of January 1, 2020, community banks and holding companies (which includes CTB and CTBI) that satisfy certain qualifying criteria, including having less than $10 billion in average total consolidated assets and a leverage ratio (referred to as the “community bank leverage ratio”) of greater than 9%, were eligible to opt-in to the CBLR framework. The community bank leverage ratio is the ratio of a banking organization’s Tier 1 capital to its average total consolidated assets, both as reported on the banking organization’s applicable regulatory filings. The first of the April 2020 interim final rules provides that, as of the second quarter 2020, banking organizations with leverage ratios of 8% or greater (and that meet the other existing qualifying criteria) may elect to use the CBLR framework. It also established a two-quarter grace period for qualifying community banking organizations whose leverage ratios fell below the 8% CBLR requirement, so long as the banking organization maintained a leverage ratio of 7% or greater. The second interim final rule provides a transition from the temporary 8% CBLR requirement to a 9% CBLR requirement. It established a minimum CBLR of 8% for the second through fourth quarters of 2020, 8.5% for 2021, and 9% thereafter, and maintained a two-quarter grace period for qualifying community banking organizations whose leverage ratios fell no more than 100 basis points below the applicable CBLR requirement. CTBI elected to use the CBLR framework. Under either framework, CTBI and CTB would be considered well-capitalized under the applicable guidelines. See note 20 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding CTBI’s regulatory capital requirements.
Results of Operations and Financial Condition
We reported earnings of $59.5 million, or $3.35 per basic share, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $64.5 million, or $3.64 per basic share, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
2020 Highlights
❖ Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $6.1 million, or 4.2%, from December 31, 2019 with a 27 basis point decrease in our net interest margin and a $518.2 million increase in average earning assets.
❖ Provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $11.2 million from December 31, 2019.
❖ Our loan portfolio increased $305.5 million, or 9.4%, from December 31, 2019.
❖ Net loan charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $6.2 million, or 0.18% of average loans annualized, compared to $5.6 million, or 0.18%, experienced for the year 2019.
❖ Asset quality improved during the year 2020, as nonperforming loans at $26.6 million decreased $7.0 million, or 20.9%, from December 31, 2019. Nonperforming assets at $34.3 million decreased $18.8 million, or 35.5%, from December 31, 2019.
❖ CTBI experienced significant deposit growth for the year 2020, as deposits, including repurchase agreements, increased $739.5 million, or 20.4%, from December 31, 2019.
❖ Noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 at $54.6 million increased $4.4 million, or 8.7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
❖ Noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.0 million above the year ended December 31, 2019.
COVID-19
We have worked diligently with our customers as we all continue to battle COVID-19. Through December 31, 2020, we processed 3,844 COVID-19 loan deferrals totaling $992 million. These loan deferrals and modifications were executed consistent with the guidelines of the CARES Act. Pursuant to the CARES Act, these loan deferrals are not included in our nonperforming loans.
Our customers have shown improvement in their ability to resume payments as 3,071 (representing $540 million) had resumed payment status at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020 the number of customers with CARES Act deferrals reduced to 410 for a total outstanding amount of $130 million. See below for further detail regarding the types of deferrals received.
CARES Act Loan Deferral Status
We have also participated in the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) as discussed in the COVID-19, the CARES Act, and Related Regulatory Actions section above. Of the 2,962 PPP loans we closed totaling $277.0 million, 2,817 were under $350 thousand, 132 were between $350 thousand and $2.0 million, and 13 were over $2.0 million. See below for additional information related to our PPP loans for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Statement Review
*Yield on average earning assets and net interest margin are computed on a taxable equivalent basis using a 21% tax rate.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $151.0 million increased $6.1 million, or 4.2%, from prior year. Average earning assets for the year 2020 increased $518.2 million over prior year. Our yield on average earning assets for the year 2020 decreased 72 basis points from prior year, as we continue to find limited high yield investment opportunities for our excess liquidity, while our cost of interest bearing funds decreased 60 basis points during the same time period. Our net interest margin for the year 2020 declined 27 basis points from 2019 to 3.33%. We experienced pressure on our net interest margin throughout the year driven by reductions in rates by the Federal Reserve during the first half of 2020 in response to the COVID 19 pandemic. The net interest margin was negatively impacted primarily by the repricing of interest-bearing assets exceeding that of interest-bearing liabilities in the current low rate environment. Average loans to deposits, including repurchase agreements, for the year ended December 31, 2020 were 84.7% compared to 88.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses added to the allowance and charged against current earnings for 2020 of $16.0 million was an $11.2 million increase from prior year. This provision represented the charge necessary to maintain the allowance at an appropriate level determined using the accounting estimates described in the Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates section.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 at $54.6 million increased $4.4 million, or 8.7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in noninterest income from prior year is the result of increases in gains on sales of loans ($5.3 million), securities gains ($1.0 million), and loan related fees ($1.3 million), offset partially by declines in deposit service charges ($2.9 million) and debt redemption gains ($0.2 million). Deposit service charges declined primarily due to the impact to overdraft income of a forgiveness period and higher customer liquidity resulting from the CARES Act.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 at $119.2 million was $1.0 million above the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in noninterest expense year over year included increases in personnel expense ($3.4 million), FDIC insurance premiums ($0.8 million), and data processing expense ($0.5 million), partially offset by declines in net other real estate owned expense ($2.8 million), marketing and promotional expense ($0.3 million), legal fees ($0.3 million), and loan related expense ($0.3 million). Personnel expense was impacted by a $2.4 million charge to post retirement benefits related to our bank owned life insurance as additional liability was recognized for the lower long-term interest rate environment and increased life expectancy in updated mortality tables.
Balance Sheet Review
CTBI’s total assets at $5.1 billion increased $773.1 million, or 17.7%, from December 31, 2019. Loans outstanding at December 31, 2020 were $3.6 billion, increasing $305.5 million, or 9.4%, year over year. We experienced growth during the year of $228.6 million in the commercial loan portfolio, $92.6 million in the indirect loan portfolio, and $4.2 million in the consumer direct loan portfolio, offset partially by a $19.9 million decrease in the residential loan portfolio. Loans held for sale at $23.3 million at December 31, 2020 increased $22.1 million over prior year. The historically low mortgage loan rates have created a significant refinancing boom. During 2020, we closed and delivered 1,960 secondary market mortgage loans for a total of $341.7 million compared to 580 loans totaling $80.5 million in 2019. Correspondingly, our total mortgage servicing portfolio increased by $192.7 million during the year to $639.8 million. CTBI’s investment portfolio increased $397.4 million, or 66.0%, from December 31, 2019. Deposits in other banks increased $78.0 million from December 31, 2019. Deposits, including repurchase agreements, at $4.4 billion increased $739.5 million, or 20.4%, from December 31, 2019.
Shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2020 was $654.9 million, a 6.5% increase from the $614.9 million at December 31, 2019. CTBI’s annualized dividend yield to shareholders as of December 31, 2020 was 4.16%.
Loans
Asset Quality
CTBI’s total nonperforming loans, not including troubled debt restructurings, were $26.6 million, or 0.75% of total loans, at December 31, 2020 compared to $33.6 million, or 1.03% of total loans, at December 31, 2019. Accruing loans 90+ days past due decreased $2.5 million from December 31, 2019. Nonaccrual loans decreased $4.6 million from December 31, 2019. Accruing loans 30-89 days past due at $12.5 million was a decrease of $10.5 million from December 31, 2019. Our loan portfolio management processes focus on the immediate identification, management, and resolution of problem loans to maximize recovery and minimize loss. Our loan portfolio risk management processes include weekly delinquent loan review meetings at the market levels and monthly delinquent loan review meetings involving senior corporate management to review all nonaccrual loans and loans 30 days or more past due. Any activity regarding a criticized/classified loan (i.e. problem loan) must be approved by CTB’s Watch List Asset Committee (i.e. Problem Loan Committee). CTB’s Watch List Asset Committee also meets on a quarterly basis and reviews every criticized/classified loan of $100,000 or greater. CTB’s Loan Portfolio Risk Management Committee also meets quarterly focusing on the overall asset quality and risk metrics of the loan portfolio. We also have a Loan Review Department that reviews every market within CTB annually and performs extensive testing of the loan portfolio to assure the accuracy of loan grades and classifications for delinquency, troubled debt restructuring, nonaccrual status, and adequate loan loss reserves. The Loan Review Department has annually reviewed on average 96% of the outstanding commercial loan portfolio for the past three years. The average annual review percentage of the consumer and residential loan portfolio for the past three years was 86% based on the loan production during the number of months included in the review scope. The review scope is generally four to six months of production. CTBI generally does not offer high risk loans such as option ARM products, high loan to value ratio mortgages, interest-only loans, loans with initial teaser rates, or loans with negative amortizations, and therefore, CTBI would have no significant exposure to these products.
For further information regarding nonperforming loans, see note 4 to the consolidated financial statements.
Our reserve coverage (allowance for credit losses to nonperforming loans) at December 31, 2020 was 180.7% compared to 104.4% at December 31, 2019. Our credit loss reserve as a percentage of total loans outstanding at December 31, 2020 was 1.35%, an increase from the allowance for loan loss reserve incurred loss model of 1.08% from December 31, 2019.
Our level of foreclosed properties at $7.7 million at December 31, 2020 was a decrease of $11.8 million from the $19.5 million at December 31, 2019. Sales of foreclosed properties for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $14.8 million while new foreclosed properties totaled $4.4 million. At December 31, 2020, the book value of properties under contracts to sell was $1.2 million; however, the closings had not occurred at year-end.
When foreclosed properties are acquired, appraisals are obtained and the properties are booked at the current market value less expected sales costs. Additionally, periodic updated appraisals are obtained on unsold foreclosed properties. When an updated appraisal reflects a fair market value below the current book value, a charge is booked to current earnings to reduce the property to its new market value less expected sales costs. Charges to earnings in 2020 to reflect the decrease in current market values of foreclosed properties totaled $1.5 million. Charges during the year ended December 31, 2019 were $4.3 million. Our policy for determining the frequency of periodic reviews is based upon consideration of the specific properties and the known or perceived market fluctuations in a particular market and is typically between 12 and 18 months but generally not more than 24 months. Approximately eighty-six percent of our OREO properties and approximately 89% of the book value of our OREO properties have appraisals dated within the past 18 months.
The appraisal aging analysis of foreclosed properties, as well as the holding period, at December 31, 2020 is shown below:
Regulatory approval is required and has been obtained to hold foreclosed properties beyond the initial period of 5 years. Additionally, CTBI is required to dispose of any foreclosed property that has not been sold within 10 years. As of December 31, 2020, three foreclosed properties with a total book value of $0.2 million had been held by us for at least nine years. One property totaling $6.8 million that had been held for nine years at September 30, 2020 was sold during the fourth quarter 2020.
Net loan charge-offs for the year were $6.2 million, or 0.18% of average loans annualized, an increase from prior year’s $5.6 million, or 0.18% of average loans annualized. Of the total net charge-offs, $3.9 million were in commercial loans, $1.6 million were in indirect auto loans, $0.4 million were in direct consumer loans, and $0.3 million were in residential real estate mortgage loans.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As disclosed in the notes to the consolidated financial statements, we have certain obligations and commitments to make future payments under contracts. At December 31, 2020, the aggregate contractual obligations and commitments are:
*The amounts provided as interest on advances from Federal Home Loan Bank and interest on long-term debt assume the liabilities will not be prepaid and interest is calculated to their individual maturities.
The interest on $57.8 million in long-term debt is calculated based on the three-month LIBOR plus 1.59% until its maturity of June 1, 2037. The three-month LIBOR rate is projected using the most likely rate forecast from assumptions incorporated in the interest rate risk model and is determined two business days prior to the interest payment date. These assumptions are uncertain, and as a result, the actual payments will differ from the projection due to changes in economic conditions.
Commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit do not necessarily represent future cash requirements in that these commitments often expire without being drawn upon. Refer to note 17 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding other commitments.
Liquidity and Market Risk
The objective of CTBI’s Asset/Liability management function is to maintain consistent growth in net interest income within our policy limits. This objective is accomplished through management of our consolidated balance sheet composition, liquidity, and interest rate risk exposures arising from changing economic conditions, interest rates, and customer preferences. The goal of liquidity management is to provide adequate funds to meet changes in loan and lease demand or deposit withdrawals. This is accomplished by maintaining liquid assets in the form of cash and cash equivalents and investment securities, sufficient unused borrowing capacity, and growth in core deposits and wholesale funding (including the use of wholesale brokered deposits). As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $338.2 million in cash and cash equivalents and approximately $997.3 million in securities valued at estimated fair value designated as available-for-sale and available to meet liquidity needs on a continuing basis compared to $264.7 million and $599.8 million at December 31, 2019. Additional asset-driven liquidity is provided by the remainder of the securities portfolio and the repayment of loans. In addition to core deposit funding, we also have a variety of other short-term and long-term funding sources available. At December 31, 2019, we had $37.1 million in brokered deposits with a weighted average maturity of 0.71 years. As of December 31, 2020, we no longer had wholesale brokered deposits outstanding. We also rely on Federal Home Loan Bank advances for both liquidity and management of our asset/liability position. Federal Home Loan Bank advances were $0.4 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had a $477.2 million available borrowing position with the Federal Home Loan Bank compared to $391.9 million at December 31, 2019. We generally rely upon net inflows of cash from financing activities, supplemented by net inflows of cash from operating activities, to provide cash for our investing activities. As is typical of many financial institutions, significant financing activities include deposit gathering, use of short-term borrowing facilities such as repurchase agreements and federal funds purchased, use of wholesale brokered deposits, and issuance of long-term debt. At December 31, 2020, we had $75 million in lines of credit with various correspondent banks available to meet any future cash needs compared to $45 million at December 31, 2019. Our primary investing activities include purchases of securities and loan originations. We do not rely on any one source of liquidity and manage availability in response to changing consolidated balance sheet needs. Included in our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 were deposits with the Federal Reserve of $280.7 million compared to $203.6 million at December 31, 2019. Additionally, we project cash flows from our investment portfolio to generate additional liquidity over the next 90 days.
The investment portfolio consists of investment grade short-term issues suitable for bank investments. The majority of the investment portfolio is in U.S. government and government sponsored agency issuances. At December 31, 2020, available-for-sale (“AFS”) securities comprised all of the total investment portfolio, and the AFS portfolio was approximately 152% of equity capital. Eighty-four percent of the pledge eligible portfolio was pledged.
Interest Rate Risk
We consider interest rate risk one of our most significant market risks. Interest rate risk is the exposure to adverse changes in net interest income due to changes in interest rates. Consistency of our net interest revenue is largely dependent upon the effective management of interest rate risk. We employ a variety of measurement techniques to identify and manage our interest rate risk including the use of an earnings simulation model to analyze net interest income sensitivity to changing interest rates. The model is based on actual cash flows and repricing characteristics for on and off-balance sheet instruments and incorporates market-based assumptions regarding the effect of changing interest rates on the prepayment rates of certain assets and liabilities. Assumptions based on the historical behavior of deposit rates and balances in relation to changes in interest rates are also incorporated into the model. These assumptions are inherently uncertain, and as a result, the model cannot precisely measure net interest income or precisely predict the impact of fluctuations in interest rates on net interest income. Actual results will differ from simulated results due to timing, magnitude, and frequency of interest rate changes as well as changes in market conditions and management strategies.
CTBI’s Asset/Liability Management Committee (ALCO), which includes executive and senior management representatives and reports to the Board of Directors, monitors and manages interest rate risk within Board-approved policy limits. Our current exposure to interest rate risks is determined by measuring the anticipated change in net interest income spread evenly over the twelve-month period.
The following table shows our estimated earnings sensitivity profile as of December 31, 2020:
The following table shows our estimated earnings sensitivity profile as of December 31, 2019:
The simulation model used the yield curve spread evenly over a twelve-month period. The measurement at December 31, 2020 estimates that our net interest income in an up-rate environment would increase by 11.96% at a 400 basis point change, 8.02% increase at a 300 basis point change, 4.76% increase at a 200 basis point change, and a 2.15% increase at a 100 basis point change. In a down-rate environment, net interest income would decrease 0.63% at a 25 basis point change over one year. We actively manage our balance sheet and limit our exposure to long-term fixed rate financial instruments, including loans. In order to reduce the exposure to interest rate fluctuations and to manage liquidity, we have developed sale procedures for several types of interest-sensitive assets. Primarily all long-term, fixed rate single family residential mortgage loans underwritten according to Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation guidelines are sold for cash upon origination or originated under terms where they could be sold. Periodically, additional assets such as commercial loans are also sold. In 2020 and 2019, proceeds of $347.0 million and $94.5 million, respectively, were realized on the sale of fixed rate residential mortgages. We focus our efforts on consistent net interest revenue and net interest margin growth through each of the retail and wholesale business lines. We do not currently engage in trading activities.
The preceding analysis was prepared using a rate ramp analysis which attempts to spread changes evenly over a specified time period as opposed to a rate shock which measures the impact of an immediate change. Had these measurements been prepared using the rate shock method, the results would vary.
Our static repricing gap as of December 31, 2020 is presented below. In the 12 month cumulative repricing gap, rate sensitive liabilities (“RSL”) exceeded rate sensitive assets (“RSA”) by $483.6 million.
Capital Resources
We continue to grow our shareholders’ equity while also providing an annual dividend yield for the year 2020 of 4.16% to shareholders. Shareholders’ equity increased 6.5% from December 31, 2019 to $654.9 million at December 31, 2020. Our primary source of capital growth is the retention of earnings. Cash dividends were $1.53 per share for 2020 compared to $1.48 per share for 2019. We retained 54.3% of our earnings in 2020 compared to 59.3% in 2019.
Insured depository institutions are required to meet certain capital level requirements. On October 29, 2019, federal banking regulators adopted a final rule to simplify the regulatory capital requirements for eligible community banks and holding companies that opt-in to the community bank leverage ratio framework (the “CBLR framework”), as required by Section 201 of the Economic Growth, Relief and Consumer Protection Act of 2018. Under the final rule, which became effective as of January 1, 2020, community banks and holding companies (which includes CTB and CTBI) that satisfy certain qualifying criteria, including having less than $10 billion in average total consolidated assets and a leverage ratio (referred to as the “community bank leverage ratio”) of greater than 9%, were eligible to opt-in to the CBLR framework. The community bank leverage ratio is the ratio of a banking organization’s Tier 1 capital to its average total consolidated assets, both as reported on the banking organization’s applicable regulatory filings. Accordingly, a qualifying community banking organization that has a community bank leverage ratio greater than 9% will be considered to have met: (i) the risk-based and leverage capital requirements of the generally applicable capital rules; (ii) the capital ratio requirements in order to be considered well-capitalized under the prompt corrective action framework; and (iii) any other applicable capital or leverage requirements.
In April 2020, as directed by Section 4012 of the CARES Act, the regulatory agencies introduced temporary changes to the CBLR. These changes, which subsequently were adopted as a final rule, temporarily reduced the CBLR requirement to 8% through the end of calendar year 2020. Beginning in calendar year 2021, the CBLR requirement will increase to 8.5% for the calendar year before returning to 9% in calendar year 2022. The final rule also provides for a two-quarter grace period for qualifying community banking organizations whose leverage ratios fall no more than 100 basis points below the applicable CBLR requirement. Management has elected to use the CBLR framework for CTBI and CTB. Under either framework, CTBI and CTB would be considered well-capitalized under the applicable guidelines. CTBI’s CBLR ratio as of December 31, 2020 was 12.70%. CTB’s CBLR ratio as of December 31, 2020 was 12.13%.
As of December 31, 2020, we are not aware of any current recommendations by banking regulatory authorities which, if they were to be implemented, would have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material adverse impact on our liquidity, capital resources, or operations.
Impact of Inflation, Changing Prices, and Economic Conditions
The majority of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. Therefore, CTBI differs greatly from most commercial and industrial companies that have significant investment in nonmonetary assets, such as fixed assets and inventories. However, inflation does have an important impact on the growth of assets in the banking industry and on the resulting need to increase equity capital at higher than normal rates in order to maintain an appropriate equity to assets ratio. Inflation also affects other expenses, which tend to rise during periods of general inflation.
We believe one of the most significant impacts on financial and operating results is our ability to react to changes in interest rates. We seek to maintain an essentially balanced position between interest rate sensitive assets and liabilities in order to protect against the effects of wide interest rate fluctuations.
We are all finding ourselves living and operating in unprecedented times as the COVID-19 pandemic is causing personal and financial hardship to our customers, employees, and communities. During these challenging times, we have instituted programs to support our customers with loan modifications, forbearance, and fee waivers and participated in programs created by the government stimulus programs like the Paycheck Protection Program, focused on helping small businesses keep their employees and meet their expenses as they are unable to operate due to mandated closures. We instituted programs supporting our employees focused on healthcare, childcare, and remote and split schedule work, as well as work space changes that allow for proper social distancing to keep our employees safe as we continue to operate as a critical part of the economy. We continue to support our communities through donations to non-profit organizations as they strive to continue their commitments of serving those in need. We also continue to manage our company for the long term and our strong capital position and culture of building communities built on trust will facilitate our ability to manage through these challenging times. Our results for 2020 were good, but the extraordinary changes in the economic conditions and the implications of the impact of COVID-19 to the future for our customers had a material impact on our first quarter provision for credit losses. We will continue to serve our constituents while we all meet the challenges of living with COVID-19.
Stock Repurchase Program
CTBI’s stock repurchase program began in December 1998 with the authorization to acquire up to 500,000 shares and was increased by an additional 1,000,000 shares in July 2000, May 2003, and March 2020. CTBI repurchased 32,664 shares of its common stock during the first quarter 2020, leaving 1,034,706 shares remaining under our current repurchase authorization. As of December 31, 2020, a total of 2,465,294 shares have been repurchased through this program. The following table shows Board authorizations and repurchases made through the stock repurchase program for the years 1998 through 2020:
*Repurchased shares and average prices have been restated to reflect stock dividends that have occurred; however, board authorized shares have not been adjusted.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires the appropriate application of certain accounting policies, many of which require us to make estimates and assumptions about future events and their impact on amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes. Since future events and their impact cannot be determined with certainty, the actual results will inevitably differ from our estimates. Such differences could be material to the consolidated financial statements.
We believe the application of accounting policies and the estimates required therein are reasonable. These accounting policies and estimates are constantly reevaluated, and adjustments are made when facts and circumstances dictate a change. Historically, we have found our application of accounting policies to be appropriate, and actual results have not differed materially from those determined using necessary estimates.
Our accounting policies are described in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Investments - Management determines the classification of securities at purchase. We classify debt securities into held-to-maturity, trading, or available-for-sale categories. Held-to-maturity securities are those which we have the positive intent and ability to hold to maturity and are reported at amortized cost. In accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 320, Investments - Debt Securities, investments in debt securities that are not classified as held-to-maturity shall be classified in one of the following categories and measured at fair value in the statement of financial position:
a. Trading securities. Securities that are bought and held principally for the purpose of selling them in the near term (thus held for only a short period of time) shall be classified as trading securities. Trading generally reflects active and frequent buying and selling, and trading securities are generally used with the objective of generating profits on short-term differences in price.
b. Available-for-sale securities. Investments not classified as trading securities (nor as held-to-maturity securities) shall be classified as available-for-sale securities.
We do not have any securities that are classified as trading securities. Available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses included as a separate component of shareholders’ equity, net of tax. If declines in fair value are other than temporary, the carrying value of the securities is written down to fair value as a realized loss with a charge to income for the portion attributable to credit losses and a charge to other comprehensive income for the portion that is not credit related.
Gains or losses on disposition of debt securities are computed by specific identification for those securities. Interest and dividend income, adjusted by amortization of purchase premium or discount, is included in earnings.
With the implementation of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13, commonly referred to as CECL, an allowance will be recognized for credit losses relative to available-for-sale securities rather than as a reduction in the cost basis of the security. Subsequent improvements in credit quality or reductions in estimated credit losses will be recognized immediately as a reversal of the previously recorded allowance, which aligns the income statement recognition of credit losses with the reporting period in which changes occur.
Held-to-maturity (“HTM”) securities will be subject to CECL. CECL will require an allowance on these held-to-maturity debt securities for lifetime expected credit losses, determined by adjusting historical loss information for current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The forward-looking evaluation of lifetime expected losses will be performed on a pooled basis for debt securities that share similar risk characteristics. These allowances for expected losses must be made by the holder of the HTM debt security when the security is purchased. At December 31, 2020, CTBI held no securities designated as held-to-maturity.
CTBI accounts for equity securities in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 321, Investments - Equity Securities. ASC 321 requires equity investments (except those accounted for under the equity method and those that result in the consolidation of the investee) to be measured at fair value, with changes in fair values recognized in net income.
Equity securities with a readily determinable fair value are required to be measured at fair value, with changes in fair value recognized through net income. Equity securities without a readily determinable fair value are carried at cost, less any impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes for identical or similar investments. As permitted by ASC 321-10-35-2, CTBI can make an irrevocable election to subsequently measure an equity security without a readily determinable fair value, and all identical or similar investments of the same issuer, including future purchases of identical or similar investments of the same issuer, at fair value. CTBI has made this election for its Visa Class B equity securities. The fair value of these securities was determined by a third party service provider using Level 3 inputs as defined in ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, and changes in fair value are recognized in income.
Loans - Loans with the ability and the intent to be held until maturity and/or payoff are reported at the carrying value of unpaid principal reduced by unearned interest, an allowance for credit losses, and unamortized deferred fees or costs and premiums. Income is recorded on the level yield basis. Interest accrual is discontinued when management believes, after considering economic and business conditions, collateral value, and collection efforts, that the borrower’s financial condition is such that collection of interest is doubtful. Any loan greater than 90 days past due must be well secured and in the process of collection to continue accruing interest. Cash payments received on nonaccrual loans generally are applied against principal, and interest income is only recorded once principal recovery is reasonably assured. Loans are not reclassified as accruing until principal and interest payments remain current for a period of time, generally six months, and future payments appear reasonably certain. A restructuring of a debt constitutes a troubled debt restructuring if the creditor for economic or legal reasons related to the debtor’s financial difficulties grants a concession to the debtor that it would not otherwise consider.
The provisions of the CARES Act included an election to not apply the guidance on accounting for troubled debt restructurings to loan modifications, such as extensions or deferrals, related to COVID-19 made between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of (i) December 31, 2020 or (ii) 60 days after the end of the COVID-19 national emergency. The relief can only be applied to modifications for borrowers that were not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019. The ability to exclude COVID-19-related modifications as troubled debt restructurings was extended under the Consolidated Appropriations Act 2021 to the earlier of (i) 60 days after the COVID-19 national emergency and (ii) January 1, 2022. CTBI elected to adopt these provisions of the CARES Act, as extended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act 2021.
Loan origination and commitment fees and certain direct loan origination costs are deferred and the net amount amortized over the estimated life of the related loans, leases, or commitments as a yield adjustment.
Allowance for Credit Losses - The Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2016-13 in 2016 which introduced the current expected credit losses methodology (CECL) for estimating allowances for credit losses. This accounting change was effective January 1, 2020. CTBI measures expected credit losses of financial assets on a collective (pool) basis using loss-rate methods when the financial assets share similar risk characteristics. Loans that do not share risk characteristics are evaluated on an individual basis. Regardless of an initial measurement method, once it is determined that foreclosure is probable, the allowance for credit losses is measured based on the fair value of the collateral as of the measurement date. As a practical expedient, the fair value of the collateral may be used for a loan when determining the allowance for credit losses for which the repayment is expected to be provided substantially through the operation or sale of the collateral when the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty. The fair value shall be adjusted for selling costs when foreclosure is probable. For collateral-dependent financial assets, the credit loss expected may be zero if the fair value less costs to sell exceed the amortized cost of the loan. Loans shall not be included in both collective assessments and individual assessments.
In the event that collection of principal becomes uncertain, CTBI has policies in place to reverse accrued interest in a timely manner. Therefore, CTBI elected ASU 2019-04 which allows that accrued interest would continue to be presented separately and not part of amortized cost on loan. The methodology used by CTBI is developed using the current loan balance, which is then compared to amortized cost balances to analyze the impact. The difference in amortized cost basis versus consideration of loan balances impacts the allowance for credit losses calculation by one basis point and is considered immaterial. The primary difference is for indirect lending premiums.
We maintain an allowance for credit losses (“ACL”) at a level that is appropriate to cover estimated credit losses on individually evaluated loans, as well as estimated credit losses inherent in the remainder of the loan and lease portfolio. Credit losses are charged and recoveries are credited to the ACL.
We utilize an internal risk grading system for commercial credits. Those credits that meet the following criteria are subject to individual evaluation: the loan has an outstanding bank share balance of $1 million or greater and (i) has a criticized risk rating, (ii) is in nonaccrual status, (iii) is a TDR, or (iv) is 90 days or more past due. The borrower’s cash flow, adequacy of collateral coverage, and other options available to CTBI, including legal remedies, are evaluated. We evaluate the collectability of both principal and interest when assessing the need for loss provision. Historical loss rates are analyzed and applied to other commercial loan segments not subject to individual evaluation.
Homogenous loans, such as consumer installment, residential mortgages, and home equity lines are not individually risk graded. The associated ACL for these loans is measured in pools with similar risk characteristics under ASC 326.
When any secured commercial loan is considered uncollectable, whether past due or not, a current assessment of the value of the underlying collateral is made. If the balance of the loan exceeds the fair value of the collateral, the loan is placed on nonaccrual and the loan is charged down to the value of the collateral less estimated cost to sell. For commercial loans greater than $1 million and classified as criticized, troubled debt restructuring, or nonaccrual, a specific reserve is established if a loss is determined to be possible and then charged-off once it is probable. When the foreclosed collateral has been legally assigned to CTBI, the estimated fair value of the collateral less costs to sell is then transferred to other real estate owned or other repossessed assets, and a charge-off is taken for any remaining balance. When any unsecured commercial loan is considered uncollectable the loan is charged off no later than at 90 days past due.
All closed-end consumer loans (excluding conventional 1-4 family residential loans and installment and revolving loans secured by real estate) are charged off no later than 120 days (5 monthly payments) delinquent. If a loan is considered uncollectable, it is charged off earlier than 120 days delinquent. For conventional 1-4 family residential loans and installment and revolving loans secured by real estate, when a loan is 90 days past due, a current assessment of the value of the real estate is made. If the balance of the loan exceeds the fair value of the property, the loan is placed on nonaccrual. Foreclosure proceedings are normally initiated after 120 days. When the foreclosed property has been legally assigned to CTBI, the fair value less estimated costs to sell is transferred to other real estate owned and the remaining balance is taken as a charge-off.
Historical loss rates for loans are adjusted for significant factors that, in management’s judgment, reflect the impact of any current conditions on loss recognition. With the implementation of ASC 326, weighted average life (“WAL”) calculations were completed as a tool to determine the life of CTBI’s various loan segments. Vintage modeling was used to determine the life of loan losses for consumer and residential real estate loans. Static pool modeling was used to determine the life of loan losses for commercial loan segments. Qualitative factors used to derive CTBI’s total ACL include delinquency trends, current economic conditions and trends, strength of supervision and administration of the loan portfolio, levels of underperforming loans, trends in loan losses, and underwriting exceptions. With the implementation of ASC 326, forecasting factors including unemployment rates and industry specific forecasts for industries in which our total exposure is 5% of capital or greater are also included as factors in the ACL model. Management continually reevaluates the other subjective factors included in its ACL analysis.
Other Real Estate Owned - When foreclosed properties are acquired, appraisals are obtained and the properties are booked at the current fair market value less expected sales costs. Additionally, periodic updated appraisals are obtained on unsold foreclosed properties. When an updated appraisal reflects a fair market value below the current book value, a charge is booked to current earnings to reduce the property to its new fair market value less expected sales costs. Our policy for determining the frequency of periodic reviews is based upon consideration of the specific properties and the known or perceived market fluctuations in a particular market and is typically between 12 and 18 months but generally not more than 24 months. All revenues and expenses related to the carrying of other real estate owned are recognized through the income statement.
Income Taxes - Income tax expense is based on the taxes due on the consolidated tax return plus deferred taxes based on the expected future tax benefits and consequences of temporary differences between carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities, using enacted tax rates. Any interest and penalties incurred in connection with income taxes are recorded as a component of income tax expense in the consolidated financial statements. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, CTBI has not recognized a significant amount of interest expense or penalties in connection with income taxes.