Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
This annual report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements made by the management of Computer Task Group, Incorporated (“CTG,” the “Company” or the “Registrant”) that are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. These forward-looking statements are based on information as of the date of this report. The Company assumes no obligation to update these statements based on information from and after the date of this report. Generally, forward-looking statements include words or phrases such as “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “projects,” “could,” “may,” “might,” “should,” “will” and words and phrases of similar impact. The forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements regarding future operations, industry trends or conditions and the business environment, and statements regarding future levels of or trends in business strategy and expectations, new business opportunities, cost control initiatives, business wins, market demand, revenue, operating expenses, capital expenditures, and financing. The forward-looking statements are made pursuant to safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Numerous factors could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements, including the following: (i) the availability to CTG of qualified professional staff, (ii) domestic and foreign industry competition for clients and talent, including technical, sales and management personnel, (iii) increased bargaining power of large clients, (iv) the Company's ability to protect confidential client data, (v) the partial or complete loss of the revenue the Company generates from International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) and other significant clients, (vi) the uncertainty of clients' implementations of cost reduction projects, (vii) the effect of healthcare reform and initiatives, (viii) the mix of revenue between staffing and solutions, (ix) currency exchange risks, (x) risks associated with operating in foreign jurisdictions, (xi) renegotiations, nullification, or breaches of contracts with clients, vendors, subcontractors or other parties, (xii) the impact of current and future laws and government regulation, as well as repeal or modification of such, affecting the information technology (IT) solutions and staffing industry, taxes and the Company's operations in particular, (xiii) industry and economic conditions, including fluctuations in demand for IT services, (xiv) consolidation among the Company's competitors or clients, (xv) the need to supplement or change our IT services in response to new offerings in the industry or changes in client requirements for IT products and solutions, (xvi) the risks associated with acquisitions, (xvii) actions of activist shareholders, (xviii) the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the regulatory, social, and business responses thereto on the Company’s business, operations, employees, contractors, and clients, and (xix) the risks described in Item 1A of the Company’s most recently filed annual report on Form 10-K, and from time to time, in the Company's reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Industry Trends
The market demand for the Company’s services is heavily dependent on information and technology-related spending by major corporations, organizations and government entities in the markets and regions that we serve. The pace of technology advances, changes in business requirements, and the practices of our clients all have a significant impact on the demand for the services we provide. Competition for new engagements and pricing pressure has been strong as there are numerous competitors. The demand for the Company's information and technology-related solutions business, primarily in our healthcare vertical market in North America, improved in 2018 and 2019. In 2020, demand was significantly reduced, primarily in our staffing business, as the COVID-19 global pandemic (“Pandemic”) had a significant negative impact on the economies of the countries and the markets we serve. To offset this decrease in demand, the Company took action to reduce its expenses, including a full-time furlough for certain employees and a 20% furlough for nearly all other non-billable employees, including the senior management team. This furlough was in place for about six months, and ended with the close of the Company’s fiscal third quarter.
The Company also actively participated in government-sponsored programs in its European operations, including Belgium, France and Luxembourg, that partially reimbursed the Company for the costs of employees that were made idle by the Pandemic. This primarily included employees that were previously billable on an engagement, but the client made a decision to stop or end a project prior to completion. The Company is continuing to participate in these programs, but the benefit to the Company’s European operations was diminished subsequent to August 2020 as the respective governments reduced the reimbursement under these programs at that time. The Company believes that if these employees had remained billable throughout 2020, the revenue they would have generated would have approximated the reimbursements received from the various governments.
The Company operates in one industry segment, providing information technology and related services to its clients. These services include information and technology-related solutions, including supplemental staffing as a solution. With solution services, the Company generally takes responsibility for the deliverables and some level of project and staff management, and services may include high-end advisory or business-related consulting. When providing staffing services, including managed staffing, staff augmentation, and volume staffing, personnel are provided to clients, who then, in turn, take their direction from the clients’ managers.
IT solutions and IT and other staffing revenue as a percentage of consolidated revenue for the three years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 is as follows:
The Company provides a majority of its services in five vertical market focus areas: technology service providers, financial services, healthcare (which includes services provided to healthcare providers, health insurers (payers), and life sciences companies), manufacturing, and energy. The remainder of CTG’s revenue is derived from general markets.
CTG’s revenue by vertical market as a percentage of consolidated revenue for the three years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 is as follows:
The IT services industry is extremely competitive and characterized by continuous changes in client requirements and improvements in technologies. Our competition varies significantly by geographic region, as well as by the type of service provided. Many of our competitors are larger than CTG, and have greater financial, technical, sales, and marketing resources. In addition, the Company frequently competes with a client’s own internal IT staff. Our industry is impacted by the growing use of lower-cost offshore delivery capabilities (primarily India and other parts of Asia). There can be no assurance that we will be able to continue to compete successfully with existing or future competitors or that future competition will not have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when control of the promised good or service is transferred to clients in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. For time-and-material contracts, revenue is recognized as hours are incurred and costs are expended. For contracts with progress billing schedules, primarily monthly, revenue is recognized as services are rendered to the client. Revenue for fixed-price contracts is recognized over time using an input-based approach. Over time revenue recognition best portrays the Company’s performance in transferring control of the goods or services to the client. On most fixed price contracts, revenue recognition is supported through contractual clauses that require the client to pay for work performed to date, including cost plus a reasonable profit margin, for goods or services that have no alternative use to the Company. On certain contracts, revenue recognition is supported through contractual clauses that indicate the client controls the asset, or work in process, as the Company creates or enhances the asset. On a given project, actual salary and indirect labor costs incurred are measured and compared with the total estimate of costs of such items at the completion of the project. Revenue is recognized based upon the percentage-of-completion calculation of total incurred costs to total estimated costs. The Company infrequently works on fixed-price projects that include significant amounts of material or other non-labor related costs that could distort the percent complete within a percentage-of-completion calculation. The Company’s estimate of the total labor costs it expects to incur over the term of the contract is based on the nature of the project and our experience on similar projects, and includes management judgments and estimates that affect the amount of revenue recognized on fixed-price contracts in any accounting period. Losses on fixed-price projects are recorded when identified
The Company’s revenue from contracts accounted for under time-and-material, progress billing, and percentage-of-completion methods as a percentage of consolidated revenue for the three years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 is as follows:
Results of Operations
The table below sets forth percentage information calculated as a percentage of consolidated revenue as reported on the Company’s consolidated statements of operations as included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this report.
2020 as compared with 2019
The Company recorded revenue in 2020 and 2019 as follows:
The Company’s strategy throughout its operations is to expand the amount of IT solutions services it provides to its clients as compared with IT staffing services, and to focus on delivering digital solutions. IT Solutions provide significant value to our clients, and drive higher bill rates and margins for the Company. Our existing solutions include business, technology, and operations solutions that aid our clients in digitally transforming their company, and ultimately meet the needs of their clients. The digital services the Company delivers includes the Internet of Things, Intelligent Automation, Data and Analytics, Cloud and Automated Testing.
The revenue decrease in North America in 2020 as compared with 2019 was primarily due to a significant decrease in demand for the Company's IT staffing business due to the impact the Pandemic had on the economies in the markets we serve. Additionally, the Company continues to disengage from its lowest margin staffing services as part of its strategy. Demand in some areas of our IT solutions business, primarily in our healthcare vertical market, also declined driven by the impact of the Pandemic. The revenue increase in Europe was primarily due to strong demand for the Company’s services in the European markets we serve, and the acquisition of StarDust on March 3, 2020, which at the time of acquisition had estimated annual revenue of approximately $6 million. Reimbursable expenses billed to clients and included in revenue totaled $1.9 million and $2.6 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
On a consolidated basis, IT solutions revenue decreased $3.0 million or 2.1% in 2020 as compared with 2019. The decrease is primarily due to a decrease in IT solutions services in North America in our healthcare vertical market. In our European operations, IT solutions revenue remained strong and was complemented by the acquisition of StarDust, a company that provides crowd testing and quality assurance services in France and Canada. As a percentage of consolidated revenue, IT solutions revenue increased 2.0% to 37.8% of total revenue.
Also on a consolidated basis, IT and other staffing revenue decreased $25.1 million or 9.9% during 2020 as compared with 2019. The IT staffing revenue decrease was again primarily due to a significant decrease in demand resulting from the Pandemic. Additionally, given the Company’s strategic focus on becoming a digital solutions company, starting in the second half of 2019 the Company critically evaluated each significant staffing engagement as it came up for renewal to determine if the Company would continue to provide those services to its client. These decisions are based on, among other factors, critically evaluating the work performed, the availability of the resources, the client, the long-term opportunities for the services provided at the client, and the revenue and profit associated with the engagement. The Company made a decision to disengage from several small engagements and a large staffing engagement late in 2019. While these decisions negatively affected revenue during 2020, the Company believes the reallocation of resources away from these engagements to other higher margin, IT solutions services will positively impact the Company’s operations in the long-term, and aid in the execution of the strategy to become a digital transformation solution provider.
Following the acquisition of CTG France (formerly Soft Company) in 2018, which relies heavily on billable subcontractors (non-employees), the Company revised how it defines and calculates headcount in order to report all billable consultants, including both employees and subcontractors. Accordingly, the Company’s total headcount was approximately 3,900 at December 31, 2020, which was a 1.3% decrease from approximately 3,950 at December 31, 2019. Approximately 91% of this headcount is for technical resources and 9% for support positions.
The increase in revenue in the Company’s European operations in 2020 as compared with 2019 was in part due to the strength relative to the U.S. dollar of the currencies in Belgium, Luxembourg, France, and the United Kingdom, the countries in which the Company’s European subsidiaries operate. In Belgium, Luxembourg, and France, the functional currency is the Euro, while in the United Kingdom the functional currency is the British Pound. In 2020 as compared with 2019, the average value of the Euro increased 2.0%, and the average value of the British Pound increased 0.5%. A significant portion of the Company's revenue from its European operations is recorded in Belgium, Luxembourg, and France. Had there been no change in these exchange rates from 2019 to 2020, total European revenue would have been approximately $3.0 million lower, or $158.8 million as compared with the $161.8 million reported. When considering the year-over-year change in revenue in constant currencies, revenue from our European operations increased 5.1%. Operating income was positively impacted by $0.1 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 given the increase in the exchange rates year-over-year.
The Company continues to monitor the impact that the United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union (Brexit) has had on its operations. To date, there has been a nominal impact on the Company’s operating results from Brexit. As the total revenue generated by our British subsidiary is immaterial as compared with the Company’s total consolidated revenue, we do not expect the nominal impact the exit has had on the Company’s operations to date to change in the foreseeable future.
International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) was CTG’s largest client and accounted for $77.5 million or 21.2% and $84.9 million or 21.5% of the Company’s consolidated revenue in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The National Technical Services Agreement with IBM was renewed and now expires on October 27, 2023. As part of the National Technical Services Agreement, the Company provides its services as a predominant supplier primarily to IBM’s Integrated Technology Services and the Systems and Technology Group business units. This agreement accounted for approximately 66% of all of the services provided to IBM by the Company in 2020. The Company’s accounts receivable from IBM at December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaled $11.3 million and $23.0 million, respectively.
We expect to continue to derive a significant portion of our revenue from IBM in future years; however, a significant decline or the loss of the revenue from this client would have a significant negative effect on our operating results. No other client accounted for more than 10% of the Company’s revenue in 2020 or 2019.
Direct costs, defined as costs for billable staff including billable out-of-pocket expenses, were 79.0% and 80.9% of consolidated revenue in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, direct costs as a percentage of revenue fell as the Company’s strategy to focus on selling IT solutions, which has lower direct costs as a percentage of revenue, had an increasing impact on the Company’s overall financial results as the percentage of solutions revenue grew. Additionally, the decision to disengage from a large, low margin staffing engagement, as well as other smaller engagements late in 2019, had a modest impact on the year’s direct cost percentage.
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses were 18.5% of revenue in 2020 as compared with 17.3% of revenue in 2019. The increase in SG&A expenses as a percentage of revenue in 2020 as compared with 2019 is primarily due to the loss of operating leverage from lower revenue, and the continued investment in business development, solutions, recruiting and marketing that support IT solutions services in order to focus on the Company’s long-term growth.
Operating income was 2.5% of revenue in 2020 as compared with 1.8% of revenue in 2019. Operating income from the North American operations was $0.6 million in 2020 after allocations of $1.8 million to foreign operations, compared
with operating income of $2.3 million in 2019 after allocations of $1.6 million. Operating income from our European operations was $8.5 million in 2020 after allocations of $1.8 million from our North American operations, compared with $4.6 million in 2019 after allocations of $1.6 million.
Other income (expense) was 0.4% of revenue in 2020 and (0.2)% of revenue in 2019. In 2020, the Company recorded non-taxable life insurance gains of approximately $1.0 million as two of its former executives passed away, and gains of approximately $0.8 million from the sale of a building.
The Company’s effective tax rate (ETR) is calculated based upon the full year's operating results and various tax related items. The ETR in 2020 was 28.3%, while the 2019 ETR was 34.4%. The ETR in 2020 was impacted by a number of items, including non-taxable life insurance gains, a one-time tax benefit of approximately $0.08 per share for a change in tax legislation, offset by higher effective tax rates in the Company’s European operations where the Company generated most of its income in 2020.
Net income for 2020 was 2.1% of revenue or $0.53 per diluted share, compared with 1.0% of revenue or $0.29 per diluted share in 2019. Diluted earnings per share were calculated using 14.4 million weighted-average equivalent shares outstanding in 2020 and 14.0 million in 2019.
2019 as compared with 2018
The Company recorded revenue in 2019 and 2018 as follows:
The revenue increase in North America in 2019 as compared with 2018 was primarily due to a significant increase in demand for the Company's IT solutions business, primarily in our healthcare vertical market, and a modest increase in demand for our IT and other staffing business, primarily in our technology services provider vertical market. The revenue increase in Europe is primarily due to strong demand for the Company’s services in the European markets we serve, and the acquisition of Tech-IT on February 6, 2019, which at the time of acquisition had estimated annual revenue of approximately $20 million. Reimbursable expenses billed to clients and included in revenue totaled $2.6 million and $3.2 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
On a consolidated basis, IT solutions revenue increased $28.2 million or 24.9% in 2019 as compared with 2018. The increase was primarily due to an increase in IT solutions services in both North America and Europe and the addition of Tech-IT, which conducts its operations in Luxembourg. In North America, we continue to shift our focus to IT solutions services, as the profit on those engagements is significantly higher than the profit on our IT staffing services. In our European operations, greater than 50% of the services we provide to clients are IT solutions, and those operations have consistently grown organically at a rate that far exceeds the growth rate for IT services of 3-5% in the markets in which we conduct business. The acquisition of Tech-IT expanded our IT solutions services by adding software and hardware services, including consulting, infrastructure and software design and development, infrastructure integration, project management, and training.
Also on a consolidated basis, IT and other staffing revenue increased $7.2 million or 2.9% during 2019 as compared with 2018. The IT staffing revenue increase was primarily due to growth in IT staffing in North America with our largest client, IBM.
Additionally, given the Company’s strategic focus on becoming a more solutions-centric company, a decision was made, starting in the second half of 2019, to critically evaluate each significant staffing engagement as it comes up for renewal to determine if the Company wants to continue to provide those services to its client. Those decisions are based on, among other factors, critically evaluating the work performed, the availability of the resources, the client, the long-term opportunities for the service provided at the client, and the revenue and profit associated with the engagement. Accordingly, the Company made a decision to disengage from several small engagements and a large staffing engagement late in 2019. While these decisions negatively affected revenue during 2020, the Company believes the reallocation of resources away from these engagements to other higher margin, IT solutions services will positively impact the Company in the long-term, and aid in the transformation to a more solutions-centric IT services provider.
Following the acquisition of CTG France (Soft Company) in 2018, which relies heavily on billable subcontractors (non-employees), we revised how we define and calculate headcount in order to report all billable consultants, including both employees and subcontractors. Accordingly, the Company’s billable consultants were approximately 3,950 at December 31, 2019, which was a 4.8% decrease from approximately 4,150 billable consultants at December 31, 2018. Approximately 91% of this headcount was for technical resources and 9% for support positions. The decrease in headcount year-over-year was due to disengaging from several IT staffing projects late in 2019.
The significant increase in revenue in the Company’s European operations in 2019 as compared with 2018 was due to an increase in demand for the Company’s IT solutions services across a number of the vertical markets we serve. The weakness relative to the U.S. dollar of the currencies in Belgium, Luxembourg, France, and the United Kingdom, the countries in which the Company’s European subsidiaries operate, offset this significant increase. In Belgium, Luxembourg, and France, the functional currency is the Euro, while in the United Kingdom the functional currency is the British Pound. In 2019 as compared with 2018, the average value of the Euro decreased 5.2%, and the average value of the British Pound decreased 4.3%. A significant portion of the Company's revenue from its European operations is recorded in Belgium, Luxembourg, and France. Had there been no change in these exchange rates from 2018 to 2019, total European revenue would have been approximately $8.4 million higher, or $160.3 million as compared with the $152.0 million reported. When considering the year-over-year change in revenue in constant currencies, revenue from our European operations increased 27.2%. Operating income was negatively impacted by $0.3 million in 2019 as compared with 2018 given the decrease in the exchange rates year-over-year.
The Company continues to assess the potential impact, if any, that the United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union will have its operations. As the total revenue generated by our British subsidiary is immaterial when compared with the Company’s total consolidated revenue, we do not expect the impact of the pending exit to have a material impact on the Company’s operations, and we have not experienced any material impact to date.
International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) was CTG’s largest client and accounted for $84.9 million or 21.5% and $80.6 million or 22.5% of the Company’s consolidated revenue in 2019 and 2018, respectively. At December 31, 2019, the National Technical Services Agreement with IBM was extended for four months to May 1, 2020. The contract extension was later signed in 2020, and now expires in October 2023. As part of the National Technical Services Agreement, the Company provides its services as a predominant supplier primarily to IBM’s Integrated Technology Services and the Systems and Technology Group business units. This agreement accounted for approximately 70% of all of the services provided to IBM by the Company in 2019. The Company’s accounts receivable from IBM at December 31, 2019 and 2018 totaled $23.0 million and $22.1 million, respectively. No other client accounted for more than 10% of the Company’s revenue in 2019 or 2018.
Direct costs, defined as costs for billable staff including billable out-of-pocket expenses, were 80.9% of consolidated revenue in both 2019 and 2018. In 2019, direct costs as a percentage of revenue fell throughout the year from a high of 81.8% in the first quarter to a low of 79.6% in the fourth quarter as the Company’s strategy to focus on selling IT solutions had an increasing impact on the Company’s financial results as the year went on. Additionally, the decision to disengage from a large, low margin staffing engagement, as well as other smaller engagements late in 2019, had a modest impact on the year’s direct cost percentage.
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses were 17.3% of revenue in 2019 as compared with 18.5% of revenue in 2018. The decrease in SG&A expenses as a percentage of revenue in 2019 as compared with 2018 was primarily due to a concerted effort to reduce certain support costs while continuing to invest in sales and other resources that support IT solutions services in order to focus on the Company’s long-term growth. Additionally, SG&A in 2019 included acquisition-related costs of $2.3 million, primarily the amortization of intangible assets resulting from our recent acquisitions. SG&A in 2018 includes acquisition-related costs totaling $2.0 million, and $0.7 million in severance.
Operating income was 1.8% of revenue in 2019 as compared with 0.6% of revenue in 2018. Operating income from the North American operations was $0.8 million in 2019 before allocations of $1.6 million to foreign operations, compared with a loss of $2.4 million in 2018 before allocations of $0.9 million. The 2018 loss was impacted by investments in business development, recruiting, and marketing, totaling approximately $3.5 million.
Operating income from our European operations was $6.1 million in 2019 before allocations of $1.6 million from our North American operations, compared with $6.3 million in 2018 before allocations of $0.9 million.
Other income (expense) was (0.2)% of revenue in 2019 and 0.1% of revenue in 2018. In 2018, the Company recorded a non-taxable life insurance gain of approximately $0.8 million as one of its former executives passed away.
The Company’s effective tax rate (ETR) is calculated based upon the full year's operating results and various tax related items. The ETR in 2019 was 34.4%, while the 2018 ETR was 224.2%.
The ETR in 2019 was impacted as a large portion of the Company’s profits result from the Company’s European operations where the effective tax rates are generally higher than in the U.S. Additionally, the ETR was higher in 2019 primarily due to non-deductible acquisition costs related to the Tech-IT and Soft Company acquisitions.
The ETR was high in 2018 primarily due to the Company recording a valuation allowance for its deferred tax assets in the U.S. totaling $3.8 million as the Company had recurring pre-tax losses in recent years and uncertainty as to income in future years. The Company also incurred approximately $0.7 million of tax associated with the GILTI provisions of the 2017 Tax Cut and Jobs Act, and $0.3 million of tax from non-deductible acquisition-related costs in our European operations. These items, which caused additional tax expense, were offset by a non-taxable life insurance gain, the reversal of the valuation for deferred tax assets in the United Kingdom, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act which reduced the US federal corporate tax rate to 21%, and tax benefits for the Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC) and Research and Development tax credit (R&D).
Net income for 2019 was 1.0% of revenue or $0.29 per diluted share, compared with net loss of (0.8)% of revenue or $(0.20) per diluted share in 2018. Diluted earnings per share were calculated using 14.0 million weighted-average equivalent shares outstanding in 2019 and 13.8 million in 2018.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires the Company’s management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. The Company’s significant accounting policies are included in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K under Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” These policies, along with the underlying assumptions and judgments made by the Company’s management in their application, have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements. The Company identifies its most critical accounting policies as those that are the most pervasive and important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial position and results of operations, and that require the most difficult, subjective and/or complex judgments by management regarding estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. The Company’s critical accounting policies are related to the valuation allowance for deferred income taxes, and the valuation of goodwill.
Income Taxes-Valuation Allowances on Deferred Tax Assets
At December 31, 2020, the Company had a total of approximately $0.4 million of deferred tax assets, and approximately $2.2 million of deferred tax liabilities recorded on its consolidated balance sheet. The deferred tax assets, net, primarily consist of deferred compensation, loss carryforwards, and state taxes. The changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities from period to period are determined based upon the changes in the differences between the basis of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the basis of assets and liabilities for tax purposes, as measured by the enacted tax rates when these differences are estimated to reverse. The Company has made certain assumptions regarding the timing of the reversal of these assets and liabilities, and whether taxable income in future periods will be sufficient to recognize all or a part of any gross deferred tax asset of the Company.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had deferred tax assets recorded resulting from net operating losses in previous years totaling approximately $0.4 million. The Company has analyzed each jurisdiction’s tax position, including forecasting potential taxable income in future periods and the expiration of the net operating loss carryforwards as applicable, and determined that it is unclear whether all of these deferred tax assets will be realized at any point in the future. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, the Company had offset a portion of these assets with a valuation allowance totaling approximately $0.2 million, resulting in a net deferred tax asset from net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $0.2 million.
In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers, within each taxing jurisdiction, whether it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will be realized, or that a valuation allowance is required. Management considers all available evidence, both positive and negative, in assessing realizability of its deferred tax assets. A key component of this assessment is management’s critical evaluation of current and future impacts of business and economic factors on the Company’s ability to generate future taxable income. Factors that may affect the Company’s ability to generate taxable income include, but are not limited to increased competition, a decline in revenue or margins, a loss of market share, the availability of qualified professional staff, and a decrease in demand for
the Company’s services. The Company had a total of $5.2 million of deferred tax assets in its North American operations that were fully offset by a valuation allowance at December 31, 2020.
The Company’s deferred tax assets and their potential realizability are evaluated each quarter to determine if any changes should be made to the valuation allowance. Any change in the valuation allowance in the future could result in a change in the Company’s ETR. A 1% change in the ETR in 2020 would have increased or decreased net income by approximately $107,000, or less than $0.01 per diluted share.
Goodwill Valuation
As of December 31, 2020, goodwill recorded on the Company's consolidated balance sheet totaled $21.3 million, which relates to the acquisitions completed by the Company in 2018, 2019, and 2020. The acquisition of Soft Company in 2018 and StarDust in 2020 are in the France reporting unit, while the 2019 acquisition of Tech-IT is in the Luxembourg reporting unit. In connection with our annual goodwill impairment test, we make various assumptions to determine the estimated fair value of the reporting units to which the goodwill relates. We perform the annual impairment review in the fourth quarter of each year.
The goodwill impairment test is performed at least annually, unless indicators of an impairment exist in interim periods. The Company compared the estimated fair value of a reporting unit with goodwill to its carrying value. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit’s goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of its goodwill, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess.
As of October 2020 fiscal month-end, we performed our annual goodwill impairment test in conjunction with an external consultant and estimated the fair value of our reporting units based on a combination of the income (estimates of future discounted cash flows) and the market approach (market multiples for similar companies). The income approach uses a discounted cash flow (DCF) method that utilizes the present value of cash flows to estimate fair value of the reporting unit. The future cash flows for the reporting units were projected based upon on our estimates of future revenue, operating income and other factors such as working capital and capital expenditures. As part of our projections, we took into account expected industry and market conditions for the industries in which the reporting units operate, as well as trends currently impacting the reporting units. The market approach utilizes multiples of earnings before interest expense, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) to estimate the fair value of the reporting unit. The market multiples used for our reporting units were based on competitor industry data, along with the market multiples for the Company and other factors.
As part of our DCF analysis, we projected revenue and operating profits, and assumed a long-term revenue growth rates in the “terminal year” for both of the reporting units. We also utilized a weighted-average cost of capital (WACC) of 16.0% for the France reporting unit and 15.0% for the Luxembourg reporting unit. The carrying value as of October 2020 was approximately $17.6 million and $13.2 million for the France and Luxembourg reporting units, respectively.
Finally, we compared our estimates of fair value to the consolidated Company’s October 2020 month-end total public market capitalization, which included factoring in the business operations that do not have goodwill, and assessed implied control premiums. Based on the results of this analysis, we concluded that the estimated fair value determined under our approach for the annual goodwill impairment test for our France and Luxembourg reporting units was reasonable.
We concluded that the goodwill assigned to the France and Luxembourg reporting units as of October 2020 were not impaired. However, the estimates and assumptions on which the Company’s evaluations are based involve judgments and are based on current available information, any of which could prove wrong or inaccurate when made, or become wrong or inaccurate as a result of subsequent events. In the event the business significantly under achieves its goals for revenue and profit growth in the future, the carrying value for this business unit may not be supportable using a discounted cash flow projection, and an impairment charge may exist.
Other Estimates
The Company has also made a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of its assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities to prepare the consolidated financial statements pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, the FASB, and other regulatory authorities. Such estimates primarily relate to the valuation of stock options for recording equity-based compensation expense, allowances for doubtful accounts receivable, investment valuation, discount rates associated with pension plans, incurred but not reported healthcare claims, acquisition and related accounting, legal matters, and estimates of progress toward completion and direct profit or loss on contracts, as applicable. As future events and their effect on the Company's operating results cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ from these estimates. Changes in the economic climates in which the Company operates may affect these estimates and will be reflected in the Company’s financial statements in the event they occur.
Financial Condition and Liquidity
Cash provided by (used in) operating activities was $30.7 million, $8.5 million, and $(0.3) million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. In 2020, net income was $7.6 million, while other non-cash adjustments, primarily consisting of depreciation and amortization expense, equity-based compensation, deferred income taxes, non-taxable life insurance gains, a gain from a sale of a building, impairment of capitalized software, and deferred compensation totaled $4.4 million. In 2019 and 2018, net income (loss) was $4.1 million and $(2.8) million, respectively, while the corresponding non-cash adjustments netted to $4.3 million and $6.3 million, respectively.
Accounts receivable balances decreased $17.0 million in 2020 as compared with 2019, increased $3.6 million in 2019 as compared with 2018, and increased $8.7 million in 2018 as compared with 2017. The decrease in the accounts receivable balance in 2020 resulted from a decrease in the Company’s days sales outstanding (DSO) as compared with 2019. DSO is calculated by dividing accounts receivable obtained from the consolidated balance sheet by average daily revenue for the fourth quarter of the respective year. DSO was 74 days at December 31, 2020 as compared with 85 days December 31, 2019. The decrease in DSO was primarily driven by the Company entering into an arrangement with its largest customer to factor outstanding receivables, which decreases the time of payment from 90 days to as little as 15 days based upon the Company’s direction. DSO was 85 days at December 31, 2019 as compared with DSO at December 31, 2018 of 82 days.
The cash surrender value of life insurance policies decreased $0.7 million in 2020, decreased $1.0 million in 2019, and increased $1.4 million in 2018. The increase or decrease in each of the years was due to normal appreciation of the existing cash surrender value of the outstanding policies at each respective point in time, which in turn was reduced by the benefits paid upon the death of former executives in 2020 (two) and 2018 (one). Accounts payable decreased $0.6 million in 2020, increased $3.9 million in 2019, and increased less than 0.1 million in 2018. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due to the timing of certain payments near year-end, while the increase in 2019 was primarily due to the growth in the size of the Company and the timing of payments made near year-end. Accrued compensation decreased $3.1 million in 2020 primarily due to the US operations reducing its payroll lag from two weeks in 2019 to one week in 2020, and increased $2.2 million in 2019 primarily due to significant growth in the Company’s operations and higher incentives for 2019 paid early in 2020. Accrued compensation increased $2.6 million in 2018 primarily due to significant growth in the Company’s operations and headcount. Income taxes receivable increased by $1.3 million in 2020 due to a change in tax legislation which created a one-time benefit of approximately $1.1 million, and increased $0.2 million in 2019 due to refunds received from the federal government and higher taxable income. Income taxes receivable decreased $0.5 million in 2018 due to refunds received from the federal government. Deferred payroll taxes increased $6.7 million in 2020. The increase was due to the Company’s participation in a U.S. government program that allows companies under the CARES ACT to defer the payment of the employer portion of payroll taxes until 2021 and 2022. Advance billings increased $1.3 million in 2020, decreased $2.8 million in 2019, and increased $0.2 million in 2018. The change in advance billings in any given period is determined by the nature and type of existing projects, and the advance payments, if any, associated with those projects.
Investing activities used $5.0 million, $11.5 million, and $12.6 million of cash in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Cash paid for the acquisition of StarDust, net of cash acquired, was approximately $4.3 million. In 2019, net cash paid for the acquisition of Tech-IT totaled $8.5 million, while in 2018, cash paid for the acquisition of Soft Company was $13.8 million. The Company also used cash for additions to property, equipment and capitalized software of $2.9 million in 2020, $2.4 million in 2019, and $2.2 million in 2018. The Company expects the amount to be spent in 2021 on additions to property, equipment and capitalized software to be similar to the amount spent in 2020. The Company has no material commitments for future capital expenditures. The Company received approximately $1.8 million of proceeds from the sale of its corporate administrative building in the first quarter of 2018. As the carrying value of the building was $1.6 million, the Company recorded a gain of $0.1 million after applicable fees. During the 2020 second quarter, the Company sold its
remaining owned real estate for $2.5 million. As the book value of the building was approximately $1.6 million, the Company recorded a gain of approximately $0.8 million, after fees. The Company paid premiums for life insurance totaling $0.6 million in both 2020 and 2019, and $0.7 million for life insurance in 2018. The Company received a total of $0.4 million of proceeds from life insurance policies on former executives in the 2020. Net cash received from the Company's deferred compensation plans was less than $0.1 million in 2020, and $0.2 million in 2019 and 2018.
Financing activities provided (used) $(5.7) million, $1.8 million, and $14.6 million of cash in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Net cash received (paid) under the Company’s revolving credit agreement was $(5.3) million in 2020, $1.7 million in 2019, and $(0.8) million in 2018. Payments made to taxing authorities that represent the value of shares withheld for taxes in employee equity-based compensation transactions totaled $0.2 million in both 2020 and 2019, and $0.3 million in 2018. Cash overdrafts relate to the amount of outstanding checks at a point in time, and netted to $(0.4) million, less than $0.1 million, and $(0.5) million in the 2020, 2019, and 2018 periods, respectively. In 2018, the Company borrowed $29.3 million against the cash surrender value of its life insurance policies, primarily to return capital to shareholders through the “Dutch Auction” tender offer, fund the acquisition of Soft Company, and for general working capital purposes. The Company also used $14.9 million to purchase 1,767,000 shares for treasury under its buyback program in the 2018 period, including 1,530,990 shares purchased under the “Dutch Auction” tender offer in the 2018 second quarter. As of December 31, 2020, $7.7 million was available under the Company's authorization to purchase shares in future periods. The Company recorded $0.0 million, $0.1 million, and $1.8 million during 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, from the proceeds from stock option exercises.
No dividends were paid in 2020, 2019, or 2018.
The Company’s Credit and Security Agreement provides for a three-year revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $45.0 million, including a sublimit of $10.0 million for letters of credit.
The Credit and Security Agreement expires in December 2022, and has interest rates ranging from 150 to
200 basis points over LIBOR or the greater of (i) the prime rate, (ii) the federal funds effective rate plus 50 basis points, and (iii) adjusted LIBOR plus 100 basis points plus a spread ranging from 50 to 100 basis points based on the amounts outstanding under the Credit and Security Agreement. The Company can borrow under the agreement with either rate at its discretion.
There was $0.0 million, $5.3 million, and $3.6 million outstanding under the Company’s lines of credit at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The Company borrows or repays its debt as needed based upon its working capital obligations, including the timing of the U.S. bi-weekly payroll.
The maximum amount outstanding under its credit agreements in 2020, 2019, and 2018 was $12.0 million, $22.3 million, and $12.8 million, respectively. The average amounts outstanding during 2020, 2019, and 2018 were $6.4 million, $10.4 million, and $4.1 million, respectively, and carried weighted-average interest rates of 1.9%, 2.8%, and 3.4%, respectively. Total commitment fees incurred in 2020 totaled $0.2 million, and $0.3 million in both 2019 and 2018, while interest paid in 2020 totaled $0.2 million, $0.4 million in 2019, and $0.2 million in 2018.
Under the Credit and Security Agreement, the Company is required to meet certain financial covenants in order to maintain borrowings under its revolving credit line, pay dividends, and make acquisitions. The covenants are measured quarterly, and at December 31, 2020, included a fixed charge coverage ratio, which must be less than 1.10 to 1.00, consolidated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA), adjusted for equity-based compensation and severance expense, must be no less than $5.0 million for the trailing twelve months, and capital expenditures for property, plant, equipment, and capitalized software must be no more than $5.0 million in any annual period. The fixed charge coverage ratio is only tested if availability on a measurement date is less than approximately $5.6 million. Actual borrowings by CTG under the Credit and Security Agreement are subject to a borrowing base, which is a formula based on certain eligible receivables and reserves. Total availability as of December 31, 2020 was approximately $21.2 million. The Company was in compliance with these covenants at December 31, 2020 as EBITDA, as defined above, was $15.4 million and capital expenditures for property, equipment and capitalized software were $2.0 million in 2020. The Company was also in compliance with its covenants at December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018.
Of the total cash and cash equivalents reported on the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020 of $32.9 million, approximately $26.3 million is held by the Company’s foreign operations and is considered to be indefinitely reinvested in those operations. The Company has not repatriated any of its cash and cash equivalents from its foreign operations in the past five years, and has no intention of doing so in the foreseeable future as the funds are generally required to meet the working capital needs of its foreign operations.
At December 31, 2020, the Company believes existing internally available funds, cash potentially generated from future operations, and funds potentially available under the Company's revolving line of credit (subject to collateral limits) totaling $20.0 million, will be sufficient to meet foreseeable working capital and capital expenditure needs, fund stock repurchases, pay a dividend (if any), fund acquisitions, and allow for future internal growth and expansion.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company did not have off-balance sheet arrangements or transactions in 2020, 2019, and 2018 other than guarantees in our European operations which support office leases and performance under government contracts. These guarantees totaled approximately $3.2 million at December 31, 2020. Also, the Company has purchase obligations in 2021, 2022, and 2023 for certain software, recruiting and other services totaling $2.5 million.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
The Company’s primary market risk exposure consists of foreign currency exchange risk associated with the Company’s European operations. See Item 7A, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk” in this report.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842),” which sets out the principles for the recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of leases for both parties to a contract (i.e. lessees and lessors). The new standard requires lessees to apply a dual approach, classifying leases as either finance or operating leases based on the principle of whether or not the lease is effectively a financed purchase by the lessee. This classification will determine whether lease expense is recognized based on an effective interest method or on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease, respectively. A lessee is also required to record a right-of-use asset and a lease liability for all leases with a term of greater than 12 months regardless of their classification. Leases with a term of 12 months or less will be accounted for similar to existing guidance for operating leases today. Topic 842 supersedes the previous leases standard, ASC 840, Leases. This guidance is effective for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018. On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted the new lease standard using the modified retrospective transition approach and elected the transition method to apply the new lease standard as of the January 1, 2019 adoption date. Results for the reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2019 are presented under Topic 842, while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with accounting under Topic 840. In addition, the Company elected the package of practical expedients, which permits the Company not to reassess under the new standard prior conclusions about lease identification, lease classification, and initial direct costs. The Company has also elected the practical expedient to separate lease and non-lease components for its office leases and has elected to group lease and non-lease components for its vehicle leases. Upon adoption of Topic 842 on January 1, 2019, the Company recorded approximately $13.1 million of operating lease right-of-use assets and lease liabilities. The adoption of Topic 842 did not have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income (loss), or its consolidated statements of cash flows. The new lease standard does not affect the Company’s compliance with financial covenants associated with its Credit and Security Agreement.
In January 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-02, “Income Statement - Reporting Comprehensive Income (Topic 220): Reclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (AOCI)”, which gives entities the option to reclassify to retained earnings the tax effects resulting from the Act related to items in AOCI that the FASB refers to as having been stranded in AOCI. The guidance required new disclosures regarding a company’s accounting policy for releasing the tax effects in AOCI and permit the company the option to reclassify to retained earnings the tax effects resulting from the Act that are stranded in AOCI. The Company reclassified approximately $0.3 million to retained earnings due to the adoption of ASU 2018-02 in the 2018 fourth quarter.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, “Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments”, which requires the immediate recognition of estimated credit losses expected to occur over the remaining life of many financial assets, including trade receivables. The allowance for credit losses will be the difference between the amortized cost balance of a financial asset and the amount of amortized cost expected to be collected over the remaining contractual life. When determining the allowance, expected credit losses over the contractual term of the financial assets will be estimated considering relevant information about past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of the reported amount. Subsequent changes in the allowance will be recorded through the income statement as an expense adjustment. This guidance is effective for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019; however, early adoption is permitted. The Company adopted the new credit loss standard on January 1, 2020. The Company estimated its allowance for credit losses by pooling assets with similar risk characteristics, reviewing historical losses within the last five years and taking into consideration any reasonable supportable forecasts of
future economic conditions. The Company cannot guarantee that the rate of future credit losses will be similar to past experience, but considers all available information when assessing the adequacy of its allowance for credit losses each quarter. As the impact from this standard on the Company was immaterial, no adjustment was made to the beginning retained earnings balance.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04,”Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment”, which simplifies how an entity is required to test goodwill for impairment by eliminating Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. This guidance is effective for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019; however, early adoption is permitted. The Company adopted the new standard on January 1, 2020 for the year ending December 31, 2020 on a prospective basis and the adoption did not have a material impact on the Company’s operations.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, “Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That Is a Service Contract”, which helps entities evaluate the accounting for fees paid in a cloud computing arrangement (hosting arrangement) by providing guidance for determining when the arrangement includes a software license. This guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019; however, early adoption is permitted. The Company adopted the new standard on January 1, 2020 for the year ending December 31, 2020 on a prospective basis and the adoption did not have a material impact on the Company’s operations.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-14, "Compensation - Retirement Benefits - Defined Benefit Plans - General (Subtopic 715-20)". The amendments in this update modify the disclosure requirements for employers that sponsor defined benefit pension or other post-retirement plans by removing disclosures that no longer are considered cost beneficial, clarifying the specific requirements of disclosures, and adding disclosure requirements identified as relevant. The new ASU is effective for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2020, and early adoption is permitted. The Company adopted this new standard retrospectively for the year ending December 31, 2020, and the adoption did not have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements and associated disclosures.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04, “Reference Rate Reform - Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting,” which provides optional expedients and exceptions for accounting contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions affected by reference rate reform if certain criteria are met. The amendments apply only to contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions that reference the London Interbank Offering Rate (“LIBOR”) or another reference rate expected to be discontinued due to the reference rate reform. It is effective for all entities between March 12, 2020 and December 31, 2022. The Company does not expect a significant impact from the adoption of this standard as provisions have been made in our Credit and Security Agreement to use an alternate benchmark interest rate when the use of LIBOR is discontinued.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes.” Among other clarifications and simplifications related to income tax accounting, the new standard simplifies the accounting for income taxes by eliminating certain exceptions related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period, hybrid taxes and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. ASU 2019-12 is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. Early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently reviewing the provisions of this new pronouncement, but does not expect adoption of this guidance to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.
Contractual Obligations
The Company intends to satisfy its contractual obligations from operating cash flows, and, if necessary, from draws on its demand credit line. A summary of the Company’s contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 is as follows:
A
On December 21, 2017, the Company entered into the Credit and Security Agreement which provides for a three-year revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $45.0 million. The agreement was amended on December 23, 2019 for three years and now expires in December 2022. The Company uses this Credit and Security Agreement to fund its working capital obligations as needed, primarily funding the U.S. bi-weekly payroll. There were no borrowings outstanding under the Credit and Security Agreement as of December 31, 2020.
B
Operating lease obligations relate to the rental of office space, office equipment, and automobiles leased by the Company. Total rental expense under operating leases in 2020, 2019, and 2018 was approximately $6.4 million, $6.8 million, and $6.6 million, respectively.
C
The Company’s purchase obligations in 2021, 2022 and 2023 total approximately $2.5 million, including $1.1 million for software maintenance, support and related fees, $0.3 million for telecommunications, $0.3 million for recruiting services, $0.3 million for professional organization memberships, and $0.5 million for computer-based training courses.
D
The Company is committed to the Executive Supplemental Benefit Plan (ESBP) in the U.S. that provides certain former key executives with deferred compensation benefits. The ESBP was amended as of November 30, 1994 to freeze benefits for participants at that time. At December 31, 2020, 14 individuals were receiving benefits under this plan. The ESBP is deemed to be unfunded as the Company has not specifically identified Company assets to be used to discharge the deferred compensation benefit liabilities.
E
The Company retained a contributory defined-benefit plan for its previous employees located in the Netherlands when the Company disposed of its subsidiary, CTG Nederland B.V. This plan was curtailed on January 1, 2003 for additional contributions. The Company does not anticipate making additional contributions to fund the plan in future years.
F
The Company maintains a fully funded pension plan for its CTG Belgium and CTG Health Solutions (Belgium) employees. The Company will continue to make contributions to fund the plan as needed in future years.
G
As a result of the acquisition of Soft Company on February 15, 2018, the Company maintains an unfunded pension plan related to the current Soft Company employees (FDBP). The Company will make payments as needed in the future.
H
The Company has other long-term liabilities including payments for a postretirement benefit plan for several retired employees and their spouses, totaling fewer than 10 participants.
I
The Company has a contingent consideration liability related to an earn-out provision of which a portion will be payable in each period subject to the achievement by StarDust of certain consolidated direct profit targets for fiscal years 2020 and 2021. The Company expects to pay $0.4 million related to the achievement of these targets for fiscal year 2020 and $0.1 million related to fiscal year 2021.