Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes and other information included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
The Company was formed on September 1, 2010 as a Delaware corporation. The Company engages in exploration for gold, silver, and copper ores in Alaska. The Company's largest asset is a 30.0% membership interest in Peak Gold, LLC, which leases approximately 675,000 acres from the Tetlin Tribal Council and owns approximately 13,000 State of Alaska mining claims for exploration and development through its wholly-owned subsidiary, CORE Alaska, LLC. The Company’s wholly-owned subsidiary, Contango MineralsAlaska, LLC, owns 100% interest in the mineral rights to approximately 200,000 acres of State of Alaska mining claims located north and northwest of the Manh Choh Joint Venture Property. As of June 30, 2021 the Company had approximately $35.2 million in cash and is actively working to acquire additional properties in Alaska for exploration. The acquisitions may include leases or similar rights from Alaska Native corporations or may include filing Federal or State of Alaska mining claims by staking claims for exploration.
Neither the Company nor the Joint Venture Company has commenced mining or producing commercially marketable minerals. To date, neither the Company nor the Joint Venture Company has generated any revenue from mineral sales or operations. Neither the Company nor the Joint Venture Company has any recurring source of revenue other than the Company and Royal Gold’s contributions to the Joint Venture Company. The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise capital to fund future exploration and working capital requirements. In the future, the Joint Venture Company may generate revenue from a combination of mineral sales and other payments resulting from any commercially recoverable minerals from the Manh Choh Joint Venture Property. The Company does not expect the Joint Venture Company to generate revenue from mineral sales in the foreseeable future. If the Manh Choh Joint Venture Property fails to contain any proven reserves, the Company’s ability to generate future revenue, and the Company’s results of operations and financial position, would be materially adversely affected. Other potential sources of cash, or relief of demand for cash, include external debt, the sale of shares of the Company’s stock, joint ventures, or alternative methods such as mergers or sale of our assets. No assurances can be given, however, that the Company will be able to obtain any of these potential sources of cash. The Company will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability and the Company may never do so.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were $10,362,281 and $5,594,995, respectively. Current year general and administrative expense primarily relates to audit fees, legal fees, management fees, payroll, and stock-based compensation expense. The current year increase is the result of non-recurring legal and transaction related fees associated with the CORE Transactions, 2020 Private Placement, the 2021 Private Placement, and other strategic corporate activities of approximately $3.2 million and payroll and benefit related fees of $1.2 million. Payroll and benefit related fees increased because in December 2020, the Company added two new employees, and the Company’s executives that previously provided services to the Company via the Management Services Agreement with JEX, began receiving compensation and benefits directly from the Company, and the management fee under the Management Services Agreement with JEX was reduced. The Company also paid its executives bonuses totaling $0.5 million in December 2020. We recognized $3.9 million and $3.4 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to restricted stock and options granted to our officers and directors in December 2020, January 2020, November 2019, November 2018, November 2017, November 2016, August 2016, September 2015, and November 2014 all pursuant to either the Amended Equity Plan or the 2010 Plan.
Loss from Equity Investment in the Joint Venture Company. The loss from the Company’s equity investment in the Joint Venture Company for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was $3,861,252 and $3,720,000, respectively. Pursuant to the terms of the A&R JV LLCA, the Company and KG Mining are required to jointly fund the joint venture operations in proportion to their membership interests in the Joint Venture Company to avoid dilution. The Company invested $3,861,252 in the Joint Venture Company during the year ended June 30, 2021, and $3,720,000 during the year ended June 30, 2020. The portion of the cumulative loss that exceeds the Company’s cumulative investment will be suspended and recognized against earnings, if any, from the Company’s investment in the Joint Venture Company in future periods. The suspended losses for the period from inception to June 30, 2021 are $23.0 million.
Gain on Sale of a Portion of the Investment in the Joint Venture Company. The Company recorded the $32.4 million cash proceeds and the 809,744 shares of Common Stock, received from the CORE Transactions, at fair value and recognized a gain on sale of $39.6 million. The Company valued the Common Stock consideration from the CORE Transactions consistent with the accounting guidance for non-monetary exchanges. The stock consideration was valued based on the implied fair value of the CORE Transactions in total less the cash proceeds. The total value of the CORE Transactions was equated to the value of the Company's 30.0% ownership in the Joint Venture Company, post the 30.0% membership interest transferred to KG Mining. As of the date of the CORE Transaction, the Company's investment in the Joint Venture Company had a zero balance, therefore the $39.6 million gain approximates the full fair value of the CORE JV Interest surrendered in the CORE Transactions.
Income Tax Benefit/(Expense). The Company recognized an income tax expense of $1.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to $0 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The Company is forecasting book and taxable income for the year ended June 30, 2021, as a result of the income driven by the gain on the sale of the CORE JV Interest in connection with the Kinross Transactions in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021. All subsequent quarters of fiscal year 2021 had a net loss. The Company had a net loss in all quarters of fiscal year June 30, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the formation of the Joint Venture Company, the Company’s primary cash requirements were for exploration-related expenses. Since the formation of the Joint Venture Company, the Company’s primary cash requirements have been for general and administrative expenses and capital calls from the Joint Venture Company for the Manh Choh Property. Prior to the Kinross Transactions, the Company’s sources of cash have been from Common Stock offerings. In conjunction with the Kinross Transactions, the Company received $32.4 million and 809,744 shares of the Company’s Common Stock. The 809,744 shares of Common Stock were acquired by KG Mining from Royal Gold, as part of the Royal Gold Transactions and were subsequently canceled by the Company. Of the $32.4 million cash consideration, $1.2 million constituted a reimbursement prepayment to the Company of its proportionate share of certain silver royalty payments that the Joint Venture Company may be obligated to pay to Royal Gold, with the understanding that KG Mining will bear the entire impact of those royalty payments due from the Joint Venture Company.
As of June 30, 2021, the Company had approximately $35.2 million of cash. On December 10, 2020, the Management Committee approved a total budget of $18.0 million for the calendar year 2021 to undertake in-fill drilling, engineering and environmental studies necessary to complete a feasibility-level study, additional exploration, community relations, and to prepare the project for formal permitting. On June 22, 2021 the Management Committee voted to increase the exploration budget by $0.2 million for interpretation of archive drilling, adopting oriented core and geological consulting. The Company’s proportionate share of the approved budget is approximately $5.5 million. As of June 30, 2021, the Company has funded approximately $2.5 million to the Joint Venture Company during calendar year 2021. In addition, the Company plans to fund an approximately $3.0 million exploration program to continue its exploration efforts on its earlier stage Eagle and Hona projects located immediately north of the Manh Choh project area, and to explore for additional resources on 100%-owned Triple Z prospect in late 2021, focused on the areas immediately adjacent to the known Joint Venture Company resources. Due to cash received in the Kinross Transaction and the capital raise completed in September 2020, the Company believes that it has sufficient liquidity to meet its working capital requirements for the next twelve months. The Company’s cash needs going forward will primarily relate to capital calls from the Joint Venture Company, exploration of the Contango Property, and general and administrative expenses of the Company. If a large budget is undertaken, and no additional financing is obtained, the Company can elect not to fund its portion of the approved budget, in which case the Company would maintain sufficient liquidity to meet its working capital requirements for the next twelve months.
The Company entered into Stock Purchase Agreements dated as of June 14, and June 17, 2021 (the “Purchase Agreements”) for the sale of an aggregate of 523,809 shares of Common Stock at a purchase price of $21.00 per share of Common Stock, in a private placement (the “2021 Private Placement”) to certain accredited investors. The 2021 Private Placement closed on June 17 and 18, 2021. The 2021 Private Placement resulted in approximately $11.0 million of gross proceeds and approximately $10.9 million of net proceeds to the Company. The Company will use the net proceeds from the 2021 Private Placement to fund its exploration and development program and for general corporate purposes. The shares sold in the 2021 Private Placement were issued in reliance on an exemption from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, pursuant to Section 4(a)(2) thereof. The bases for the availability of this exemption include the facts that the issuance was a private transaction which did not involve a public offering and the shares were offered and sold to a limited number of purchasers. Rick Van Nieuwenhuyse, the Company’s President and Chief Executive Officer, purchased 47,619 shares of Common Stock, for a purchase price of approximately $1,000,000, in the 2021 Private Placement pursuant to a Purchase Agreement dated June 17, 2021, on the same terms and conditions as all other purchasers, except that Mr. Nieuwenhuyse did not receive any of the rights under the Registration Rights Agreement. The 2021 Private Placement to Mr. Nieuwenhuyse closed on June 18, 2021. The Audit Committee of the Company has reviewed and approved all agreements and arrangements relating to Mr. Van Nieuwenhuyse’s participation in the 2021 Private Placement.
On September 23, 2020, the Company completed the issuance and sale of an aggregate of 247,172 shares of the Company’s Common Stock in a private placement (the “2020 Private Placement”) to certain purchasers who are accredited investors. The shares of the Common Stock were sold at a price of $13.25 per share, resulting in gross proceeds to the Company of approximately $3.3 million and net proceeds to the Company of approximately $3.2 million. The Company will use the net proceeds from the 2020 Private Placement for working capital purposes and for funding future obligations to the Joint Venture Company and Contango Minerals. Petrie Partners Securities, LLC (“Petrie”) acted as the sole placement agent in connection with the 2020 Private Placement and received a placement agent fee equal to 3.25% of the gross proceeds raised from the subscribers whom they solicited, or a total of approximately $50,000 in placement agent fees. Petrie has provided to the Company in the past and may provide from time to time in the future certain securities offering, financial advisory, investment banking and other services for which it has received and may continue to receive customary fees and commissions. The shares sold in the 2020 Private Placement were issued in reliance on an exemption from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, pursuant to Section 4(a)(2) thereof. The bases for the availability of this exemption include the facts that the issuance was a private transaction, which did not involve a public offering and the shares were offered and sold to a limited number of purchasers. The Company’s President and Chief Executive Officer, Rick Van Nieuwenhuyse, purchased 75,472 of shares of Common Stock in the 2020 Private Placement, for total consideration of $1.0 million, on the same terms and conditions as all other Purchasers. The Audit Committee of the Company has reviewed and approved all agreements and arrangements relating to Mr. Van Nieuwenhuyse’s participation in the 2020 Private Placement.
KG Mining became the Manager of the Joint Venture Company in conjunction with the Kinross Transactions and the signing of the A&R JV LLCA. Pursuant to the terms of the A&R JV LLCA, the Company and KG Mining are required to jointly fund the joint venture operations in proportion to their membership interests in the Joint Venture Company. If a member elects not to contribute to an approved program and budget or contributes less than its proportionate membership interest, its percentage membership interest will be reduced. The Company’s ability to contribute funds sufficient to retain its membership interests in the Joint Venture Company may be limited. To date, neither the Company nor the Joint Venture Company has generated any revenue from mineral sales or operations. In the future, the Joint Venture Company may generate revenue from a combination of mineral sales and other payments resulting from any commercially recoverable minerals from the Manh Choh Joint Venture Property. The Company currently does not have any recurring source of revenue. The Joint Venture Company currently does not have any recurring source of revenue, and its only source of cash inflows are contributions received from KG Mining and the Company. As a result, the Company’s ability to contribute funds to the Joint Venture Company and retain its membership interest will depend on its ability to raise capital. The Company has limited financial resources and the ability of the Company to arrange additional financing in the future will depend, in part, on the prevailing capital market conditions, the exploration results achieved at the Manh Choh Joint Venture Property, as well as the market price of metals. The Company cannot be certain that financing will be available to the Company on acceptable terms, if at all. If the Company were unable to fund its contributions to the approved programs and budgets for the Joint Venture Company, its membership interest in the Joint Venture Company would be diluted.
Further financing by the Company may include issuances of equity, instruments convertible into equity (such as warrants) or various forms of debt. The Company believes that it is likely that it will raise capital through the issuance of additional equity securities in the next six months for purposes of funding its proportionate share of future Joint Venture Company exploration and for the Company’s operating costs. The Company has issued Common Stock and other instruments convertible into equity in the past and cannot predict the size or price of any future issuances of Common Stock or other instruments convertible into equity, and the effect, if any, that such future issuances and sales will have on the market price of the Company’s securities. Any additional issuances of Common Stock or securities convertible into, or exercisable or exchangeable for, Common Stock may ultimately result in dilution to the holders of Common Stock, dilution in any future earnings per share of the Company and may have a material adverse effect upon the market price of the Common Stock of the Company.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None
Contractual Obligations
The Tetlin Lease had an initial ten year term beginning July 2008 which was extended for an additional ten years to July 15, 2028, or so long as the Joint Venture Company initiates and continues to conduct mining operations on the Tetlin Lease. The Joint Venture Company was required to spend $350,000 per year annually until July 15, 2018 in exploration costs pursuant to the Tetlin Lease. Exploration expenditures to date under the Tetlin Lease have satisfied this work commitment requirement for the full lease term, through 2028, because exploration funds spent in any year in excess of $350,000 are credited toward future years’ exploration cost requirements. The Tetlin Lease also provides that the Joint Venture Company will pay the Tetlin Tribal Council a production royalty ranging from 3.0% to 5.0% should the Joint Venture Company deliver to a purchaser on a commercial basis precious or non-precious metals derived from the properties under the Tetlin Lease. The Company had previously paid the Tetlin Tribal Council $225,000 in exchange for reducing the production royalty payable to them by 0.75%. These payments lowered the production royalty to a range of 2.25% to 4.25%. The Tetlin Tribal Council had the option to increase its production royalty by (i) 0.25% by payment to the Joint Venture Company of $150,000, (ii) 0.50% by payment to the Joint Venture Company of $300,000, or (iii) 0.75% by payment to the Joint Venture Company of $450,000. The Tetlin Tribal Council exercised the option to increase its production royalty by 0.75% by payment to the Joint Venture Company of $450,000 on December 30, 2020. In lieu of a cash payment, the $450,000 will be credited against future production royalty and advance minimum royalty payments due by the Joint Venture Company to the Tetlin Tribal Council under the lease once production begins.
On January 8, 2015, the Company assigned the Tetlin Lease to the Joint Venture Company in connection with the formation of the Joint Venture Company.
Until such time as production royalties begin, the Joint Venture Company will pay the Tetlin Tribal Council an advance minimum royalty of approximately $75,000 per year, plus an inflation adjustment. Additionally, the Joint Venture Company will pay Royal Gold an overriding royalty of 3.0% should it deliver to a purchaser on a commercial basis gold or associated minerals derived from the Tetlin Lease, and a 28.0% net smelter returns silver royalty on all silver produced from a defined area within the Tetlin Lease. The Company will pay Royal Gold an overriding royalty of 3.0% on certain State of Alaska mining claims should it deliver to a purchaser on a commercial basis precious metals, non-precious metals or hydrocarbons. The Company pays claim rentals on State of Alaska mining claims which vary based on the ages of the claims. For the 2020-2021 assessment year, claims rentals totaled $349,955. Also, if the minimum work requirement is not performed on the property, additional minimum labor payments are due on certain state of Alaska acreage.
In February 2019, the Company entered into Retention Agreements with its then-Chief Executive Officer, Brad Juneau, its Chief Financial Officer, Leah Gaines, and one other employee providing for payments in an aggregate amount of $1,500,000 upon the occurrence of certain conditions. The Retention Agreements, as amended, are triggered upon a change of control (as defined in the applicable Retention Agreement), that takes place prior to August 6, 2025, provided that the recipient is employed by the Company when the change of control occurs. Mr. Juneau and Ms. Gaines will receive a payment of $1,000,000 and $250,000, respectively, upon a change of control.
On June 10, 2020, the Company entered into a Retention Payment Agreement with Rick Van Nieuwenhuyse, the Company’s President and Chief Executive Officer, providing for a payment in an amount of $350,000 upon the occurrence of certain conditions. The Retention Payment Agreement is triggered upon a change of control (as defined in the Retention Payment Agreement) which occurs on or prior to August 6, 2025, provided that Mr. Van Nieuwenhuyse is employed by the Company when the change of control occurs.
The Company received $32.4 million in cash consideration in conjunction with the Kinross Transactions. Of the $32.4 million, $1.2 million constituted a reimbursement prepayment to the Company relating to its proportionate share of certain silver royalty payments that the Joint Venture Company may be obligated to pay to Royal Gold, with the understanding that KG Mining will bear the entire economic impact of those royalty payments due from the Joint Venture Company. Pursuant to Article IV of the A&R JV LLCA, if the Joint Venture Company is dissolved, or the Company’s membership interest in the Joint Venture Company falls below 5% prior to when the prepaid royalty is paid out, the $1.2 million (less any portion already paid out) is refundable to KG Mining.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Management’s Estimates
The discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations is based upon the consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. The Company has identified below the policies that are of particular importance to the portrayal of the Company's financial position and results of operations and which require the application of significant judgment by management. The Company analyzes its estimates, including those related to its mineral reserve estimates, on a periodic basis and bases its estimates on historical experience, independent third-party engineers and various other assumptions that management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company believes the following critical accounting policies affect its more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements:
Stock-Based Compensation. The Company applies the fair value method of accounting for stock-based compensation. Under this method, compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized over the award vesting period. The Company classifies the benefits of tax deductions in excess of the compensation cost recognized for the options (excess tax benefit) as financing cash flows. The fair value of each option award is estimated as of the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of each restricted stock award is equal to the Company’s stock price on the date the award is granted.
Investment in the Joint Venture Company. The Company’s consolidated financial statements include the investment in the Joint Venture Company, which is accounted for under the equity method. The Company has designated one of the three members of the Management Committee and on June 30, 2021, held a 30.0% ownership interest in the Joint Venture Company. The Company recorded its investment at the historical cost of the assets contributed. The cumulative losses of the Joint Venture Company exceed the historical cost of the assets contributed to the Joint Venture Company, therefore the Company’s investment in the Joint Venture Company as of June 30, 2021 is zero. The portion of the cumulative loss that exceeds the Company’s investment will be suspended and recognized against earnings, if any, from the investment in the Joint Venture Company in future periods. The audited financial statements of the Joint Venture Company as of and for the six months ended December 31, 2020 are filed as an exhibit to this Form 10-K.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements. See “Part II. Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.