Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, future financial performance, expense levels and liquidity sources, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Risk Factors” section of this report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the acquisition, development and commercialization of novel targeted therapies for blood-related cancers that offer a unique benefit to patients and their healthcare providers. Our goal is to build a profitable company by generating income from products we develop and commercialize, either alone or with partners. We concentrate our efforts on treatments that target blood-related cancers where there is an unmet medical need. In particular, we are focused on evaluating pacritinib, our sole product candidate currently in active development, for the treatment of adult patients with myelofibrosis. In addition, we have recently started developing pacritinib for use in hospitalized patients with severe COVID-19, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Pacritinib is an investigational oral kinase inhibitor with specificity for JAK2, IRAK1 and CSF1R. The JAK family of enzymes is a central component in signal transduction pathways, which are critical to normal blood cell growth and development, as well as inflammatory cytokine expression and immune responses. Mutations in these kinases have been shown to be directly related to the development of a variety of blood-related cancers, including myeloproliferative neoplasms, leukemia and lymphoma. In addition to myelofibrosis, the kinase profile of pacritinib suggests its potential therapeutic utility in conditions such as acute myeloid leukemia, or AML, myelodysplastic syndrome, or MDS, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, or CMML, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, or CLL, due to its inhibition of JAK2, IRAK1, FLT3 and CSF1R. We believe pacritinib has the potential to be delivered as a single agent or in combination therapy regimens.
We have historically funded our operations through the sale of equity securities, funding received from our licensees and collaborators and debt financing. We do not expect to achieve or sustain profitability for the foreseeable future. We had a net loss of $52.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and an accumulated deficit of $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2020, primarily from expenses incurred in connection with our research programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
We have incurred significant operating losses to date and expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for at least the next 12 to 24 months. We anticipate that our expenses will increase as we:
•continue our research and clinical development of pacritinib;
•seek regulatory and marketing approvals for pacritinib if we successfully complete the remainder of its anticipated clinical development paths;
•maintain, protect and expand our intellectual property portfolio; and
•prepare for and execute the commercialization of pacritinib.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Research and Development Activities
We will need to commit significant time and resources to develop our current and any future product candidates. Our sole product candidate currently in active development, pacritinib, is currently in clinical development in two clinical trial pathways. Many drugs in human clinical trials fail to demonstrate the desired safety and efficacy characteristics. We are unable
to provide the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts necessary to complete the development of pacritinib because, among other reasons, we cannot predict with any certainty the pace of patient enrollment of our clinical trials, which is a function of many factors, including the availability and proximity of patients with the relevant condition and the availability of the compounds for use in the applicable trials. We rely on third parties to conduct clinical trials, which may result in delays or failure to complete trials if the third parties fail to perform or meet applicable standards.
Additionally, we continue to evaluate and manage the impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic on our operations and the conduct of our clinical trials, including considerations of the vulnerable nature of the patient population participating in our trials, reduced or halted activities at our clinical trial sites, and an increase in fatalities or other adverse events due to medical problems related to the COVID-19 global pandemic and the benefits of continued patient access to pacritinib. Even after a clinical trial is enrolled, preclinical and clinical data can be interpreted in different ways, which could delay, limit or preclude regulatory approval and advancement of this compound through the development process.
Regulatory agencies, including the FDA and EMA, regulate many aspects of a product candidate’s life cycle, including research and development and preclinical and clinical testing. We or regulatory authorities may suspend clinical trials at any time on the basis that the participants are being exposed to unacceptable health risks. In addition, based on our interactions with regulatory authorities, we have sought, and may in the future seek, changes to the protocol of clinical trials if we believe such changes may enhance the probability of approval or are necessary to protect patient safety. Such changes, if any, would impact the size, timing and cost of clinical development. Even if a product candidate progresses successfully through initial human testing in clinical trials, it may fail in later stages of development, including as a result of a failure to adequately demonstrate safety or efficacy to the satisfaction of applicable regulatory authorities. A number of companies in the pharmaceutical industry, including us, have suffered significant setbacks in advanced clinical trials, even after reporting promising results in earlier trials. For these reasons, among others, we cannot estimate the date on which clinical development of any product candidate will be completed, if ever, or when we will be able to begin commercializing pacritinib to generate material net cash inflows. In order to generate revenue from any of these compounds, any product candidate needs to be developed to a stage that will enable us to commercialize, sell or license related marketing rights to third parties.
We may also enter into collaboration agreements for the development and commercialization of our product candidates. We cannot control the amount and timing of resources our collaborators devote to product candidates, which may also result in delays in the development or marketing of products. Because of these risks and uncertainties, we cannot accurately predict when or whether we will successfully complete the development of any of our product candidates or the ultimate product development costs.
The risks and uncertainties associated with completing development on schedule and the consequences to operations, financial position and liquidity if the project is not timely completed are discussed in more detail in our risk factors, which can be found in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Summary
Our license and contract revenues reflect the earned amount of upfront payments and milestone payments under our product collaborations. We did not have any revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. Total revenues were $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Loss from operations was $47.8 million and $40.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Results of operations may vary substantially from year to year and from quarter to quarter and, as a result, you should not rely on them as being indicative of our future performance.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $52.5 million.
Results of Operations
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
License and contract revenues. License and contract revenues are summarized as follows (in thousands):
License and contract revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $0.1 million of development services revenue relating to the reimbursement of certain regulatory agency costs. Other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a one-time revenue in the amount of $2.2 million recognized in connection with the Asset Purchase Agreement with Les Laboratoires Servier and Institut de Recherches Internationales Servier, or collectively Servier. In addition, other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $0.6 million of revenue related to transition period activities pursuant to the terms of the Termination Agreement with Servier.
Operating costs and expenses
Research and development expenses. Our research and development expenses for compounds under development and preclinical development were as follows (in thousands):
Costs for our compounds include external direct expenses such as principal investigator fees, charges from contract research organizations, or CROs, and contract manufacturing fees incurred for preclinical, clinical, manufacturing and regulatory activities associated with preparing the compounds for submissions of NDAs or similar regulatory filings to the FDA, the EMA or other regulatory agencies outside the United States and Europe, as well as upfront license fees for acquired technology. Operating expenses include our personnel costs and an allocation of occupancy, depreciation and amortization expenses associated with developing our compounds. We are not able to capture the total cost of each compound because we do not allocate operating expenses to all of our compounds. Cumulative to date external direct costs incurred by us through December 31, 2020 were $183.4 million for pacritinib (excluding costs for pacritinib prior to our acquisition of certain assets from S*BIO in May 2012 and $29.1 million of in-process research and development expenses associated with the acquisition of certain assets from S*BIO). We do not anticipate incurring additional expenses related to PIXUVRI, as the Amended and Restated Exclusive License and Collaboration Agreement, or the Restated Agreement, with Servier was terminated in February 2019, and all of our rights and responsibilities for PIXUVRI were transferred and assigned globally to Servier pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement with Servier during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and development expenses increased to $25.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $24.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $1.8 million between periods was primarily attributable to a $7.8 million increase and a $5.9 million increase in development costs related to the PACIFICA Phase 3 trial and the PRE-VENT Phase 3 trial, respectively, offset by a $8.8 million decrease in development costs from the completion of the PAC203 dosing clinical trial in 2019, a $1.3 million decrease in the PIX306 clinical trial close-out in 2019, a $1.2 million decrease in regulatory and consulting costs as well as a $0.6 million decrease in unallocated operating expenses.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses were $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $19.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $1.6 million between periods was primarily attributable to a $0.8 million decrease in travel and other expenses, a $0.4 million decrease in tax expenses and a $0.4 million decrease in personnel costs.
Restructuring expenses. In December 2018, we announced a plan to reduce our workforce in order to improve efficiencies, reduce costs within the organization and preserve capital for pacritinib development. For the year ended December
31, 2019, we recorded $0.8 million of restructuring expenses related to employee separation costs. There were no such expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as we fully recognized the restructuring expenses during the first quarter of 2019.
Other operating expenses. Other operating expense of $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to a full provision for uncollectability of our Italian VAT receivables and deposit. See Part II, Item 8, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 1. Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Italian Value Added Tax Receivable for further details. There was no such expense for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Non-operating income and expenses
Interest income. Interest income was $0.2 million and $1.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest income was primarily related to our short-term investments and cash equivalent securities. The change was primarily due to decreases in short-term investments and interest rates for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019.
Interest expense. Interest expense was $0.5 million and $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest expense was related to our secured term loan. The change between periods primarily relates to a lower average loan principal balance outstanding as well as a lower average interest rate during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019.
Amortization of debt discount and issuance costs. Amortization of debt discount and issuance costs of $0.5 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were primarily related to our senior secured term loan.
(Loss) gain on dissolution of subsidiary. A loss of $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to a loss recognized upon dissolution of our majority-owned subsidiary, Aequus Biopharma, Inc. in June 2020. See Part II, Item 8, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 13. Related Party Transactions for further details. A gain of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was related to a gain released from the cumulative foreign currency translation adjustment account upon dissolution of our foreign entity in accordance with ASC 830, Foreign Currency Matters.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have funded our operations with proceeds from the sales and the issuance of equity securities, payments pursuant to license and collaboration agreements and the incurrence of debt. As of December 31, 2020, we had $52.5 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Rights offering. In March 2020, we issued 15.7 million shares of our common stock at a $1.00 per share price and 4,429 shares of our Series X Preferred Stock at a $10,000 per share price, collecting net proceeds of $59.1 million upon completion of our rights offering.
At-The-Market Equity Offering. In November 2019, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement℠ with Jefferies LLC to sell shares of our common stock, having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $15.0 million, from time to time, through an “at the market” equity offering program under which Jefferies acted as sales agent. In November and December 2020, we sold 2.1 million shares of our common stock for net proceeds of approximately $7.2 million after compensation to Jefferies. As discussed in Note 16. Subsequent Events to our consolidated financial statements, in January 2021 we entered into a new Open Market Sale Agreement℠ with Jefferies LLC to sell shares of our common stock having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $50.0 million, and received approximately $3.0 million in net proceeds as of the date of filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Loan Agreement. In November 2017, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB, which agreement was amended in May 2018, the proceeds of which were partially used to repay in full all outstanding indebtedness under our Loan and Security Agreement, dated March 26, 2013, as amended, with Hercules Technology Growth Capital, Inc., or Hercules (and certain of its affiliates). As of December 31, 2020, we had an outstanding principal balance under our secured term loan agreement of $4.9 million. We are required to pay interest plus principal payments in the approximate amount of $0.5 million per month until November 1, 2021, with the final principal plus interest payment totaling approximately $0.4 million as well as a back-end fee of $1.4 million. These borrowings are secured by a first priority security interest on substantially all of our personal property except our intellectual property and subject to certain other exceptions. In addition, the secured term loan agreement requires us to comply with restrictive covenants, including those that limit our operating flexibility
and ability to borrow additional funds. A failure to make a required loan payment or a covenant breach could lead to an event of default, and in such case, all amounts then outstanding may become due and payable immediately.
Historical Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $42.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $27.8 million for the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to revenue generated in 2019, the timing of payments and accruals and the 2019 collection of 2018 receivables from license and development services arrangements. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received €3.0 million (or $3.3 million using the currency exchange rate as of the date of cash receipt) relating to the attainment of a regulatory milestone in November 2018 under the Restated Agreement with Servier and also collected $10.0 million from Teva relating to the December 2018 achievement of a worldwide net sales milestone of TRISENOX.
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $9.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, and net cash provided by investing activities was $28.1 million during the same period in 2019. The change was primarily due to the amounts of short-term investments matured between periods.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $61.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and net cash used in financing activities was $5.6 million during the same period in 2019. The change was primarily attributable to the net proceeds from the completion of our rights offering in March 2020 and the net proceeds from our at-the-market equity offering.
In October 2016, we resumed primary responsibility for the development and commercialization of pacritinib as a result of the termination of the Pacritinib License Agreement. We currently have no commitments for additional financing to fund the development and commercial launch of pacritinib, and we may need to seek additional funding. The development and commercialization of a major product candidate like pacritinib without a collaborative partner will require a substantial amount of our time and financial resources, and as a result, we could experience a decrease in our liquidity and a new demand on our capital resources. For additional information relating to the Pacritinib License Agreement, see Part I, Item 1, “Business - License Agreements - Baxalta” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Capital Resources
We have prepared our consolidated financial statements assuming that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. However, we believe that, as of the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our present financial resources will only be sufficient to fund our operations into the second quarter of 2021. This raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and we will need to raise substantial additional capital in the near term in order to fund our operations through and beyond the second quarter of 2021 and to continue as a going concern thereafter. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on our assessment. Further, we have incurred net losses since inception and expect to generate losses for the foreseeable future, primarily due to research and development costs for pacritinib. Because of our reacquisition of worldwide rights for pacritinib, we are no longer eligible to receive cost sharing or milestone payments for pacritinib’s development from Baxalta, and losses related to research and development for pacritinib have increased. We have historically funded our operations through equity financings, borrowings and funds obtained under product collaborations, any or all of which may not be available to us in the future. As of December 31, 2020, our available cash, cash equivalents and short-term investment totaled $52.5 million. We had an outstanding principal balance under our secured term loan agreement of $4.9 million as of December 31, 2020.
Financial resource forecasts are subject to change as a result of a variety of risks and uncertainties. Changes in manufacturing, developments in and expenses associated with our clinical trials and the other factors identified under “Capital Requirements” below may consume capital resources earlier than planned. Additionally, following our and Servier’s mutual termination of our collaborative agreement, we are no longer eligible to receive additional revenues or payments from Servier relating to PIXUVRI. Although we received a $10.0 million milestone payment from Teva in February 2019, which was recognized as revenue in 2018 relating to the achievement of a worldwide net sales milestone of TRISENOX, the achievement of the remaining milestones is uncertain at this time. Due to these and other factors, the foregoing forecast for the period for which we will have sufficient resources to fund our operations may be inaccurate.
Capital Requirements
We will need to acquire additional funds in order to develop our business and continue the development of pacritinib. We may seek to raise such capital through public or private equity financings, partnerships, collaborations, joint ventures, disposition of assets, debt financings or restructurings, bank borrowings or other sources of financing. However, we have a limited number of authorized shares of common stock available for issuance and additional funding may not be available on favorable terms or at all. If additional funds are raised by issuing equity securities, substantial dilution to existing stockholders may result. If we fail to obtain additional capital when needed, our ability to operate as a going concern will be harmed, and we may be required to delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs and/or reduce our general and administrative expenses, be unable to attract and retain highly qualified personnel, be unable to obtain and maintain contracts necessary to continue our operations and at affordable rates with competitive terms, refrain from making our contractually required payments when due (including debt payments) and/or be forced to cease operations, liquidate our assets and possibly seek bankruptcy protection. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•disruptions or other delays to our business and clinical trials resulting from the ongoing worldwide COVID-19 pandemic;
•developments in and expenses associated with our research and development activities;
•changes in manufacturing;
•our clinical development plans and any changes that we may initiate or that may be requested by the FDA or other regulators;
•regulatory approval developments;
•our ability to generate sales of any approved product;
•our ability to execute appropriate collaborations for development and commercialization activities;
•our ability to reach milestones triggering payments under certain of our contractual arrangements;
•acquisitions of compounds or other assets;
•litigation and other disputes;
•competitive market developments; and
•other unplanned business developments.
Impact of Inflation
In the opinion of management, inflation has not had a material effect on our operations.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management makes certain judgments and uses certain estimates and assumptions when applying accounting principles generally accepted in the United States in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an on-going basis and base our estimates on historical experience and on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our experience and assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Given the global economic climate and additional or unforeseen effects from the COVID-19 pandemic, these estimates are becoming more challenging. Actual results may vary from what we anticipate and different assumptions or estimates about the future could change our reported results. We believe the following estimates are the most critical to us, in that they are important to the portrayal of our consolidated financial statements and require our subjective or complex judgment in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Research and Development Expenses
We accrue expenses for clinical trial activities performed by CROs based upon the estimated amount of work completed on each trial. The significant factors used in estimating accruals include the number of patients enrolled, the number of active clinical sites, clinical milestones achieved, the duration for which the patients have been enrolled in the trial, and other criteria
related to the efforts of our vendors. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activities to the extent possible through internal reviews, review of contractual terms and correspondence with CROs. We base our estimates on the best information available at the time. However, these estimates will be subject to change as additional information becomes available, which will allow us to make a more accurate estimate in future periods. In that event, we may be required to record adjustments to research and development expenses in future periods when the actual level of activity becomes more certain. Amounts ultimately incurred in relation to amounts accrued for these services may be substantially higher or lower than our estimates. Depending on the timing of payments to vendors and estimated services provided, we record net prepaid or accrued expenses related to these costs.
Leases
Our operating lease liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As our leases do not provide a readily determinable implicit rate of return, we use our incremental borrowing rate to derive the present value of lease payments, which is the rate of interest that we would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. The other areas that would involve our significant judgment and estimates include the determination of whether an arrangement is a lease or contains a lease, identification of lease modifications and reassessment events, and impairment of right-of-use assets.
Equity-based Compensation Expense
Equity-based compensation expense for all equity-based payment awards made to employees and directors is recognized and measured based on estimated fair values. For option valuations, we have elected to utilize the Black-Scholes valuation method in order to estimate the fair value of options on the date of grant. The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield currently available for United States Treasury securities at maturity with an equivalent term. We have not declared or paid dividends on our common stock and do not currently expect to do so in the future. The expected term of options represents the period that our equity-based awards are expected to be outstanding and was determined based on historical weighted average holding periods and projected holding periods for the remaining unexercised options. Consideration was given to the contractual terms of our equity-based awards, vesting schedules and expectations of future employee behavior. Expected volatility is based on the annualized daily historical volatility, including consideration of the implied volatility and market prices of traded options for comparable entities within our industry. These assumptions underlying the Black-Scholes valuation model involve management’s best estimates.
Generally accepted accounting principles for equity-based compensation also require that we recognize compensation expense for only the portion of awards expected to vest. Therefore, we apply an estimated forfeiture rate that we derive from historical employee termination behavior. If the actual number of forfeitures differs from our estimates, adjustments to compensation expense may be required in future periods. For performance-based awards that do not include market-based conditions, we record share-based compensation expense only when the performance-based milestone is deemed probable of achievement. We utilize both quantitative and qualitative criteria to judge whether milestones are probable of achievement. For awards with market-based performance conditions, we recognize the grant-date fair value of the award over the derived service period regardless of whether the underlying performance condition is met.
Contingencies
On a quarterly basis, we review the status of each significant matter and assess its potential financial exposure. If the potential loss from any claim, asserted or unasserted, or legal proceeding is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, we accrue a liability for the estimated loss. Significant judgment is required in both the determination of probability and the determination as to whether an exposure is reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related to these matters, accruals are based only on the best information available at the time. As additional information becomes available, we reassess the potential liability related to pending claims and litigation and may revise our estimates. These revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations and financial position.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements, including the expected effects on our results of operations and financial condition, refer to Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 1. Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” which is incorporated herein by reference.