ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes, which appear elsewhere in this Annual Report. This section of the Annual Report generally discusses the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 and year-to-year comparisons between the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. The discussion of our results of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 and a comparison of our results for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2020 and 2019 is included in Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, filed with the SEC on August 31, 2020 and is incorporated herein by reference. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. You should carefully read “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Overview
We provide differentiated development and manufacturing solutions for drugs, protein-based biologics, cell and gene therapies, and consumer health products at over fifty facilities across four continents under rigorous quality and operational standards. Our oral, injectable, and respiratory delivery technologies, along with our state-of-the-art protein and cell and gene therapy manufacturing capacity, address a wide and growing range of modalities and therapeutic and other categories across the biopharmaceutical and consumer health industries. Through our extensive capabilities, growth-enabling capacity, and deep expertise in product development, regulatory compliance, and clinical trial supply, we can help our customers take products to market faster, including nearly half of new drug products approved by the FDA in the last decade. Our development and manufacturing platforms, which include those in our Biologics, Softgel and Oral Technologies, and Oral and Specialty Delivery segments, our proven formulation, supply, and regulatory expertise, and our broad and deep development and manufacturing know-how enable our customers to advance and then bring to market more products and better treatments for patients and consumers. Our commitment to reliably supply our customers’ and their patients’ needs is the foundation for the value we provide; annually, we produce more than 70 billion doses for nearly 7,000 customer products, or approximately 1 in every 24 doses of such products taken each year by patients and consumers around the world. We believe that through our investments in state-of-the-art facilities and capacity expansion, including investments in facilities focused on new treatment modalities and other attractive market segments our continuous improvement activities devoted to operational and quality excellence, the sales of existing and introduction of new customer products, and, in some cases, our innovation activities and patents, we will continue to attract premium opportunities and realize the growth potential from these areas.
We currently operate in four operating segments, which also constitute our four reporting segments: Biologics, Softgel and Oral Technologies, Oral and Specialty Delivery, and Clinical Supply Services, as further described in "Business-Our Reporting Segments" contained elsewhere in this Annual Report.
The COVID-19 Pandemic
Our response to COVID-19
Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken and continue to take steps to protect our employees, ensure the integrity and quality of our products and services, and to maintain business continuity for our customers and their patients who depend on us to manufacture and supply critical products to the market. To address the multiple dimensions of the pandemic, senior, multi-disciplinary teams reporting directly to our Chief Executive Officer have been continuously monitoring the global situation, executing mitigation activities whenever and wherever required, and implementing a phased and structured return to our facilities as circumstances have permitted for those employees who have been working remotely.
Among other things, we implemented measures to avoid or reduce infection or contamination in line with guidelines issued by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the World Health Organization, and local authorities where we operate, re-emphasized good hygiene practices, restricted non-employee access to our sites, reorganized our workflows where permitted to maximize physical distancing, limited employee travel, facilitated safer alternatives to travel to and from work, and employed remote-working strategies. We have reviewed and will continue to analyze our supply chain to identify any risk, delay, or concern that may have an impact on our ability to deliver our services and products. To date, we have not identified any significant risk, delay, or concern that would have a substantial effect on such delivery. We have adopted various procedures to minimize and manage any future disruption to our ongoing operations, including the creation and activation of
new and existing business continuity plans when needed. Our existing procedures, which are consistent with cGMP and other regulatory standards, are intended to assure the integrity of our supply against any contamination. We have a detailed response plan to manage any impact of the virus on employee health, site operations, and product supply, including immediate assessment of the health of employees reporting symptoms, comprehensive risk assessment of any impact to quality, additional cleaning protocols, and alternative shift patterns to compensate should fewer employees be available.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business and Results of Operations
Throughout fiscal 2021, we observed some increases in customer delays and cancellations, occasional increases in absenteeism of production employees in our facilities in certain affected regions, disruptions at times in certain clinical trials supported by our Clinical Supply Services segment, and a delay in inspections and product approvals by the FDA and regulatory authorities globally. A portion of our customers reported a reduction in demand, particularly in our consumer health product lines, and a larger percentage reported an increase in demand.
We have also seen increased demand and significant revenue increases and the potential for further revenue increases from COVID-19-related products, particularly in our Biologics segment. As part of our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we accelerated and enhanced certain of our capital improvement plans to expand capacity for manufacturing drug substance and drug product for protein-based biologics and cell and gene therapies, particularly at our drug product facilities in Bloomington, Indiana, Anagni, Italy, and our commercial-scale viral vector manufacturing facility in Maryland. In order to meet customer demand for developing, manufacturing and packaging COVID-19-related products, we hired approximately 2,200 new employees at our facilities in Indiana, Maryland, and Anagni, Italy, and built and brought online new clean room suites, manufacturing lines and other facilities expansions in those locations ahead of schedule. We have also implemented various strategies to protect our financial condition and results of operations should we experience a reduction in demand for COVID-19 related products, such as ensuring contractual take-or-pay and minimum volume requirements for the manufacture of certain COVID-19 related products. However, the extent and duration of revenue associated with COVID-19-related products is uncertain and dependent, in important respects, on factors outside our control.
The COVID-19-vaccines we manufacture are still pending approval from the FDA and other non-U.S. regulatory authorities and may not receive approval. The future duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic and the future demand for COVID-19 vaccines and therapies is unknown. Public opinion of certain COVID-19 vaccines and therapies and the product owners and manufacturers can change quickly and affect the demand for certain products and services, although they should not affect any required minimum payment for a COVID-19 related product subject to a “take-or-pay” provision. In addition, any concentration of revenue from certain COVID-19 vaccine products enhances our operational risk with respect to quality, security, regulatory inspections and business disruption resulting from any unforeseen event that affects any of the facilities and communities in which we manufacture COVID-19 vaccines. We have implemented various mechanisms to protect our customers, their material and product, and our business continuity, such as enhanced security measures at certain facilities and heightened cybersecurity controls.
See also “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business and the Industry in Which We Operate - Our business, financial condition, and results of operations may be adversely affected by global health epidemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic” and “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business and the Industry in Which We Operate - The continually evolving nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting public health response, including the changing demand for various COVID-19 vaccines and treatments from both patients and governments around the world, may affect on sales of the COVID-19 products we manufacture” elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The following disclosure supplements the descriptions of our accounting policies contained in Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements regarding significant areas of judgment. Management made certain estimates and assumptions during the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities in the Consolidated Financial Statements. These estimates also affect the reported amount of net earnings during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Because of the size of the financial statement elements to which they relate, some of our accounting policies and estimates have a more significant impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements than others.
Management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting policies and estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors. A discussion of some of our more significant accounting policies and estimates follows.
Revenue
We sell products and services directly to our pharmaceutical, biopharmaceutical, and consumer health customers. The majority of our business is conducted through manufacturing and commercial product supply, development services, and clinical supply services.
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require judgment. For our manufacturing and commercial product supply revenue, the contract generally includes the terms of the manufacturing services and related product quality assurance procedures to comply with regulatory requirements. Due to the regulated nature of our business, these contract terms are highly interdependent and, therefore, are considered to be a single combined performance obligation. For our development services and clinical supply services revenue, our performance obligations vary per contract and are accounted for as separate performance obligations. If a contract contains a single performance obligation, we allocate the entire transaction price to the single performance obligation. If a contract contains multiple performance obligations, we allocate consideration to each performance obligation using the “relative standalone selling price” as defined under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Generally, we utilize observable standalone selling prices in our allocations of consideration. If observable standalone selling prices are not available, we estimate the applicable standalone selling price using an adjusted market assessment approach, representing the amount that we believe the market is willing to pay for the applicable service. Revenue is recognized over time using an appropriate method of measuring progress towards fulfilling our performance obligation for the respective arrangement. Determining the measure of progress that consistently depicts our satisfaction of performance obligations within each of our revenue streams across similar arrangements requires judgment.
Licensing revenue
We occasionally enter into arrangements with customers that include licensing of functional intellectual property, including drug formulae, or other intangible property (“out-licensing”). We do not have any material license arrangement that contains more than one performance obligation. Our out-licensing generally entitles us to nonrefundable, up-front fees or royalties. Nonrefundable, up-front license fees are recognized as revenue when the licensed property is made available for the customer’s use and benefit, provided there is no unsatisfied performance obligation included in the arrangement. Royalty payments from such arrangements are recognized when subsequent sale or usage of an item subject to the royalty occurs and the performance obligation to which royalty relates is satisfied.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
We account for purchased goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other. Under ASC 350, goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment at least annually. We perform an impairment evaluation of goodwill annually during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year or when circumstances otherwise indicate an evaluation should be performed. The evaluation may begin with a qualitative assessment for each reporting unit to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If the qualitative assessment does not generate a positive response, or if no qualitative assessment is performed, a quantitative assessment, based upon discounted cash flows, is performed and requires management to estimate future cash flows, growth rates, and economic and market conditions. In fiscal 2020, we proceeded immediately to the quantitative assessment, but in fiscal 2019 and 2021 we began with the qualitative assessment. Accordingly, no sensitivity analysis was performed for fiscal 2021. The evaluations performed in fiscal 2019, 2020 and 2021 resulted in no impairment charge.
See Notes 4, Goodwill and 5, Other Intangibles, net to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Series A Preferred Stock Dividend Adjustment Feature
The terms of the Series A Preferred Stock include a dividend adjustment feature to provide the holders with certain protections against a decline in the trading price of our Common Stock. Because this adjustment feature depends in part on the value of external metrics at future dates, over which we have no control, this feature is accounted for separately from the rest of the Series A Preferred Stock as a derivative instrument, which is measured at fair value, as of the valuation date, using a combination of (i) a Monte Carlo simulation and (ii) a binomial lattice model, which incorporates the terms and conditions of the Series A Preferred Stock and is based on changes in the market prices of shares of our Common Stock over successive periods. Key assumptions used in both models include the current market price of one share of the Common Stock and its historical and expected volatility, risk-neutral interest rates, and the remaining term of the adjustment feature. The calculation of the estimated fair value of the derivative liability is highly sensitive to changes in the unobservable inputs, such as the expected volatility and our specific credit spread. We recognize the derivative as either an asset or liability in the consolidated balance
sheets at its fair value and revalue it as of the end of each quarterly reporting period; changes in the fair value are recognized in the consolidated statements of operations.
Income Taxes
In accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, we account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. The asset and liability method requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for expected future tax consequences of temporary differences that currently exist between tax bases and the corresponding financial reporting bases of our assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates in the respective jurisdictions in which we operate. Deferred taxes are not provided on the undistributed earnings of subsidiaries outside of the U.S. when it is expected that these earnings will be permanently reinvested. In fiscal 2018, we recorded a provision for U.S. income taxes and foreign withholding taxes in relation to expected repatriations as a result of the 2017 U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the ”2017 Tax Act”), but we have not made any provision for U.S. income taxes on the remaining undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries as those earnings are considered permanently reinvested in the operations of those foreign subsidiaries in post fiscal 2018 years.
The 2017 Tax Act imposed taxes on so-called “global intangible low-taxed income” (“GILTI”) earned by certain foreign subsidiaries of a U.S. company. In accordance with ASC 740, we made an accounting policy election to treat taxes due on future U.S. inclusions in taxable income related to GILTI as a current-period expense when incurred.
We assess the realizability of deferred tax assets by considering all available evidence, both positive and negative, in assessing the need for a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets. We evaluate four possible sources of taxable income when assessing the realization of deferred tax assets:
•carrybacks of existing NOLs (if and to the extent permitted by tax law);
•future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences;
•tax planning strategies; and
•future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards.
We consider the need to maintain a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets based on management’s assessment of whether it is more likely than not that we would realize those deferred tax assets as a result of future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences and the ability to generate sufficient taxable income within the carryforward period available under the applicable tax law.
Unrecognized tax benefits are generated when there are differences between tax positions taken in a tax return and amounts recognized in the Consolidated Financial Statements. Tax benefits are recognized in the Consolidated Financial Statements when it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination. To the extent we prevail in matters for which liabilities have been established or are required to pay amounts in excess of our liabilities, our effective income tax rate in a given period could be materially affected. An unfavorable income tax settlement may require the use of cash and result in an increase in our effective income tax rate in the year it is resolved. A favorable income tax settlement would be recognized as a reduction in the effective income tax rate in the year of resolution.
Our accounting for income taxes involves the application of complex tax regulations in the U.S. and in each of the non-U.S. jurisdictions in which we operate, particularly European tax jurisdictions. The determination of income subject to taxation in each tax-paying jurisdiction requires us to review reported book income and the events occurring during the year in each jurisdiction in which we operate. In addition, the application of deferred tax assets and liabilities will have an effect on the tax expense in each jurisdiction. For those entities engaging in transactions with affiliates, we apply transfer-pricing guidelines relevant in many jurisdictions in which we operate and make certain informed and reasonable assumptions and estimates about the relative value of contributions by affiliates when assessing the allocation of income and deductions between consolidated entities in different jurisdictions. The estimates and assumptions used in these allocations can result in uncertainty in the measured tax benefit.
Factors Affecting our Performance
Fluctuations in Operating Results
Our annual financial reporting periods end on June 30. Our revenue and net earnings are generally higher in the third and fourth quarters of each fiscal year, with our first fiscal quarter typically generating our lowest revenue of any quarter, and our last fiscal quarter typically generating our highest revenue. These fluctuations are primarily the result of the timing of our, and our customers’, annual operational maintenance periods at locations in Europe and the U.S., the seasonality associated with pharmaceutical and biotechnology budgetary spending decisions, clinical trial and research and development schedules, the
timing of new product launches and length of time needed to obtain full market penetration, and, to a lesser extent, the time of the year some of our customers’ products are in higher demand.
Acquisition and Related Integration Efforts
Our growth and profitability are affected by the acquisitions we complete and the speed at which we integrate those acquisitions into our existing operating platforms. In fiscal 2019, we completed acquisitions of an early-phase development site in the U.K. and a gene therapy business in the U.S., which have been integrated into our Oral and Specialty Delivery and Biologics segments, respectively. In fiscal 2020, we completed the acquisition of additional gene and cell therapy assets in the U.S. and Belgium, which have been integrated into our Biologics segment. We also completed the acquisition of the Anagni facility in Italy, which has been integrated into our Oral and Specialty Delivery and Biologics segments. In fiscal 2021, we expanded the capacity and capabilities of our Biologics segment through five acquisitions. First, in September 2020, we purchased a facility in Bloomington, Indiana that was still undergoing qualification at the time of acquisition and is intended to support development and early-phase clinical fill and finish activities. We also completed four additional acquisitions in Gosselies, Belgium: (i) the November 2020 purchase of Skeletal Cell Therapy Support SA (“Skeletal”), including its cell therapy manufacturing facility; (ii) the April 2021 purchase of Hepatic Cell Therapy Support SA (“Hepatic”), which also included a cell therapy manufacturing facility co-located with Skeletal in a building owned by Société d’infrastructures, de services et d’énergies SA (“SISE”); (iii) the June 2021 purchase of SISE, the owner of the building housing Skeletal and Hepatic's facilities; and (iv) the February 2021 purchase of Delphi. In February 2021, we also acquired a dry powder inhaler and spray dry manufacturing business from Acorda Therapeutics, Inc. (“Acorda”), which is included in our Oral and Specialty Delivery segment.
Foreign Exchange Rates
Our operating network is global, and, as a result, we have substantial revenues and operating expenses that are denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, the currency in which we report our financial results, and are therefore influenced by changes in currency exchange rates. In fiscal 2021, approximately 38% of our revenue was generated from our operations outside the U.S. Significant foreign currencies for our operations include the British pound, European euro, Brazilian real, Argentine peso, Japanese yen, and the Canadian dollar.
Trends Affecting Our Business
Industry
We participate in nearly every sector of the global pharmaceutical and biotechnology industry, which has been estimated to generate more than $1 trillion in annual revenue, including, but not limited to, the prescription drug and biologic sectors as well as consumer health, which includes the over-the-counter and vitamins and nutritional supplement sectors. Innovative pharmaceuticals, and biologics in particular, continue to play a critical role in the global market, while the share of revenue due to generic drugs and biosimilars is increasing in both developed and developing markets. Sustained developed market demand and rapid growth in emerging economies is driving consumer health product growth. Payors, both public and private, have sought to limit the economic impact of pharmaceutical and biologics product demand through greater use of generic and biosimilar drugs, access and spending controls, and health technology assessment techniques, favoring products that deliver truly differentiated outcomes.
New Molecule Development and R&D Sourcing
Continued strengthening in early-stage development pipelines for drugs and biologics, compounded by increasing clinical trial breadth and complexity, support our belief in the attractive growth prospects for development solutions. Large companies are in many cases reconfiguring their R&D resources, increasingly involving the use of strategic partners for important outsourced functions and new treatment modalities. Additionally, an increasing portion of compounds in development are from companies that do not have a full research and development infrastructure, and thus are more likely to need strategic development solutions partners.
Demographics
Aging population demographics in developed countries, combined with the global COVID-19 pandemic and health care reforms in many global markets that are expanding access to treatments to a greater proportion of the global population, will continue to drive increases in demand for pharmaceuticals, biologics, and consumer health products. Increasing economic affluence in developing regions will further increase demand for healthcare treatments, and we are taking active steps to allow us to participate effectively in these growth regions and product categories.
Finally, we believe the market access and payor pressures our customers face, global supply chain complexity, and the increasing demand for improved and new modality treatments will continue to escalate the need for advanced formulation and manufacturing, product differentiation, improved outcomes, and treatment cost reduction, all of which can often be addressed using our advanced delivery technologies.
Non-GAAP Metrics
As described in this section, management uses various financial metrics, including certain metrics that are not based on concepts defined in U.S. GAAP, to measure and assess the performance of our business, to make critical business decisions, and to assess our compliance with certain financial obligations. We therefore believe that presentation of certain of these non-GAAP metrics in this Annual Report will aid investors in understanding our business.
EBITDA from operations
Management measures operating performance based on consolidated earnings from operations before interest expense, expense (benefit) for income taxes and depreciation and amortization, adjusted for the income attributable to non-controlling interests (“EBITDA from operations”). EBITDA from operations is not defined under U.S. GAAP, is not a measure of operating income, operating performance, or liquidity presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and is subject to important limitations.
We believe that the presentation of EBITDA from operations enhances an investor’s understanding of our financial performance. We believe this measure is a useful financial metric to assess our operating performance across periods and use this measure for business planning purposes. In addition, given the significant investments that we have made in the past in property, plant and equipment, depreciation and amortization expenses represent a meaningful portion of our cost structure. We believe that disclosing EBITDA from operations will provide investors with a useful tool for assessing the comparability between periods of our ability to generate cash from operations sufficient to pay taxes, to service debt, and to undertake capital expenditures without consideration of non-cash depreciation and amortization expense. We present EBITDA from operations in order to provide supplemental information that we consider relevant for the readers of the Consolidated Financial Statements, and such information is not meant to replace or supersede U.S. GAAP measures. Our definition of EBITDA from operations may not be the same as similarly titled measures used by other companies. The most directly comparable measure to EBITDA from operations defined under U.S. GAAP is net earnings. Included in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis is a reconciliation of net earnings to EBITDA from operations.
In addition, we evaluate the performance of our segments based on segment earnings before non-controlling interest, other (income) expense, impairments, restructuring costs, interest expense, income tax expense (benefit), and depreciation and amortization (“Segment EBITDA”).
Adjusted EBITDA
Under the Credit Agreement and in the Indentures, the ability of Operating Company to engage in certain activities, such as incurring certain additional indebtedness, making certain investments and paying certain dividends, is tied to ratios based on Adjusted EBITDA (which is defined as “Consolidated EBITDA” in the Credit Agreement and “EBITDA” in the Indentures). Adjusted EBITDA is a covenant compliance measure in our Credit Agreement and Indentures, particularly those covenants governing debt incurrence and restricted payments. Adjusted EBITDA is based on the definitions in the Credit Agreement, is not defined under U.S. GAAP, is not a measure of operating income, operating performance or liquidity presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and is subject to important limitations. Because not all companies use identical calculations, our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
In addition, we use Adjusted EBITDA as a performance metric that guides management in its operation of and planning for the future of the business and drives certain management compensation programs. Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA provides a useful measure of our operating performance from period to period by excluding certain items that are not representative of our core business, including interest expense and non-cash charges like depreciation and amortization.
The measure under U.S. GAAP most directly comparable to Adjusted EBITDA is net earnings. In calculating Adjusted EBITDA, we add back certain non-cash, non-recurring and other items that are deducted when calculating EBITDA from operations and net earnings, consistent with the requirements of the Credit Agreement. Adjusted EBITDA, among other things:
•does not include non-cash stock-based employee compensation expense and certain other non-cash charges;
•does not include cash and non-cash restructuring, severance and relocation costs incurred to realize future cost savings and enhance operations;
•adds back any non-controlling interest expense, which represents minority investors’ ownership of non-wholly owned consolidated subsidiaries and is, therefore, not available; and
•includes estimated cost savings that have not yet been fully reflected in our results.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Net Income per Share
We use Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Net Income per share (which we sometimes refer to as “Adjusted EPS”) as performance metrics. Adjusted Net Income is not defined under U.S. GAAP, is not a measure of operating income, operating performance, or liquidity presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and is subject to important limitations. We believe that providing information concerning Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Net Income per share enhances an investor’s understanding of our financial performance. We believe that these measures are useful financial metrics to assess our operating performance from period to period by excluding certain items that we believe are not representative of our core business, and we use these measures for business planning and executive compensation purposes. We define Adjusted Net Income as net earnings adjusted for (1) earnings or loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, (2) amortization attributable to purchase accounting, and (3) income or loss from non-controlling interest in majority-owned operations. We also make adjustments for other cash and non-cash items (as shown above, in “-Adjusted EBITDA”), partially offset by our estimate of the tax effects as a result of such cash and non-cash items. Our definition of Adjusted Net Income may not be the same as similarly titled measures used by other companies. Adjusted Net Income per share is computed by dividing Adjusted Net Income by the weighted average diluted shares outstanding.
Use of Constant Currency
As exchange rates are an important factor in understanding period-to-period comparisons, we believe the presentation of results on a constant currency basis in addition to reported results helps improve investors’ ability to understand our operating results and evaluate our performance in comparison to prior periods. Constant currency information compares results between periods as if exchange rates had remained constant period-over-period. We use results on a constant currency basis as one measure to evaluate our performance. In this Annual Report, we calculate constant currency by calculating current-year results using prior-year foreign currency exchange rates. We generally refer to such amounts calculated on a constant currency basis as excluding the impact of foreign exchange. These results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, results reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Results on a constant currency basis, as we present them, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies and are not measures of performance presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Summary Two-Year Key Financial Performance Metrics
Discussion of the year-over-year changes for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 and the results of operations and cash flows for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019, is included in Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Result of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, filed with the SEC on August 31, 2020, and is incorporated herein by reference.
The below tables summarize our results in fiscal 2021 and 2020 with respect to several financial metrics we use to measure performance. Refer to the discussions below regarding performance and the use of key financial metrics and “-Non-GAAP Metrics-Use of Constant Currency” concerning the measurement of revenue at “constant currency.”
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2021 compared to the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2020
Results for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 were as follows:
Net Revenue
Net revenue increased by $815 million, or 26%, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Net revenue increased 3% as a result of acquisitions, which was partially offset by a 2% decrease in net revenue due to the sale of Catalent USA Woodstock, Inc. (the “Blow-Fill-Seal Business”) in March 2021. Among other acquisitions, we acquired Skeletal in November 2020, and Delphi and Acorda in February 2021. In addition, we divested a facility in Australia in October 2019. Organic net revenue increased 25% on a constant-currency basis, and was primarily driven by robust demand across all our Biologics offerings, in particular demand for our drug product and drug substance offerings for COVID-19-related programs, offset in part by the loss of volume from the voluntary recall of a previously launched product in the respiratory specialty platform in our Oral and Specialty Delivery segment and demand decreases attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic that impacted Softgel and Oral Technologies net revenue.
Gross Margin
Gross margin increased by $336 million, or 34%, in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, primarily as a result of the strong margin profile for all Biologics segment offerings, including demand across our drug product and drug substance offerings for COVID-19 related programs. Growth was offset in part by the loss in volume from the voluntary recall of a previously launched product in the respiratory specialty platform in our Oral and Specialty Delivery segment and decreased demand for our prescription and consumer health products in our Softgel and Oral Technologies segment. On a constant-currency basis, gross margin, as a percentage of net revenue, increased 200 basis points to 34% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, compared to 32% in the prior year, primarily due to the higher margin profile associated with our Biologics segment.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expense
Selling, general, and administrative expense increased by $102 million, or 17%, in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, driven by $65 million of employee-related cost primarily incurred for wages and bonuses, a $15 million increase in cost for professional and consulting services, and additional selling, general and administrative expenses from acquired companies of $13 million, including $2 million of incremental depreciation and amortization expense and $3 million related to the cost of various transitional services. These increases were partially offset by $12 million in reduced costs associated with health and welfare benefits and $9 million associated with travel and entertainment expenses.
The year-over-year increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses was also due to a $32 million increase in information technology spend associated with headcount increases, additional cyber security initiatives, insurance premium increases, certain market research initiatives, and COVID-19-related spend for personal protective equipment and test kits for our employees.
Other Operating Expense
Other operating expense for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was $19 million and $11 million, respectively. The year-over-year increase was attributable to an increase in impairment charges and an increase in restructuring costs primarily associated with our plan to reduce costs and optimize our infrastructure in Europe by closing our Clinical Supply Services facility in Bolton, U.K.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net, of $110 million in fiscal 2021 decreased by $16 million, or 13%, compared to fiscal 2020, driven by savings from repayment of our formerly outstanding dollar-denominated term loans, euro-denominated term loans, euro-denominated 4.75% Senior Notes due 2024 (the “2024 Notes”), and U.S. dollar-denominated 4.875% Senior Notes due 2026 (the “2026 Notes”), partially offset by interest expenses on the 2028 Notes, the new tranche of dollar-denominated term loans, and the 2029 Notes. The savings also includes $6 million of additional capitalized interest costs for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year due to increased capital expenditures.
For additional information concerning our debt and financing arrangements, including the changing mix of debt and equity in our capital structure, see “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Debt and Financing Arrangements” and Note 7, Long-Term Obligations and Short-Term Borrowings to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net of $3 million for fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by an $11 million premium on early redemption of the 2026 Notes, a write-off of $4 million of previously capitalized financing charges related to our repayment of term loans and our redeemed 2026 Notes, $3 million of financing charges related to our outstanding term loans and a net foreign currency translation loss of $5 million. Those losses were partially offset by a gain of $17 million related to the fair value of the derivative liability associated with the Series A Preferred Stock.
Other expense, net for fiscal 2020 of $8 million was primarily driven by financing charges of $16 million. The financing charges included a $6 million write-off of previously capitalized financing charges related to our repaid euro-denominated term loan under our senior secured credit facilities and redeemed 2024 Notes, and a $10 million premium on early redemption of the 2024 Notes. The loss was partially offset by a foreign currency gain of $3 million and a derivative gain of $3 million related to the change in the fair value of the derivative liability arising from the dividend adjustment mechanism of our Series A Preferred Stock.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was $130 million relative to earnings before income taxes of $715 million. Our provision for income taxes for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 was $39 million relative to earnings before income taxes of $260 million. The increased income tax provision for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 over the prior-year was largely the result of an increase in pretax income and a $56 million income tax charge on the divestiture of the Blow-Fill-Seal Business. This increase was partially offset by a $47 million income tax benefit for U.S. foreign tax credits resulting from an amendment to a prior-year return and certain equity compensation deductions. The provision for income taxes was also impacted by the geographic distribution of our pretax income, the tax impact of permanent differences, restructuring, special items, and other discrete tax items that may have unique tax implications depending on the nature of the item.
Segment Review
The below charts depict the percentage of net revenue from each of our four reporting segments for the previous two years. Refer below for discussions regarding the segments’ net revenue and EBITDA performance and to “-Non-GAAP Metrics” for a discussion of our use of Segment EBITDA, a measure that is not defined under U.S. GAAP.
Our results on a segment basis for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 were as follows:
(1) Unallocated costs include restructuring and special items, stock-based compensation, gain (loss) on sale of subsidiary, impairment charges, certain other corporate-directed costs, and other costs that are not allocated to the segments as follows:
(a) Restructuring and other special items during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 include (i) transaction costs for the sale of our Blow-Fill-Seal Business, (ii) transaction and integration costs associated with the acquisition of our facility in Anagni, Italy and the Acorda, Masthercell Global Inc. (“MaSTherCell”), Delphi, Hepatic, Skeletal and SISE transactions, and (iii) restructuring costs associated with the closure of our Clinical Supply Services facility in Bolton, U.K. Restructuring and other special items during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 include transaction and integration costs associated with the Anagni facility, our cell and gene therapy acquisitions, the divestiture of a facility in Australia, and other restructuring initiatives across our network of sites.
(b) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, gain on sale of subsidiary is due to the divestiture of our Blow-Fill-Seal Business, which was part of our Oral and Specialty Delivery segment. Loss on sale of subsidiary for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 is due to the divestiture of the Australian facility that was part of the Softgel and Oral Technologies segment.
(c) Refer to Note 15, Other Expense, net for details of financing charges and foreign currency translation adjustments recorded within Other Expense, net in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Provided below is a reconciliation of net earnings to EBITDA from operations:
Biologics segment
Net revenue in our Biologics segment increased by $876 million, or 86%, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. The increase was driven across all segment offerings by robust end-market demand for our global drug product, drug substance, and cell and gene therapy offerings, primarily related to demand for COVID-19-related programs.
Biologics Segment EBITDA increased by $360 million, or 151%, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. The increase was driven across all segment offerings by robust end-market demand for our global drug product, drug substance, and cell and gene therapy offerings, primarily related to demand for COVID-19-related programs.
Several acquisitions contributed to the Biologics inorganic growth in fiscal 2021. Our Anagni, Italy facility, part of which operates within our Biologics segment, and our MaSTherCell acquisition together increased net revenue and Segment EBITDA on an inorganic basis by 6% and 3%, respectively, in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the prior year.
Softgel and Oral Technologies segment
Net revenue in our Softgel and Oral Technologies segment decreased by $77 million, or 7%, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. The decrease primarily relates to reduced end-market demand for prescription products within North America and Europe, as well as lower demand in consumer health products, particularly in cough, cold, and over-the-counter pain relief products attributable to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The net revenue decrease was partially offset by strong development revenue growth.
Softgel and Oral Technologies Segment EBITDA decreased by $26 million, or 10%, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. The decrease, similar to that of net revenue, was primarily driven by a decrease in demand in both the prescription and consumer health portfolio of products, offset in part by the margin generated from strong development revenue growth.
Oral and Specialty Delivery segment
Net revenue in our Oral and Specialty Delivery segment decreased by $11 million, or 2%, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. Excluding the effect of acquisitions and divestitures, the loss of volume resulting from the voluntary recall of a previously launched product in our respiratory specialty platform and decreased demand for other non-Zydis orally delivered commercial products were partially offset by increased demand for the segment’s orally delivered Zydis commercial products and early-phase development programs.
Oral and Specialty Delivery Segment EBITDA decreased by $50 million, or 25%, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. Segment EBITDA without acquisitions and divestitures decreased 24%, primarily driven by the loss of volume and voluntary recall impact of a previously launched product in our respiratory specialty platform, inclusive of charges of $32 million in the aggregate associated with the recall. Increased demand for the segment’s orally delivered Zydis commercial products and favorable manufacturing efficiencies within our respiratory specialty platform partially offset the decrease.
Our Anagni and Acorda transactions increased net revenue and Segment EBITDA on an inorganic, constant-currency basis by 7% and 7%, respectively, in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the prior year. We divested the Blow-Fill-Seal Business in March 2021, which decreased net revenue and Segment EBITDA on an inorganic, constant-currency basis by 6% and 8%, respectively, in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the prior year.
Clinical Supply Services segment
Net revenue in our Clinical Supply Services segment increased by $35 million, or 10%, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. The increase was driven by strong demand in our manufacturing and packaging and storage and distribution offerings in North America.
Clinical Supply Services Segment EBITDA increased by $12 million, or 13%, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. The increase was driven primarily by strong global demand in our manufacturing and packaging and storage and distribution offerings.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and use of Cash
Our principal source of liquidity has been cash flow generated from operations and the net proceeds of capital market activities. The principal uses of cash are to fund operating and capital expenditures, business or asset acquisitions, interest payments on debt, the payment of deferred purchase consideration from the Catalent Indiana acquisition, the payment of the quarterly dividend on the Series A Preferred Stock, and any mandatory or discretionary principal payment on our debt. At the current stated value of the Series A Preferred Stock outstanding as of June 30, 2021, the aggregate amount of each regular quarterly dividend, if paid in cash, is $5 million. As of June 30, 2021, and following the February 2021 execution of Amendment No. 5 (the “Fifth Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement, we had available a $725 million Revolving Credit Facility that matures in May 2024, the capacity of which is reduced by the amount of all outstanding letters of credit issued under the senior secured credit facilities and those short-term borrowings referred to as swing-line borrowings. At June 30, 2021, we had $6 million of outstanding letters of credit and no outstanding borrowing under our Revolving Credit Facility.
On August 29, 2021, we entered into an agreement to acquire Bettera Holdings, LLC ("Bettera") for $1.00 billion. Bettera is a manufacturer of nutraceuticals specializing in gummy, soft chew, and lozenge delivery systems. The transaction is expected to close before December 31, 2021 and we plan to fund this all-cash acquisition through a combination of additional borrowings under our existing senior secured credit facilities, cash on hand and depending on market conditions, new debt financing.
We nonetheless believe that our cash on hand, cash from operations, and available borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility will be adequate to meet our future liquidity needs for at least the next twelve months, including with respect to payment of the remaining $50 million installment on the Catalent Indiana deferred purchase consideration, our quarterly regular dividend on the Series A Preferred Stock, if paid in cash, and the amounts expected to become due with respect to our pending capital projects. We have no significant maturity under any of our bank or note debt until the July 2027 maturity of our 2027 Notes.
Cash Flows
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2021 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2020
The following table summarizes our consolidated statements of cash flows for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared with the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020:
Operating Activities
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $433 million, a decrease of $7 million compared to $440 million for the prior year. Cash flow provided by operating activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 increased primarily due to an increase in operating earnings, which increased from $394 million in fiscal 2020 to $828 million in fiscal 2021. The increase in cash proceeds from higher operating earnings was partially offset by an unfavorable working capital impact, which included an unfavorable impact from inventory due to an increase of materials on-hand to assure adequate supply during the COVID-19 pandemic, an increase in in-process inventory, and unfavorable timing for the collection of trade accounts receivable.
Investing Activities
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $649 million, compared to $827 million during fiscal 2020. The decrease in cash used in investing activities was attributable to a $266 million increase in proceeds from the sale of subsidiaries and a $232 million decrease in payments for acquisitions, which were partially offset by a $206 million increase in cash used in purchases of property, plant, and equipment. In fiscal 2021, we received $287 million in net proceeds from the divestiture of our Blow-Fill-Seal Business.
In fiscal 2021, we paid $147 million of cash for the Skeletal, Delphi, and Acorda acquisitions. In fiscal 2020, we paid $379 million of cash for the MaSTherCell and Anagni acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Financing Activities
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $142 million, which decreased $860 million compared to cash provided by financing activities of $1.00 billion during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. The decrease in cash provided by financing activities was primarily driven by a $964 million decrease in net proceeds from equity offerings, which was partially offset by a $38 million increase in cash received from the exercise of stock options compared to the prior year.
Debt and Financing Arrangements
Senior Secured Credit Facilities and Fifth Amendment to the Credit Agreement
In February 2021, we completed the Fifth Amendment to the Credit Agreement. Pursuant to the Fifth Amendment, we refinanced the existing $933 million aggregate principal amount of U.S. dollar-denominated term loans (the “Term B-2 Loans”) with the proceeds of an equivalent amount of new U.S. dollar-denominated term loans (the “Term B-3 Loans”), incurred an additional $67 million aggregate principal amount of Term B-3 Loans, and obtained an additional $175 million of revolving credit commitments (the “Incremental Revolving Credit Commitments”) under the Revolving Credit Facility.
The Term B-3 Loans constitute a new class of term loans under the Credit Agreement, with an interest rate of one-month LIBOR (subject to a floor of 0.50%) plus 2.00% per annum, a maturity date of February 2028, and quarterly amortization of principal equal to 0.25%, with payments on the last business day of March, June, September, and December. The proceeds of the Term B-3 Loans, after payment of the offering fees and expenses, were used to repay in full the existing Term B-2 Loans under the Credit Agreement, plus any accrued and unpaid interest thereon, with the remainder available for general corporate purposes.
The Incremental Revolving Credit Commitments constitute revolving credit commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility. The applicable rate for all revolving credit commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility is initially LIBOR plus 2.25% and such rate can additionally be reduced to LIBOR plus 2.00% in future periods based on a measure of Operating Company's total leverage ratio. The maturity date for the Revolving Credit Facility is the earlier of (i) May 17, 2024 and (ii) the 91st day prior to the maturity of the Term B-3 Loans. In addition, pursuant to the Fifth Amendment, certain modifications were made to the Credit Agreement in order to, among other things, provide for determination of a benchmark replacement interest rate when LIBOR is no longer available.
The availability of capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility is reduced by the aggregate value of all outstanding letters of credit under the Credit Agreement. As of June 30, 2021, we had $719 million of unutilized capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility due to $6 million of outstanding letters of credit.
5.000% Senior Notes due 2027
In June 2019, Operating Company completed a private offering of the 2027 Notes. The 2027 Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally, by all of the wholly owned U.S. subsidiaries of Operating Company that guarantee its senior secured credit facilities. The 2027 Notes were offered in the U.S. to qualified institutional buyers in reliance on Rule 144A under the Securities Act and outside the U.S. only to non-U.S. investors pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act. The 2027 Notes will mature on July 15, 2027 and bear interest at the rate of 5.000% per annum. Interest is payable semi-annually in arrears on January 15 and July 15 of each year, beginning on January 15, 2020. The proceeds of the 2027 Notes after payment of the offering fees and expenses were used to repay in full the outstanding borrowings under Operating Company's then-outstanding term loans under its senior secured credit facilities that would otherwise have matured in May 2024.
2.375% Euro-denominated Senior Notes due 2028
In March 2020, Operating Company completed a private offering of the 2028 Notes. The 2028 Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally, by all of the wholly owned U.S. subsidiaries of Operating Company that guarantee its senior secured credit facilities. The 2028 Notes were offered in the U.S. to qualified institutional buyers in reliance on Rule 144A under the Securities Act and outside the U.S. only to non-U.S. investors pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act. The 2028 Notes will mature on March 1, 2028 and bear interest at the rate of 2.375% per annum. Interest is payable semi-annually in arrears on March 1 and September 1 of each year, beginning on September 1, 2020. The proceeds of the 2028 Notes after payment of the offering fees and expenses were used to repay in full the outstanding borrowings under Operating Company's euro-denominated term loans under its senior secured credit facilities, that would otherwise have matured in May 2024, and repay in full the 2024 Notes, which would otherwise have matured in December 2024, plus any accrued and unpaid interest thereon, with the remainder available for general corporate purposes.
3.125% Senior Notes due 2029
In February 2021, Operating Company completed a private offering of the 2029 Notes. The 2029 Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally, by all of the wholly owned U.S. subsidiaries of Operating Company that guarantee its senior secured credit facilities. The 2029 Notes will mature on February 15, 2029 and bear interest at the rate of 3.125% per annum payable semi-annually in arrears on February 15 and August 15 of each year, beginning on August 15, 2021. The proceeds of the 2029 Notes after payment of the offering fees and expenses were used to repay in full the outstanding borrowings under the 2026 Notes, plus any accrued and unpaid interest thereon, with the remainder available for general corporate purposes.
Deferred Purchase Consideration
Of the $950 million aggregate nominal purchase price for the Catalent Indiana acquisition, $200 million was payable in four annual $50 million installments. We made installment payments in October 2018, 2019 and 2020. The balance of the deferred purchase consideration is due in October 2021, with the difference between the remaining nominal amount and the fair value balance recorded at date of acquisition treated as imputed interest.
Debt Covenants
Senior Secured Credit Facilities
The Credit Agreement contains covenants that, among other things, restrict, subject to certain exceptions, Operating Company’s (and Operating Company’s restricted subsidiaries’) ability to incur additional indebtedness or issue certain preferred shares; create liens on assets; engage in mergers and consolidations; sell assets; pay dividends and distributions or repurchase capital stock; repay subordinated indebtedness; engage in certain transactions with affiliates; make investments, loans, or advances; make certain acquisitions; enter into sale and leaseback transactions; amend material agreements governing Operating Company’s subordinated indebtedness; and change Operating Company’s lines of business.
The Credit Agreement also contains change-of-control provisions and certain customary affirmative covenants and events of default. The Revolving Credit Facility requires compliance with a net leverage covenant when there is a 30% or more draw outstanding at a period end. As of June 30, 2021, Operating Company was in compliance with all material covenants under the Credit Agreement.
Subject to certain exceptions, the Credit Agreement permits Operating Company and its restricted subsidiaries to incur certain additional indebtedness, including secured indebtedness. None of Operating Company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries nor its dormant Puerto Rico subsidiary is a guarantor of the loans.
Under the Credit Agreement, Operating Company’s ability to engage in certain activities such as incurring certain additional indebtedness, making certain investments, and paying certain dividends is tied to ratios based on Adjusted EBITDA (which is defined as “Consolidated EBITDA” in the Credit Agreement). Adjusted EBITDA is based on the definitions in the Credit Agreement, is not defined under U.S. GAAP, and is subject to important limitations. See “-Non-GAAP Metrics” for further details on Adjusted EBITDA.
As market conditions warrant, we may from time to time seek to purchase our outstanding debt in privately negotiated or open-market transactions, by tender offer or otherwise. Subject to any limitation contained in the Credit Agreement, any purchase made by us may be funded by the use of cash on hand or the incurrence of new secured or unsecured debt. The amount involved in any such purchase transaction, individually or in the aggregate, may be material. Any such purchase may involve a substantial amount of one particular class or series of debt, with the attendant reduction in the trading liquidity of such class or series.
The Senior Notes
The Indentures contain certain covenants that, among other things, limit the ability of Operating Company and its restricted subsidiaries to incur or guarantee more debt or issue certain preferred shares; pay dividends on, repurchase, or make distributions in respect of their capital stock or make other restricted payments; make certain investments; sell certain assets; create liens; consolidate, merge, sell; or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of their assets; enter into certain transactions with their affiliates, and designate their subsidiaries as unrestricted subsidiaries. These covenants are subject to a number of exceptions, limitations, and qualifications as set forth in the Indentures. The Indentures also contain customary events of default including, but not limited to, nonpayment, breach of covenants, and payment or acceleration defaults in certain other indebtedness of Operating Company or certain of its subsidiaries. Upon an event of default, either the holders of at least 30% in principal amount of each of the then-outstanding Senior Notes or the applicable Trustee under the Indentures, may declare the applicable Senior Notes immediately due and payable; or in certain circumstances, the applicable Senior Notes will automatically become immediately due and payable. As of June 30, 2021, Operating Company was in compliance with all material covenants under the Indentures.
Liquidity in Foreign Subsidiaries
As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, the amounts of cash and cash equivalents held by foreign subsidiaries were $351 million and $228 million, respectively, out of total consolidated cash and cash equivalents of $896 million and $953 million, respectively. These balances are dispersed across many international locations around the world.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income per Share
The below tables summarize our fiscal 2021 and 2020 results with respect to certain financial metrics we use to measure performance throughout the fiscal year. Refer to “Non-GAAP Metrics” for further details regarding Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted net income per share.
A reconciliation between Adjusted EBITDA and net earnings, the most directly comparable measure under U.S. GAAP, which also shows the adjustments from EBITDA from operations, follows:
(1) Foreign exchange gain of $4 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 includes: (a) $13 million of unrealized losses related to foreign trade receivables and payables, (b) $3 million of unrealized losses on the unhedged portion of our euro-denominated debt, and (c) $25 million of unrealized gains on inter-company loans. The foreign exchange adjustment was also affected by the exclusion of realized foreign currency exchange rate losses from the settlement of inter-company loans of $5 million. Inter-company loans exist between our subsidiaries and do not reflect the ongoing results of our trade operations.
Foreign exchange loss of $1 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 includes: (a) $5 million of unrealized losses related to foreign trade receivables and payables, (b) $6 million of unrealized gains on the unhedged portion of the euro-denominated debt, and (c) $5 million of unrealized losses on inter-company loans. The foreign exchange adjustment was also affected by the exclusion of realized foreign currency exchange rate gains from the
settlement of inter-company loans of $3 million. Inter-company loans exist between our subsidiaries and do not reflect the ongoing results of our trade operations.
(2) Primarily represents the gain recorded on the change in the estimated fair value of the derivative liability.
A reconciliation between Adjusted Net Income and net earnings, the most directly comparable measure under U.S. GAAP, follows. The table also provides a calculation of Adjusted Net Income per each basic share and each diluted share.
(1) Represents the amortization attributable to purchase accounting for previously completed business combinations.
(2) Foreign exchange gain of $4 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 includes: (a) $13 million of unrealized losses related to foreign trade receivables and payables, (b) $3 million of unrealized losses on the unhedged portion of the euro-denominated debt, and (c) $25 million of unrealized gains on inter-company loans. The foreign exchange adjustment was also affected by the exclusion of realized foreign currency exchange rate losses from the settlement of inter-company loans of $5 million. Inter-company loans exist between our subsidiaries and do not reflect the ongoing results of our trade operations.
Foreign exchange loss of $1 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 includes: (a) $5 million of unrealized losses related to foreign trade receivables and payables, (b) $6 million of unrealized gains on the unhedged portion of the euro-denominated debt, and (c) $5 million of unrealized losses on inter-company loans. The foreign exchange adjustment was also affected by the exclusion of realized foreign currency exchange rate gains from the settlement of inter-company loans of $3 million. Inter-company loans exist between our subsidiaries and do not reflect the ongoing results of our trade operations.
(3) Primarily represents the gain recorded on the change in the estimated fair value of the derivative liability.
(4) We computed the tax effect of adjustments to Adjusted Net Income by applying the statutory tax rate in the relevant jurisdictions to the income or expense items that are adjusted in the period presented. If a valuation allowance exists, the rate applied is zero.
(5) Discrete period income tax expense (benefit) items are unusual or infrequently occurring items, primarily including: changes in judgment related to the realizability of deferred tax assets in future years, changes in measurement of a prior year tax position, deferred tax impact of changes in tax law, and purchase accounting.
(6) Represents Adjusted Net Income divided by the weighted average of Common Stock outstanding. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, and 2020, the weighted average was 168 million and 150 million, respectively.
(7) Represents Adjusted Net Income divided by the weighted average sum of (a) the number of shares of Common Stock outstanding, plus (b) the number of shares of Common Stock that would be issued assuming exercise or vesting of all potentially dilutive instruments, plus (c) the number of shares of Common Stock equivalent to the shares of Series A Preferred Stock outstanding under the "if-converted" method. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, the weighted average was 180 million and 165 million, respectively.
Interest Rate Risk Management
A portion of the debt used to finance our operations is exposed to interest-rate fluctuations. We may use various hedging strategies and derivative financial instruments to create an appropriate mix of fixed-and floating-rate assets and liabilities. In February 2021, we replaced one interest-rate swap agreement with Bank of America N.A. with another, and each acts or acted as a hedge against the economic effect of a portion of the variable-interest obligation associated with our U.S dollar-denominated term loans under our senior secured credit facilities, so that the interest payable on that portion of the debt becomes fixed at a certain rate, thereby reducing the impact of future interest-rate changes on future interest expense. The applicable rate for the U.S. dollar-denominated term loan under the Credit Agreement was LIBOR (subject to a floor of 0.50%) plus 2.00% as of June 30, 2021; however, as a result of the interest-rate swap agreement, the floating portion of the applicable rate on $500 million of the term loan was effectively fixed at 0.9985% as of February 2021.
Currency Risk Management
We are exposed to fluctuations in the euro-U.S. dollar exchange rate on our investments in our foreign operations in Europe. While we do not actively hedge against changes in foreign currency, we have mitigated the exposure of our investments in our European operations by denominating a portion of our debt in euros. At June 30, 2021, we had $984 million of euro-denominated debt outstanding that qualifies as a hedge on a net investment in foreign operations. Refer to Note 9, Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of net investment hedge activity in the period.
From time to time, we may use forward currency exchange contracts to manage our exposure to the variability of cash flows primarily related to the foreign exchange rate changes of future foreign currency transaction costs. In addition, we may use foreign currency forward contracts to protect the value of existing foreign currency assets and liabilities. Currently, we do not use foreign currency exchange contracts. We expect to continue to evaluate hedging opportunities for foreign currency in the future.