Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Throughout this section, unless otherwise noted “we,” “us,” “our,” “Company,” or “Nesco” refers to Nesco Holdings, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Actual results could differ materially from such forward-looking statements as a result of various risk factors, including those that may not be in the control of management. For further information on items that could impact our future operating performance or financial condition, see the section herein entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and the section entitled “Risk Factors”. This section of the Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2020 to 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 on our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview of Markets and Related Industry Performance
Nesco was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic during second quarter of 2020 and continuing into the third quarter of 2020, when we began to see an uneven recovery take hold. New project starts increased in August, September and October before additional pandemic related shutdowns in November and December led to additional temporary project delays, which impacted ERS rental revenue. While Nesco has not yet reached the same levels as a year ago, and remains cautious about the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, original equipment cost (or, “OEC”) on rent improved compared to the end of the second quarter to the end of the year.
Nesco serves critical infrastructure sectors that have been identified by the United States Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (“CISA”) as vital to the U.S. Accordingly, we have continued to meet the needs of our customers during the pandemic. We continue to adhere to protocols designed to maintain the health and safety of our employees and their families, as well as our customers, vendors and communities. These protocols have allowed the Company to keep all business and service locations operational throughout the pandemic with little to no disruption.
Starting in March, we saw a decline in demand from customers as planned projects were delayed in response to the uncertainty caused by the onset of the pandemic. These delays were most pronounced in electric utility T&D customers close to population centers in efforts to promote social distancing. Electric transmission customers also delayed planned new project starts. This led to a decline in OEC on rent during the second quarter that began to impact business in the third and fourth quarters. As projects ended or were delayed, equipment was returned and there was little offsetting demand from new projects. This trend began to reverse starting in late August. Nesco started to service new electric distribution projects and then benefited from a normal seasonal uptick of new electric transmission projects in August, which continued through October. However, with additional COVID-19 shutdowns during November and December, additional projects were temporarily delayed. Electric utility T&D customers continue to have large backlogs of projects that must be undertaken to maintain an aged grid, to reduce fire hazards, to ensure the uninterrupted supply of electricity and to meet growing electricity demands of the future tied to increased household usages and vehicle electrification. We have experienced relative stability in the rail and telecom sectors. Telecom end-customers have announced intentions to continue to invest in 5G infrastructure and additional network enhancements designed to address deficiencies that became apparent with increased traffic during pandemic stay-at-home orders.
The unprecedented nature of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to make it difficult to predict our future business and financial performance. However, our customers continue to reiterate record or near-record backlogs and capital investment plans. We are not aware of any significant project cancellations by our customers during the pandemic at this time. Customer projects that we are aware of were merely delayed. Many projects that were previously delayed have now been rescheduled. Following the project delays from March to August, we are now experiencing an increase in demand as customers work to fulfill backlogs. Like Nesco, our customers have become more adept at working safely within the pandemic environment.
At the onset of the pandemic, our focus was on delivering upon the needs of our customers, managing costs and cash flows, and preparing for a future recovery. We reduced our capital spending, our working capital balances and undertook cost reduction efforts including limited headcount reductions. As part of these efforts we reduced our service costs by limiting repairs on equipment coming off-rent to levels required to meet demand. We now believe the beginning of a pivot towards a recovery is underway. This led to temporary service cost increases during the fourth quarter as we sought to rapidly deploy equipment to meet customer demand. As we look ahead to 2021, leading up to the planned acquisition of Custom Truck, we are continuing to position ourselves for long-term growth while maintaining a financial position and liquidity level that provides flexibility in the face of ongoing uncertainty.
Financial Overview
We use a variety of operational and financial metrics, including non-GAAP financial measures, such as EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, to enable us to analyze our performance and financial condition. We utilize these financial measures to manage our business on a day-to-day basis and believe that they are the most relevant measures of performance. Some of these measures are commonly used in our industry to evaluate performance. We believe these non-GAAP measures provide expanded insight to assess performance, in addition to the standard GAAP-based financial measures. There are no specific rules or regulations for determining non-GAAP measures, and as such, our non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to measures used by other companies within the industry.
The presentation of non-GAAP financial information should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. You should read this discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition together with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto also included within.
Measures Related to our Fleet
We consider the following key operational measures when evaluating our performance and making day-to-day operating decisions:
OEC on rent - OEC on rent is the original equipment cost of units rented to customers at a given point in time. Average OEC on rent is calculated as the weighted-average OEC on rent during the stated period. OEC represents the original equipment cost, exclusive of the effect of adjustments to rental equipment fleet acquired in business combinations, and is the basis for calculating certain of the measures set forth below. This adjusted measure of OEC is used by our creditors pursuant to our credit agreements, wherein this is a component of the basis for determining compliance with our financial loan covenants. Additionally, the pricing of our rental contracts and equipment sales prices for our equipment is based upon OEC, and we measure a rate of return from our rentals and sales using OEC. OEC is a widely used industry metric to compare fleet dollar value independent of depreciation.
Fleet utilization - Fleet utilization is defined as the total numbers of days the rental equipment was rented during a specified period of time divided by the total number of days available during the same period and weighted based on OEC. Utilization is a measure of fleet efficiency expressed as a percentage of time the fleet is on rent and is considered to be an important indicator of the revenue generating capacity of the fleet.
OEC on rent yield - OEC on rent yield (“ORY”) is a measure of return realized by our rental fleet during a period. ORY is calculated as rental revenue (excluding freight recovery and ancillary fees) during the stated period divided by the average OEC on rent for the same period. For periods less than 12 months, ORY is adjusted to an annualized basis.
Gross Profit, Income from Operations and Cash Flow from Operations
Gross profit, income from operations and cash flow from operations are financial performance measures that we use to monitor our results from operations and to measure our performance against our debt covenants. Additionally, from time to time we separately describe two components included in our measure of gross profit, depreciation of rental equipment and major repairs disposal expenses, each of which represents non-cash items. Refer to our discussion of Adjusted EBITDA for further information.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial performance measure that Nesco uses to monitor its results from operations, to measure performance against debt covenants and performance relative to competitors. Nesco believes Adjusted EBITDA is a useful performance measure because it allows for an effective evaluation of operating performance when compared to peers, without regard to financing methods or capital structures. Nesco excludes the items identified in the reconciliations of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA because these amounts are either non-recurring or can vary substantially within the industry depending upon accounting methods and book values of assets, capital structures and the method by which the assets were acquired. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net income (loss) determined in accordance with GAAP. Certain items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA are significant components in understanding and assessing a company’s financial performance, such as a company’s cost of capital and tax structure, as well as the historical costs of depreciable assets, none of which are reflected in Adjusted EBITDA. Nesco’s presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an indication that results will be unaffected by the items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA. Nesco’s computation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be identical to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
Nesco defines Adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, equity-based compensation, and other items that Nesco does not view as indicative of ongoing performance. Additionally, Nesco’s Adjusted
EBITDA includes an adjustment to exclude the effects of purchase accounting adjustments when calculating the cost of inventory and used equipment sold. When inventory or equipment is purchased in connection with a business combination, the assets are revalued to their current fair values for accounting purposes. The consideration transferred (i.e., the purchase price) in a business combination is allocated to the fair values of the assets as of the acquisition date, with amortization or depreciation recorded thereafter following applicable accounting policies; however, this may not be indicative of the actual cost to acquire inventory or new equipment that is added to product inventory or the rental fleets apart from a business acquisition. Additionally, the pricing of rental contracts and equipment sales prices for equipment is based upon original equipment cost (or, “OEC”), and Nesco measures a rate of return from rentals and sales using OEC. As indicated above, the agreements governing Nesco’s indebtedness define this adjustment to EBITDA, as such, and it is believed this metric is a better indication of its true cost of equipment sales due to the removal of the purchase accounting adjustments.
Operating Results
Total Revenue. Total revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $302.7 million, which represents an increase of $38.7 million, or 14.7%, when compared to 2019. Rental revenue decreased to $195.5 million, or 1.3%, in 2020 compared to 2019 driven by rental fleet investments made in 2019 and partially offset by delays in projects resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in the second quarter of 2020. Sales of rental equipment increased to $31.5 million, or 32.7%, and sales of new equipment increased to $25.1 million, or 143.5%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in equipment sales is the result of the higher investment made in new equipment inventory in 2019 and early 2020 as well as the concerted effort made to market and sell aging units from the rental fleet during the year. Parts sales and service revenue increased to $50.6 million, or 58.4%, in 2020 when compared to 2019 due to the acquisition of Truck Utilities in the fourth quarter of 2019 and opening of new distribution center warehouses.
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue in 2020 increased by $40.8 million, or 38.2%, compared to 2019. The majority of the increase in cost of revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 can be attributed to incremental costs associated with the increases in equipment sales revenue and parts sales and service revenue.
Depreciation. Depreciation of rental equipment increased in 2020 and 2019 compared to the corresponding prior year periods as a direct result of the additional investments made in rental fleet. The acquisition of Truck Utilities in the fourth quarter of 2019 also contributed to the increase in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 increased $8.7 million, or 17.1%, compared to 2019. The increase is partially due to increased selling, general and administrative expenses as a result of increased headcount with the expansion of the organization and additional expenses incurred as a result of being a public company. Offsetting the increase is a reduction in transaction expenses of $1.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, which were directly related to the merger with Capitol in 2019.
Other Expense. Other expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 decreased $0.5 million, or 0.7%, compared to 2019. Other expense in 2019 included loss of extinguishment of debt of $4.0 million directly related to the transactions with Capitol, which closed on July 31, 2019. Additionally, the changes in fair value of an interest rate collar, which is an undesignated hedging instrument, resulted in $5.3 million of expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.7 million in 2019.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense was a benefit of $30.1 million for twelve months ended December 31, 2020. We recorded a reduction of our deferred tax valuation allowance related to federal and state net operating loss carryforwards as well as disallowed interest expense deduction carryforwards. Final regulations issued by the US Treasury and Internal Revenue Service prompted a reassessment of how we had established valuation allowances in prior interim and annual periods, which were based on interpretations regarding the impacts of the interest limitation rules. In our revised assessment, we estimate that we are more likely than not, able to realize certain of our federal and state deferred tax assets within the period that the carryforwards expire.
Financial Performance
We believe that our operating model, together with our highly variable cost structure, enables us to sustain high margins, strong cash flow generation and stable financial performance throughout various economic cycles. We are able to generate free cash flow through our earnings, as well as sales of used equipment. Our highly variable cost structure adjusts with the utilization of our equipment, thereby reducing our costs to match our revenue. We principally evaluate financial performance based on the following measurements: Adjusted EBITDA, OEC on rent, fleet utilization and OEC on rent yield. The following table summarizes these operating metrics.
The presentation of non-GAAP financial information should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(a) EBITDA represents net income (loss) before interest, provision for income taxes, depreciation, and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA as further adjusted for (1) non-cash purchase accounting impact, (2) transaction and process improvement costs, including the effect of the cessation of operations in Mexico, (3) major repairs, (4) share-based payments, and (5) the change in fair value of derivative instruments. These metrics are subject to certain limitations. See “Financial Overview-Adjusted EBITDA” and the reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to U.S. GAAP net income (loss) below.
(b) Average OEC on rent is the average original equipment cost of units on rent during the period. The measure provides a value dimension to the fleet utilization statistics. This metric has been adjusted to exclude Mexico, which the Company commenced exit activities in the third quarter of 2019.
(c) Fleet utilization for the period is calculated by dividing the amount of time an asset is on rent by the amount of time the asset has been owned during the year. Time on rent is weighted by original equipment cost. This metric has been adjusted to exclude Mexico, which the Company commenced exit activities in the third quarter of 2019.
(d) OEC on rent yield (“ORY”) is a measure of return realized by our on rental fleet during the 12-month period. ORY is calculated as rental revenue (excluding freight recovery and ancillary fees) during the stated period divided by the Average OEC on Rent for the same period. For periods less than 12 months, the ORY is adjusted to an annualized basis.
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA decreased $8.9 million, or 7.0%, to $118.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. This decrease is primarily due to the decrease in gross profit as a result of equipment sales and parts sales and services comprising a higher proportion of our total revenue mix in 2020 (35.4%) compared to 2019 (25.0%). The higher level of selling, general and administrative expenses from added headcount and full-year public company costs also contributed to the decline.
The following is a reconciliation from U.S. GAAP net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 and a reconciliation from Adjusted EBITDA to U.S. GAAP net cash from operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
____________
Notes to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA reconciliations:
(1) Represents the non-cash impact of purchase accounting, net of accumulated depreciation, on the cost of equipment sold. The equipment acquired received a purchase step-up in basis, which is a non-cash adjustment to the equipment cost pursuant to our credit agreement.
(2) 2020: Represents transaction costs related to Nesco’s acquisition of Truck Utilities (which includes post-acquisition integration expenses incurred during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and transaction expenses related to the pending acquisition of Custom Truck; 2019: Represents transaction expenses related to merger activities associated with the transaction with Capitol that was consummated on July 31, 2019. These expenses are comprised of professional consultancy, legal, tax and accounting fees. Also included are costs of startup activities (which include training, travel, and process setup costs) associated with the rollout of new PTA locations that occurred throughout the prior year into the current period. Finally, the expenses associated with the closure of operations in Mexico, which closure activities commenced in the third quarter of 2019, are included for the twelve month period periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Pursuant to Nesco’s credit agreement, the cost of undertakings to affect such cost savings, operating expense reductions and other synergies, as well as any expenses incurred in connection with acquisitions, are amounts to be included in the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA.
(3) Represents the undepreciated cost of replaced vehicle chassis and components from heavy maintenance, repair and overhaul activities associated with our fleet, which is an adjustment pursuant to our credit agreement.
(4) Represents non-cash stock compensation expense associated with the issuance of stock options and restricted stock units.
(5) Represents charges incurred in 2018 for the early termination of fleet equipment leases.
(6) Represents the charge to earnings for our interest rate collar (which is an undesignated hedge).
OEC on Rent. Average OEC on rent for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $482.0 million, up from $479.0 million for 2019. The increase is due to fleet investments made in 2019 and continued demand from customers which increased in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 following first and second quarter headwinds from COVID-19 related project delays.
Fleet Utilization. Fleet utilization was 74.6% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, compared to 84.7% for 2019. The decrease is the result of project delay headwinds experienced in the second quarter and beginning of the third quarter stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic coupled with the significant level of fleet investment made in new rental equipment and acquired rental fleet in the second half of 2019.
OEC On Rent Yield. OEC on rent yield was 36.0% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, compared to 36.9% in 2019, and 37.1% in 2018. Relatively flat ORY was driven by the mix of equipment types on rent and holding rental rates steady in 2020, 2019 and 2018, including during the COVID-19 economic slowdown.
Operating Results by Segment
The Company manages its operations through two business segments: ERS, and the rental and sale of PTA. See Note 3, Segments, to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Equipment Rental and Sales Segment (ERS)
Our ERS segment primarily provides equipment to contractors who install, repair and maintain infrastructure assets, including T&D electric cabling (above and below ground), telecommunications networks and rail systems in addition to installing lighting and signage.
ERS segment revenue increased by $19.8 million or 9.1%, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Rental revenue decreased by $2.8 million over the prior period primarily due to pandemic-related project delays starting in the second quarter and impacting each of the subsequent quarters. New equipment sales increased by $14.8 million, or 143.5%, compared to 2019. Used equipment sales increased by $7.8 million. The increase in equipment sales is the result of the segment’s higher investment in new equipment inventory in 2019 and early 2020 and the sale of aging fleet units from the rental fleet, including units from the shut-down operations in Mexico.
The $27.0 million increase in cost of revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year is primarily due to costs related to increased sales of rental and new equipment.
Depreciation of our rental fleet increased by $8.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to growth in fleet equipment.
Gross profit, excluding depreciation of $74.4 million, decreased by $7.2 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the higher mix of equipment sales to total revenue and reduced fleet utilization from pandemic related project delays.
Parts, Tools, and Accessories Segment (PTA)
The PTA segment of our business complements products and services provided by our ERS operating segment. PTA is a natural adjunct to our specialty equipment rental offering. Our PTA segment offers customers sale and rental solutions for parts, tools and accessories to complement our specialty equipment line. Our PTA segment also includes maintenance, repair and upfit services of new and used heavy-duty trucks and cranes.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, PTA segment revenue increased by $18.9 million, or 40.1%. The increase in revenue is primarily due to the acquisition of Truck Utilities in the fourth quarter of 2019. The PTA segment experienced headwinds from COVID-19 social distancing measures in the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of new project delays, which offset the revenue increase brought on by the Truck Utilities acquisition.
Cost of revenue in the PTA segment increased $13.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as a direct result of the increase in parts sales and service volume stemming from the Truck Utilities acquisition, as well as the expansion of operations from two PTA locations to seven over the course of 2019 with an eighth location partially opening during the second quarter of 2020. This expanded footprint, designed to service growth, has not yet eventuated due to COVID-19. Similar to ERS, as a recovery takes hold, we have significant capacity in place within the PTA segment to support growth with limited new investments.
PTA gross profit increased $5.2 million, or 41.8%, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. The changes in gross profit were driven by higher revenue in the segment, but offset by higher costs as a result of expanded geographic footprint.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows and Liquidity
Our primary cash needs have been to meet debt service requirements and to fund working capital and capital expenditures. We fund these requirements from cash generated by our rental operations and cash received from the sale of equipment, as well as funds available under our credit facilities. As of December 31, 2020, we had $3.4 million in cash compared to $6.3 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had $251.0 million of outstanding borrowings under our 2019 Credit Facility (as defined below) with an additional $93.6 million in availability (subject to a borrowing base) compared to $209.0 million outstanding as of December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $1.4 million of letters of credit outstanding.
Due to the condition and relatively young age of our fleet, we have the ability to significantly reduce or suspend capital expenditures during difficult economic times in order to generate additional cash flow during these periods. We believe that our cash generated by our rental operations and cash received from the sale of equipment, as well as funds available under our 2019 Credit Facility will be adequate to meet our operating, investing and financing needs for the foreseeable future. To the extent additional funds are necessary to meet our long-term liquidity needs as we continue to execute our business strategy, we anticipate that they will be obtained through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of funds. Our ability to meet our operating, investing and financing needs depends to a significant extent on our future financial performance, which will be subject in part to general economic, competitive, financial, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control, including those described in PART I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. In addition to these general economic and industry factors, the principal factors in determining whether our cash flows will be sufficient to meet our liquidity requirements will be changes in governmental regulations for the T&D industry, weather, and our customers’ ability to secure materials. In the event that we need access to additional cash, we may not be able to access the credit markets on commercially acceptable terms or at all. We expect to continually assess our performance, the economic environment and market conditions to guide our decisions regarding our uses of cash, including capital expenditures.
2019 Credit Facility
On July 31, 2019, we entered into an agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., Fifth Third Bank, Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., Deutsche Bank AG New York Branch, Deutsche Bank AG Cayman Islands Branch, Deutsche Bank Securities Inc., and Citigroup Global Markets Inc., pursuant to which such parties provided us with $350.0 million in aggregate principal amount of commitments pursuant to a first lien senior secured asset based revolving credit facility (“2019 Credit Facility” or the “revolving credit facility”). The 2019 Credit Facility includes borrowing capacity available for letters of credit, borrowings on a same-day notice basis and a swingline sub-facility. On March 10, 2020, we entered into the Incremental Agreement amending the 2019 Revolving Credit Facility. The Incremental Agreement amends the syndicate of banks for a new participant that increased the maximum amount of the facility by $35.0 million to a total of $385.0 million.
The revolving credit facility has a five-year term and a floating rate of interest based on either the federal funds rate plus a margin ranging between 50 and 100 basis points or LIBOR plus a margin ranging between 150 and 200 basis points, in each case, depending on excess availability under the facility. Our availability under the revolving credit facility is a percentage of the value of our accounts receivable, our parts inventory, our fleet inventory, and our cash, in each case, subject to certain eligibility criteria. A portion of the revolving credit facility may be used for the issuance of letters of credit. The revolving credit facility is guaranteed by our wholly owned domestic subsidiaries, subject to customary exceptions, and is secured by substantially all assets of Nesco and the guarantors. We can reduce the aggregate commitments under the revolving credit facility without premium or penalty. The revolving credit facility contains covenants which, among other things, limit the incurrence of additional indebtedness (including acquired indebtedness), issuance of certain preferred stock, the payment of dividends, making restricted payments and investments, the purchase or acquisition or retirement for value of any equity interests, the provision of loans or advances to restricted subsidiaries, the sale or lease or transfer of any properties to any restricted subsidiaries, the transfer or sale of assets, and the creation of certain liens.
Senior Secured Notes due 2024
On July 31, 2019 we completed a private offering for Senior Secured Second Lien Notes due 2024 (the “Senior Secured Notes”) issued by Capitol Investment Merger Sub 2, LLC, our wholly owned and indirect subsidiary (the “Issuer”). The aggregate principal amount of the Senior Secured Notes was $475.0 million. The Senior Secured Notes bear interest at a rate of 10.0% per annum payable semi-annually, in cash in arrears, on February 1 and August 1 of each year, which commenced on February 1, 2020. The Senior Secured Notes do not have registration rights.
A summary of the key provisions are as follows:
Guarantors The Senior Secured Notes are guaranteed (the “Guarantees”) by Intermediate Holdings, our wholly owned subsidiary and the wholly owned domestic subsidiaries of the Issuer (together, “Guarantors”) that guarantee obligations under the 2019 Credit Facility or any future debt of Nesco or any other Guarantors.
Security The Senior Secured Notes and the Guarantees are secured on a second-priority basis by all assets of Nesco and the Guarantors that secure our obligations under the 2019 Credit Facility.
Ranking The Senior Secured Notes and the Guarantees are general senior secured obligations. The Senior Secured Notes rank equally in right of payment with all of our existing and future senior debt and rank senior in right of payment to all of our future subordinated obligations. The Guarantees rank equally in right of payment with all of the Guarantors’ existing and future senior obligations and rank senior in right of payment to all of the Guarantors’ existing and future subordinated obligations. The Senior Secured Notes and the Guarantees rank effectively subordinated to all of the Guarantors’ and our first-priority secured debt, including borrowings under the 2019 Credit Facility.
Redemption and Repurchase The Senior Secured Notes are redeemable, in whole or in part, at any time at specified redemption prices. At any time prior to August 1, 2021, we may redeem all or part of the notes at a redemption price equal to 100.0% of the principal amount, plus an applicable premium, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date. The applicable premium entitles holders of the Senior Secured Notes to receive a make-whole payment calculated as the greater of 1% of the principal amount and the excess of the present value of the redemption price. We may also redeem some or all of the notes: from August 1, 2021, but before July 31, 2022, at a redemption price of 105.0% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date; from August 1, 2022, but before July 31, 2023, at a redemption price of 102.5% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date; and after August 1, 2023, at a redemption price of 100.0% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date. In addition, we may redeem up to 40.0% of the Senior Secured Notes until August 1, 2021, at a redemption price of 110.0% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date, with the net cash proceeds from one or more equity offerings. In addition, we may be required to make an offer to purchase the Senior Secured Notes upon the sale of certain assets and upon a change of control.
Covenants The Senior Secured Notes contain various restrictive covenants.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes Nesco’s sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $3.4 million, a decrease of 2.9 million from December 31, 2019. Generally, we manage our cash flow by using any excess cash, after considering our working capital and capital expenditure needs, to pay down the outstanding balance of the 2019 Credit Facility.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $42.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $18.8 million in 2019. The increase is due to a $5.8 million improvement in net loss from 2019 to 2020 and a $32.9 million increase in cash flow provided from working capital changes from 2019 to 2020. Cash flow provided by working capital changes improved compared to 2019 as a result of the prior year’s investments in inventory for the new PTA locations. The increase in cash flows from operating activities from 2019 to 2020 can also be attributed to an increase in non-cash expenses, offset by the 2020 deferred tax benefit of $28.8 million from the release of a portion of the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $29.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to cash used in investing activities of $129.7 million in 2019. The reduction in net cash used in investing activities for 2020 is primarily due to the decrease in the Company’s cash outlay for purchases of rental equipment, $39.1 million, and acquisitions, $48.4 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used by financing activities was $16.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to cash provided by financing activities of 115.0 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to the incremental proceeds received in 2019 from the issuance of long-term debt and the merger and recapitalization in connection with the transactions with Capitol. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company repaid certain capital lease obligation liabilities, reducing obligations by $16.0 million in 2020 as compared to $5.2 million in 2019.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Interest on debt is comprised of contractually required interest payments calculated using the interest rate in effect as of December 31, 2020, on our 2019 Credit Facility (3.4%) and semi-annual interest payments required under our Senior Secured Notes at 10.0%.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). In applying accounting principles it is often required to use estimates. These estimates consider the facts, circumstances, and information available, and may be based on subjective inputs, assumptions, and information known and unknown to us. Material changes in certain of the estimates that we use, could potentially affect, by a material amount, our consolidated financial position and results of operations. Although results may vary, we believe our estimates are reasonable and appropriate. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for a summary of our significant accounting policies. The following describes certain of our significant accounting policies that involve more subjective and complex judgments where the effect on our consolidated financial position and operating performance could be material.
Revenue Recognition
Rental Revenue. Our rental contracts are for various equipment, parts, tools, and accessories under 28 day or monthly agreements which include automatic renewal provisions. The majority of our rental payments are due monthly. Revenue is recognized ratably over the rental agreement period and in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 840, Leases (“Topic 840”). Unearned revenue is reported in our deferred rent income line of our Consolidated Balance Sheet. We had deferred revenue of $1.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and $2.3 million as of December 31, 2019.
Sales of Rental Equipment and New Equipment. We sell both new and used equipment. Our new equipment products are sold at list price. Discounts or other pricing incentives or concessions are not significant. The contractual sales price for each individual product represents the standalone selling price. Our used equipment is of a sufficiently unique nature - based on the specifics of its age, usage, etc. - in that it does not have an observable standalone selling price. Equipment sales revenue is recognized when equipment is delivered, which is when the transfer of title, risks and rewards of ownership, and control are considered passed to the customer. Payment is usually due and collected within 30 days subsequent to transfer of control. There are no rights of return or warranties offered on equipment sales.
Parts Sales and Services. We sell parts, tools and accessories. We derive our services revenue primarily from maintenance, repair and upfit services on heavy-duty trucks and cranes. Revenue from these services includes parts sales needed to complete the service work. We recognize services revenue when the service work is completed. We record revenue on a point in time basis as parts are delivered. The amount of consideration we receive for parts is based upon a list price net of discounts and incentives, and the impact of such variable consideration is factored into the amount of revenue we recognize at any point in time. The amount of consideration received for service is based upon labor hours expended and parts utilized to perform and complete the necessary services for our customers. There are no rights of return or warranties offered on parts sales. Payment is usually due and collected within 30 days subsequent to delivery of parts or performance of service.
Useful Lives and Residual Values of Rental Equipment and Property and Equipment
Our rentable equipment consists of parts, tools and accessories and specialized rental equipment. Purchases of our equipment are recorded at cost and we depreciate cost to an estimated residual value. We depreciate our parts, tools, and accessories over their estimated useful rentable life of five years. We depreciate our rental equipment over its estimated useful rentable life of 7 years with an estimated residual value of 15%, using the straight-line method. Useful life is estimated based upon the expected period the equipment will be in the fleet as a rentable unit. A residual value is estimated to approximate the value of the equipment at the end of its useful (i.e., rentable) life, allowing for a reasonable profit margin on the sale of the equipment when we remove the unit from the fleet. In establishing useful lives and residual values, we consider factors related to the estimated engineered life of the equipment, as well as customer demand of differing types of equipment in order for us to hold and maintain an optimal mix of equipment types in our fleet. We also continuously evaluate factors related to the condition and serviceability of the equipment in our fleet in order to make estimates of useful life and expected end-of-life value. Depreciation of our equipment is recognized as a component of our cost of revenue. For sold equipment, the carrying value of an item is recognized as cost of equipment sale within cost of revenue. Changes in estimated useful life and/or residual value would impact our gross profit in our consolidated financial statements. To the extent that the useful lives of our rental equipment were to increase and decrease by one year, we estimate that our annual depreciation expense would decrease and increase by approximately $9.7 million and $12.9 million, respectively. Similarly, to the extent the estimated residual values of our rental equipment were to increase or decrease by one percentage point, we estimate that our annual depreciation expense would change by approximately $0.9 million. Any change in depreciation expense as a result of a hypothetical change in either useful lives or residual values would generally result in a proportional increase or decrease in the gross profit we would recognize upon the ultimate sale of the asset.
Business Combinations
We have made acquisitions in the past and may continue to make acquisitions in the future. We allocate the cost of the acquired enterprise to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. Rental equipment generally represents the largest component and was 62% of total assets acquired over the last three years followed by other intangible assets at 10% and goodwill at 22%. Goodwill is attributable to the synergies and economies of scale expected from the combination of the businesses.
In addition to long-lived fixed assets, we also acquire other assets and assume liabilities. These other assets and liabilities typically include, but are not limited to, parts inventory, accounts receivable, accounts payable, deferred revenue and other working capital items. Because of their short-term nature, the fair values of these other assets and liabilities generally approximate the carrying values reflected on the acquired entities’ balance sheets. However, when appropriate, we adjust these carrying values for factors such as collectability and existence. The intangible assets that we have acquired are primarily goodwill, customer relationships, trade names, and non-compete agreements. Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the cost of the acquired entity over the fair value of the net assets acquired. Customer relationships, trade names, and non-compete agreements are valued based on an excess earnings or income approach with consideration to projected cash flows.
Our estimates of the values of tangible assets from our business combinations, principally rental equipment, utilize data that reflect quoted prices for similar assets available in active markets (such as the used equipment market). For this reason, estimates of the fair values of these items is not considered to be highly subjective or complex. However, to estimate the values of intangible assets we utilize income methods that involve forecasting future cash flow related to the acquired businesses. The estimates of future cash flow require us to establish expectations about customer demand, investments in maintaining or expanding infrastructure for the markets the businesses serve, and the supply and capacity of equipment in the rental market, among others. Additionally, we are required to establish expectations for the businesses’ cost of capital and ability to acquire and maintain equipment in the future. Changes in these assumptions would have an impact on the amount of intangible assets recorded and the resulting amortization expense.
Goodwill and the Evaluation of Goodwill Impairment
We apply a fair value-based impairment test to the carrying value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets on an annual basis (as of October 1) and, if certain events or circumstances indicate that an impairment loss may have been incurred, on an interim basis. We assess the value of our goodwill and indefinite-lived assets under either a qualitative or quantitative approach. Under a qualitative approach, we consider various market factors, including certain of the key assumptions listed below. We analyze these factors to determine if events and circumstances have affected the fair value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the asset may be impaired, we use the quantitative approach to assess the asset's fair value and the amount of the impairment. Under a quantitative approach, we calculate the fair value of the asset incorporating the key assumptions listed below into our calculation. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which we have determined to be ERS and PTA. We use a variety of methodologies in conducting impairment assessments, including qualitative analysis, income and market approaches. The market value approach compares current and projected financial results to entities of similar size and industry to determine market value. The income approach utilizes assumptions regarding estimated future cash flows and other factors to determine the fair value of the respective assets. These cash flows consider factors regarding expected future operating income and historical trends.
Factors that management must estimate when performing impairment tests include sales volume, prices, inflation, discount rates, tax rates and capital spending. Significant management judgment is involved in estimating these factors, and they include inherent uncertainties. The estimates of future cash flow require us to establish expectations about customer demand, investments in maintaining or expanding infrastructure for the markets each reporting unit serves, and the supply and capacity of equipment in the rental market, among other factors. Additionally, we are required to establish expectations for the businesses’ cost of capital and ability to acquire and maintain equipment in the future. Measurement of the recoverability of these assets is dependent upon the accuracy of the assumptions used in making these estimates, as well as how the estimates compare to our eventual future operating performance. Changes in these estimates could change our conclusion regarding the impairment of goodwill assets and potentially result in a non-cash impairment in the future period.
Our consolidated goodwill balance was $238.1 million at December 31, 2020. Based on our quantitative assessment of all relevant factors, we determined that the fair value of goodwill significantly exceeded the carrying value and, therefore, there was no indication that goodwill was impaired.
Our consolidated indefinite-lived intangible asset balance was $28.0 million at December 31, 2020, and is comprised of the Nesco tradename. Based on our quantitative assessment of all relevant factors, we determined that the fair value of our indefinite-lived
intangible asset significantly exceeded the carrying value and, therefore, there was no indication that the indefinite-lived intangible asset was impaired.
Income Taxes
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. government enacted comprehensive tax legislation commonly referred to as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “TCJA”). The TCJA made broad and complex changes to the U.S. tax code. The principal change impacting our tax provision includes the limitation on deductible interest expense, the resulting federal limitation from which creates an indefinite lived deferred tax asset for which a valuation allowance assessment is required. This limitation is affected by the determination of the meaning of depreciation, which was clarified by the final regulations issued on July 27, 2020 described below. In March 2020, the United States Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) reduced the amount of disallowed interest expense which resulted in a greater amount of interest deduction. On July 27, 2020, the United States Department of Treasury and Internal Revenue Service issued final regulations that provided guidance on the determination of disallowed interest expense (the “Final Regulations”).
The provision for, or benefit from, income taxes includes deferred taxes resulting from temporary differences in income for financial and tax purposes using the liability method. Such temporary differences result primarily from differences in the carrying value of assets and liabilities. Future realization of deferred income tax assets requires sufficient taxable income within the carryback and/or carryforward period available under tax law. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets.
The evaluation includes the consideration of all available evidence, both positive and negative, regarding the estimated future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, estimated future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards, historical taxable income in prior carryback periods if carryback is permitted, and potential tax planning strategies which may be employed to prevent an operating loss or tax credit carryforward from expiring unused. The verifiable evidence such as future reversals of existing temporary differences and the ability to carryback are considered before the subjective sources such as estimated future taxable income exclusive of temporary differences and tax planning strategies. Our income tax carryforwards are comprised of federal and state net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”), some of which are subject to annual usage limitations. Certain of our state NOLs are subject to expiration, while other state NOLs and all of our federal NOLs do not have expirations. Valuation allowances are established when it is estimated that it is more likely than not that the tax benefit of the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
Our results have reflected a three year cumulative loss from operations. As a result, at December 31, 2019, we established $34.4 million in deferred tax asset valuation allowances. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a reduction of our deferred tax valuation allowance of approximately $5.0 million as a correction of the valuation allowance at December 31, 2019; and, we recorded an additional income tax benefit of approximately $8.7 million to correct the deferred tax valuation allowance recorded in prior 2020 interim periods. These releases of valuation allowance were based on our reassessment concerning sources of future taxable income, principally from interpretations related to the future interest deduction limitation under the TCJA, as well as the subsequent changes effective with the CARES Act and the Final Regulations.
While we remain in a cumulative loss condition, our ability to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets is generally limited to the ability to offset timing differences on taxable income associated with deferred tax liabilities. Therefore, a change in estimate of deferred tax asset valuation allowances for federal or state jurisdictions during this cumulative loss condition period will primarily be affected by changes in estimates of the time periods that deferred tax assets and liabilities will be realized, or on a limited basis to tax planning strategies that may result in a change in the amount of taxable income realized. At December 31, 2020, our deferred tax asset valuation allowance was $16.5 million.
Recent Accounting Standards
Leases. The FASB’s guidance issued under ASU No. 2016-02, "Leases (Topic 842)" will require all leases with durations greater than twelve months to be recognized on the balance sheet. Currently, we are required to apply Topic 842 in interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2021; however, adoption of the new standard may be required during the interim period in the year ending December 31, 2021 in the event we lose our current status as an “emerging growth company.”
While we have not completed our assessment, we believe adoption of this standard will have a significant impact on our consolidated balance sheets. However, we do not expect the adoption to have a significant impact on the recognition, measurement or presentation of lease expenses within the consolidated statements of operations or the consolidated statements of cash flows. Information about our undiscounted future lease payments and the timing of those payments is in Note 9 to the Notes to consolidated financial statements.
Under Topic 842, lessor accounting will remain substantially similar to the current accounting; however, certain refinements were made to conform the standard with the recently issued revenue recognition guidance in ASC Topic 606," Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”)," specifically related to the allocation and recognition of contract consideration earned from lease and non-
lease revenue components. On July 30, 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-11, which created a practical expedient that provides lessors an option not to separate lease and non-lease components when certain criteria are met and instead account for those components as a single lease component. We are currently in the process of evaluating whether our lease arrangements will meet the criteria under the practical expedient to account for lease and non-lease components as a single lease component, which would alleviate the requirement upon adoption of Topic 842 that we reallocate or separately present lease and non-lease components.
Information about the expected effect of adopting this new standard can be found in Note 2 to the Notes to consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets, or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any nonfinancial assets.
DISCLOSURE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS AND RISK FACTOR SUMMARY
Any statements made in this report that are not statements of historical fact, including statements about our beliefs and expectations, are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, as amended, and should be evaluated as such. Forward-looking statements include information concerning possible or assumed future results of operations, including descriptions of our business plan and strategies. These statements often include words such as “anticipate,” “expect,” “suggests,” “plan,” “believe,” “intend,” “estimates,” “targets,” “projects,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “may,” “will,” “forecast,” and other similar expressions. We base these forward-looking statements or projections on our current expectations, plans and assumptions that we have made in light of our experience in the industry, as well as our perceptions of historical trends, current conditions, expected future developments and other factors we believe are appropriate under the circumstances and at such time. As you read and consider this report, you should understand that these statements are not guarantees of performance or results. The forward-looking statements and projections are subject to and involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions and you should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements or projections. Although we believe that these forward-looking statements and projections are based on reasonable assumptions at the time they are made, you should be aware that many factors could affect our actual financial results or results of operations and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements and projections. Below is a summary of risk factors applicable to us that may materially affect such forward-looking statements and projections:
• The financial condition and results of operations of our business may be adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic or other pandemics;
• Demand for our products and services is cyclical and vulnerable to industry downturns and regional and national downturns, which may result from the current economic conditions;
• Our revenue and operating results have historically fluctuated and may continue to fluctuate, which could result in a decline in our profitability and make it more difficult for us to grow our business;
• We are subject to competition, which may have a material adverse effect on our business by reducing our ability to increase or maintain revenues or profitability;
• The cost of new equipment that we purchase for use in our rental fleet or for our sales inventory may increase and therefore we may spend more for such equipment, and in some cases, we may not be able to procure equipment on a timely basis due to supplier constraints;
• We may be unsuccessful at acquiring companies or at integrating companies that we acquire and, as a result, may not achieve expected benefits, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations;
• We might not be able to recruit and retain the experienced personnel we need to compete in our industries;
• Disruptions in our information technology systems or a compromise of security with respect to our systems could adversely affect our operating results by limiting our ability to effectively monitor and control our operations, adjust to changing market conditions, implement strategic initiatives;
• If we are unable to obtain additional capital as required, we may be unable to fund the capital outlays required for the success of our business;
• We are exposed to various risks related to legal proceedings or claims that could adversely affect our operating results. The nature of our business exposes us to various liability claims, which may exceed the level of our insurance coverage and thereby not fully protect us;
• To service our indebtedness, we require a significant amount of cash. Our ability to generate cash depends on many factors, some of which are beyond our control. An inability to service our indebtedness could lead to a default under the indenture that governs the senior secured notes or the credit agreement that governs our asset-based revolving credit facility, which may result in an acceleration of our indebtedness;
• Changes to international trade agreements, tariffs, import and excise duties, taxes or other governmental rules and regulations could adversely affect our business and results of operations;
• The risk that a condition to closing of the Acquisition and related transactions may not be satisfied or that one of more of the agreements may be terminated in accordance with its terms and the transactions may not be completed, including the risk that we may be unable to obtain governmental and regulatory approvals required for the Acquisition, or that required
governmental and regulatory approvals may delay the Transaction or result in the imposition of conditions that could reduce the anticipated benefits from the pending Acquisition or cause the parties to abandon the transactions; and
• Reports published by analysts, including projections in those reports that differ from our actual results, could adversely affect the price and trading volume of common stock.
These cautionary statements should not be construed by you to be exhaustive and are made only as of the date of this report. We undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, unless required by law. See “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report for additional risks.