ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Except for the historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties. We caution you not to put undue reliance on any forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this report. Our actual results or actions may differ materially from these forward-looking statements for many reasons, including the risks described in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report. Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes and with the understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from what we currently expect.
OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK
The Company was incorporated in September 2005 to act as a holding company for its subsidiaries in the technology, telecom and banking industries.
The Company invests in financial technology and engages in use of certain licensed technology to provide innovative telecommunications, mobility, and remittance solutions to unserved, unbanked, and emerging markets. The Company uses proprietary technology and certain licensed technology to provide innovative telecommunications and telecommunications mobility and remittance solutions in emerging markets. The Company also offers wholesale telecommunications minutes and prepaid telecommunications minutes to consumers through its Tel3 division.
The Company was incorporated under the laws of the State of Florida on September 21, 2005 to act as a holding company for its subsidiaries. Its subsidiaries are Meimoun and Mammon, LLC (100% owned) (“M&M”), Next Cala, Inc. (94% owned -was dissolved on July 3, 2020) (“Cala”), NxtGn, Inc. (65% owned-was dissolved on August 24, 2020) (“NxtGn”) and Cuentas Mobile LLC (formerly Next Mobile 360, LLC. - 100% owned). Additionally, Next Cala, Inc. had a 60% interest in NextGlocal Inc. (“NextGlocal”), a subsidiary formed in May 2016 and which was dissolved on September 27, 2019. Tel3, a business segment of Meimoun and Mammon, LLC provides prepaid calling cards to consumers directly and operates in a complimentary space as Meimoun and Mammon, LLC. On October 23, 2017, the Company acquired 100% of the outstanding shares in Limecom, Inc., (“Limecom” and such acquisition, the “Limecom Acquisition”) from Heritage Ventures Limited (“Heritage”). On January 30, 2019, the Company exercised a right to rescind the Acquisition, principally in an effort to reduce the Company’s continuing debt obligations associated with the Acquisition.
Formation of SDI NEXT DISTRIBUTION LLC (“SDI NEXT”)
On December 6, 2017, the Company completed its formation of SDI NEXT in which the Company owns a 51% membership interest, previously announced August 24, 2017 in a letter of intent with Fisk Holdings, LLC (“Fisk Holdings”). Per the Operating Agreement of SDI NEXT the Company and Fisk Holdings will serve as the Managing Members of SDI Next and the Company will contribute a total of $500,000, to be paid per an agreed-upon schedule over a twelve-month period. Fisk Holdings will contribute 30,000 (thirty thousand) active point of sale locations for distribution of retail telecommunications and prepaid financial products and services to include, but not be limited to: prepaid general purpose reload (“GPR”) cards, prepaid gift cards, prepaid money transfer, prepaid utility payments, and other prepaid products. The completed formation of an established distribution business for third-party gift cards, digital content, mobile top up, financial services and digital content, which presently includes more than 31,600 U.S. active Point of Sale locations, including store locations, convenience stores, bodegas, store fronts, etc. The parties agreed that additional product lines may be added with unanimous decision by the Managing Members of SDI NEXT. During 2018, it was agreed between the parties to distribute the Company’s recently announced CUENTAS GPR card and mobile banking solution aimed to the unbanked, underbanked and financially underserved consumers, making them available to customers at the more than 31,600 retail locations SDI NEXT presently serves. SDI NEXT was dissolved on August 22, 2020.
Limecom
On October 23, 2017, the Company acquired 100% of the outstanding interests in Limecom.
On January 29, 2019, the Company and Heritage Ventures Ltd. (“Heritage”) agreed to amend the Share Purchase Agreement, dated September 19, 2017 (the “Limecom Purchase Agreement”) to extend the right of the Company to rescind the same Share Purchase Agreement and to return the stock in Limecom back to Heritage in the following manner:
(a) The 55,259 shares of the Company issued to Heritage and its stockholders will not be returned to the Company, and the remaining 13,815 shares of the Company in escrow will not be issued to Heritage. Instead, the Company will issue an additional 36,000 shares of the Company as directed by Heritage.
(b) The $1,807,000 payment obligation under the Limecom Purchase Agreement will be cancelled.
(c) The Employment Agreement with Orlando Taddeo as International CEO of Limecom will be terminated.
(d) Heritage, its Stockholders and the current management of Limecom agreed to indemnify and hold harmless Next Group Acquisition, Inc. and the Company from any liabilities (known and unknown) incurred by Limecom (accrued, disclosed or undisclosed by Limecom) up to and including the rescission date.
(e) Heritage and Limecom’s current management agreed to cooperate with Next Group Acquisition and/or the Company with any information required to be disclosed to the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) as a part of Cuentas’ SEC disclosure obligations with respect to the rescission.
(f) Heritage, Limecom and its current management and stockholders agreed to cooperate with Cuentas’ auditors in providing all material information to Cuentas’ auditors as is reasonably required.
(g) Heritage and the Limecom current management agreed that the intercompany loan in the approximate sum of $231,000 will be cancelled.
(h) Cuentas agreed to issue 8,296 shares of Cuentas restricted stock to several Limecom employees in exchange for salaries due to them. Those shares will be issued and held in escrow until the full satisfaction of the terms of this Amendment.
(i) Cuentas agreed to advance the sum of $25,000 toward the payments agreed upon to be paid to American Express, Inc. (“AMEX”) by Limecom, and Limecom agrees to pay the sum of $25,000 to AMEX and the balance of the payments under the Stipulation of Settlement with AMEX as agreed upon by Limecom.
On January 30, 2019, Cuentas sent an executed Rescission Letter to Limecom rescinding the acquisition of Limecom according under the Amendment of the Limecom Purchase Agreement, dated January 29, 2019.
Cuentas fulfilled its obligation to pay $25,000 to AMEX pursuant to the Amendment of the Limecom Purchase Agreement dated January 29, 2019.
Next Communications, Inc. Bankruptcy
The Company has historically received financing from Next Communications, Inc. (“Next Communications”), an entity controlled by our CEO, and had a related party payable balance of approximately $0 and approximately $2,972,000 due to Next Communications as December 31, 2018. During the first calendar quarter of 2017, Next Communications filed for bankruptcy protection. As a result, the related party payable was handled by a court appointed trustee as an asset of Next Communications. On January 29, 2019, the United States Bankruptcy Court Southern District of Florida, Miami Division, approved a Plan of Reorganization for Next Communications., whereby the Company would pay $600,000 to a specific creditor in consideration for the forgiveness of the balance of the payable to Next Communications. On March 10, 2019, the Company paid $50,000 to the trust account of the specific creditor, per the order, and on May 10, 2019, the Company paid $550,000 to the same trust account of the specific creditor, per the order, and satisfied its obligation under the Approved Plan of the Reorganization for Next Communications, Inc., that was approved by the United States Bankruptcy Court Southern District of Florida, Miami Division, on January 29, 2019.
OUTLOOK
Business Environment
We are a leading technology payment platform company that enables digital and mobile payments on behalf of under-bank and unbanked individuals. We believe in providing simple, affordable, secure and reliable financial services and digital payments to help our customers to achieve their financial goals. We strive to increase our relevance for consumers, and family to access and move their money anywhere in the world, anytime, on any platform and through any device (e.g., mobile, tablets, personal computers or wearables). We provide safer and simpler ways for businesses of all sizes to accept payments from merchant websites, mobile devices and applications, and at offline retail locations through a wide range of payment solutions. We also facilitate person to person payments through Cuentas GPR Card.
We operate globally and in a rapidly evolving regulatory environment characterized by a heightened regulatory focus on all aspects of the payments industry. That focus continues to become even more heightened as regulators on a global basis focus on such important issues as countering terrorist financing, anti-money laundering, privacy and consumer protection. Some of the laws and regulations to which we are subject were enacted recently and the laws and regulations applicable to us, including those enacted prior to the advent of digital and mobile payments, are continuing to evolve through legislative and regulatory action and judicial interpretation. Non-compliance with laws and regulations, increased penalties and enforcement actions related to non-compliance, changes in laws and regulations or their interpretation, and the enactment of new laws and regulations applicable to us could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Therefore, we monitor these areas closely to ensure compliant solutions for our customers who depend on us.
Industry Trends
Our industry is dynamic and highly competitive, with frequent changes in both technologies and business models. Each industry shift is an opportunity to conceive new products, new technologies, or new ideas that can further transform the industry and our business. At Cuentas, we push the boundaries of what is possible through a broad range of research and development activities that seek to anticipate the changing demands of customers, industry trends and competitive forces.
Key Opportunities and Investments
Based on our assessment of key technology trends and our broad focus on long-term research and development of new products and services, we see significant opportunities to drive future growth.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of year ended December 31, 2020 to year ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
The Company generates revenues through the sale and distribution of prepaid telecom minutes and other related telecom services.
Revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $558,000 compared to $967,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is due to our diminishing telecom business. The Company generated revenues through the sale and distribution of prepaid telecom minutes, digital products and other related telecom services. The Company have begun to generate sales from its Fintech products and services during the third quarter of 2020.
Costs of Revenue
Cost of revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $697,000 compared to $808,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is due to our diminishing telecom business. Cost of revenue consists mainly of the purchase of wholesale minutes for resale, related telecom platform costs and purchase of digital products. Since the soft launch of the Company’s GPR Product during the second quarter of 2020, cost of revenue also consisted of costs related to the sale of the Company’s GPR Card in the amount of $158,000.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses totaled $7,640,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $2,305,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019 representing a net increase of $5,335,000. The increase in the operating expenses is mainly due to the increase in the amortization expense of intangible assets in the amount of $1,800,000, officers compensation in the amount of $1,325,000, increase in stock-based compensation in the amount of $1,234,000 and increase in professional services in the amount of $172,000.
Other Income
The Company recognized other income of $296,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to other income of $860,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019. The net change from the prior period is mainly due to other income in the amount of $2,362,000 from the satisfaction of the Company’s obligation under the Approved Plan of the Reorganization for Next Communications, Inc., that was approved by the United States Bankruptcy Court Southern District of Florida, Miami Division, on January 29, 2019 pursuant to which we paid and recorded $600,000 to satisfy an obligation of approximately $2,962,000 in 2019. It is also due to the change in the gain recognized on the fair value measurement of our derivative and stock-based liabilities. The fair value measurements related to derivative liabilities is driven by market inputs and inherently subject to volatility. Gain from Change in Fair Value of stock-based liabilities for year ended December 31, 2020 was $303,000, as compared to a loss of $560,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Loss
We incurred a net loss of $8,101,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to a net loss of $1,320,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, for the reasons described above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations, and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. Significant factors in the management of liquidity are funds generated by operations, levels of accounts receivable and accounts payable and capital expenditures.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $227,000 of cash, total current assets of $296,000 and total current liabilities of $6,480,000 creating a working capital deficit of $6,184,000. Current assets as of December 31, 2020 consisted of $227,000 of cash, marketable securities in the amount of $3,000, related parties of $54,000 and other current assets of $12,000.
As of December 31, 2019, the Company had $16,000 of cash, total current assets of $165,000 and total current liabilities of $3,917,000 creating a working capital deficit of $3,752,000. Current assets as of December 31, 2019 consisted of $16,000 of cash, marketable securities in the amount of $1,000, related parties of $54,000 and other current assets of $94,000.
The increase in our working capital deficit was mainly attributable to the increase of $1,484,000 in other accounts liabilities, an increase of $829,000 in our trade account payables and an increase of $703,000 in our short-term loans and convertible loans.
Net cash used in operating activities was $1,738,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to net cash used in operating activities of $1,315,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company’s primary uses of cash have been for professional support, marketing expenses and working capital purposes.
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $1,949,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to approximately $1,177,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. We have principally financed our operations in 2019 through the sale of our Common Stock and the issuance of debt.
We have principally financed our operations in 2020 through the sale of our Common Stock to private investors, issuance of convertible loans debt and loans from our shareholders. On September 11, 2020, the Company issued a promissory note to Labrys Funds LP (“Labrys”) for $605,000 (the “Labrys Note”). On February 12, 2021, we fully prepaid our loan to Labrys.
On November 12, 2020, we issued a convertible promissory note to a private investor in the amount of $250,000, which matures on November 12, 2021. Interest accrues from the date of the note on the unpaid principal amount at a rate equal to 10.00% per annum, calculated as simple interest. The holder may elect to convert all or any part of the then outstanding principal and accrued but unpaid interest due under the note into shares of Common Stock until maturation. The conversion price of the note is $2.75 per share, which may be proportionately adjusted as appropriate to reflect any stock dividend, stock split, reverse stock split or other similar event affecting the number of outstanding shares of Common Stock of the Company without the payment of consideration to the Company therefor at any time prior to conversion. The Company issued such convertible promissory note in reliance on the exemptions from registration pursuant to Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act.
On February 4, 2021 the Company sold an aggregate of 2,790,697 units at a price to the public of $4.30 per unit (the “Offering”), each unit consisting of one share of the Company’s Common Stock, par value $0.001 per share (the “Common Stock”), and a warrant exercisable for five years to purchase one share of Common Stock at an exercise price of $4.30 per share (the “Warrants”), pursuant to that certain Underwriting Agreement, dated as of February 1, 2021 (the “Underwriting Agreement”), between the Company and Maxim Group LLC (the “Representative” or “Maxim”), as representative of the sole underwriter. In addition, pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, the Company granted the Underwriter a 45-day option to purchase up to 418,604 additional shares of Common Stock, and/or 418,604 additional Warrants, to cover over-allotments in connection with the Offering. The Company received gross proceeds of approximately $12.0 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of 8% of the gross proceeds and estimated Offering expenses. Pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, the Company also issued to the Underwriter warrants (the “Underwriter’s Warrants”) to purchase up to a total of 223,256 shares of Common Stock (8% of the shares of Common Stock sold in the Offering). The Underwriter’s Warrants are exercisable at $5.375 per share of Common Stock and have a term of five years. The total expenses of the offering were approximately $1.4 million, which included Maxim’s expenses relating to the offering.
Our lack of operating history makes predictions of future operating results difficult to ascertain. Our prospects must be considered in light of the risks, expenses and difficulties frequently encountered by companies in their early stage of development, particularly companies in new and rapidly evolving markets. Such risks for us include, but are not limited to, an evolving and unpredictable business model and the management of growth.
To address these risks, we must, among other things, implement and successfully execute our business and marketing strategy surrounding the Cuentas Mastercard, continually develop and upgrade our website, respond to competitive developments, lower our financing costs and specifically our accounts receivable factoring costs, and attract, retain and motivate qualified personnel. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in addressing such risks, and the failure to do so can have a material adverse effect on our business prospects, financial condition and results of operations.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements and does not anticipate entering into any such arrangements in the foreseeable future.
Impact of Inflation
The Company does not expect inflation to be a significant factor in operation of the business.
Critical Accounting Policies
The methods, estimates and judgments we use in applying our accounting policies have a significant impact on the results we report in our financial statements, which we discuss under the heading “Results of Operations” following this section of Item 7. Some of our accounting policies require us to make difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain.
We set forth below those material accounting policies that we believe are the most critical to an investor’s understanding of our financial results and condition and that require complex management judgment.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“‘US GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. As applicable to the consolidated financial statements, the most significant estimates and assumptions relate to allowances for impairment of intangible assets, fair value of stock-based compensation and fair value calculations related to embedded derivative features of outstanding convertible notes payable.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with ASC Topic 360, formerly SFAS No. 144, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets, the Company reviews its long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be fully recoverable. The assessment of possible impairment is based on the Company’s ability to recover the carrying value of its asset based on estimates of its undiscounted future cash flows. If these estimated future cash flows are less than the carrying value of the asset, an impairment charge is recognized for the difference between the asset’s estimated fair value and its carrying value.
Derivative Liabilities and Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value accounting requires bifurcation of embedded derivative instruments such as conversion features in convertible debt or equity instruments and measurement of their fair value for accounting purposes. In assessing the convertible debt instruments, management determines if the convertible debt host instrument is conventional convertible debt and further if there is a beneficial conversion feature requiring measurement. If the instrument is not considered conventional convertible debt under ASC 470, the Company will continue its evaluation process of these instruments as derivative financial instruments under ASC 815.
Once determined, derivative liabilities are adjusted to reflect fair value at each reporting period end, with any increase or decrease in the fair value being recorded in results of operations as an adjustment to fair value of derivatives.
Fair value of certain of the Company’s financial instruments including cash, accounts receivable, account payable, accrued expenses, notes payables, and other accrued liabilities approximate cost because of their short maturities. The Company measures and reports fair value in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosure”, which defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and expands disclosures about fair value investments.
Fair value, as defined in ASC 820, is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The fair value of an asset should reflect its highest and best use by market participants, principal (or most advantageous) markets, and an in-use or an in-exchange valuation premise. The fair value of a liability should reflect the risk of nonperformance, which includes, among other things, the Company’s credit risk.
Valuation techniques are generally classified into three categories: the market approach; the income approach; and the cost approach. The selection and application of one or more of the techniques may require significant judgment and are primarily dependent upon the characteristics of the asset or liability, and the quality and availability of inputs. Valuation techniques used to measure fair value under ASC 820 must maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. ASC 820 also provides fair value hierarchy for inputs and resulting measurement as follows:
Level 1: Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active; inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability; and inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities; and
Level 3: Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability that are supported by little or no market activity, and that are significant to the fair values.
Fair value measurements are required to be disclosed by the Level within the fair value hierarchy in which the fair value measurements in their entirety fall. Fair value measurements using significant unobservable inputs (in Level 3 measurements) are subject to expanded disclosure requirements including a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances, separately presenting changes during the period attributable to the following: (i) total gains or losses for the period (realized and unrealized), segregating those gains or losses included in earnings, and a description of where those gains or losses included in earning are reported in the statement of income.
The Company records a debt discount related to the issuance of convertible debts that have conversion features at adjustable rates. The debt discount for the convertible instruments is recognized and measured by allocating a portion of the proceeds as an increase in additional paid-in capital and as a reduction to the carrying amount of the convertible instrument equal to the fair value of the conversion features. The debt discount will be accreted by recording additional non-cash gains and losses related to the change in fair values of derivative liabilities over the life of the convertible notes.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company applies ASC 718-10, “Share-Based Payment,” which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expenses for all share-based payment awards made to employees and directors (including employee stock options under the Company’s stock plans) based on estimated fair values.
ASC 718-10 requires companies to estimate the fair value of equity-based payment awards on the date of grant. The value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense over the requisite service periods in the Company’s statement of operations.
The Company recognizes compensation expenses for the value of non-employee awards based on the straight-line method over the requisite service period of each award, net of estimated forfeitures.
The Company estimates the fair value of stock options granted as equity awards using a Black-Scholes options pricing model. The option-pricing model requires a number of assumptions, of which the most significant are share price, expected volatility and the expected option term (the time from the grant date until the options are exercised or expire). Expected volatility is estimated based on volatility of similar companies in the technology sector. The Company has historically not paid dividends and has no foreseeable plans to issue dividends. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield from governmental zero-coupon bonds with an equivalent term. The expected option term is calculated for options granted to employees and directors using the “simplified” method. Grants to non-employees are based on the contractual term. Changes in the determination of each of the inputs can affect the fair value of the options granted and the results of operations of the Company.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
On August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies an issuer’s accounting for convertible instruments and its application of the derivatives scope exception for contracts in its own equity. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the provisions of ASU 2020-06, but do not expect any material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”), which simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions and improves consistent application of Topic 740. ASU 2019-12 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company does not anticipate any immediate impact on its consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
In June 2016, the FASB issued an ASU that supersedes the existing impairment model for most financial assets to a current expected credit loss model. The new guidance requires an entity to recognize an impairment allowance equal to its current estimate of all contractual cash flows the entity does not expect to collect. The Company adopted this guidance effective January 1, 2020, with no material impact on its consolidated financial statements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326) - Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. This guidance replaces the current incurred loss impairment methodology. Under the new guidance, on initial recognition and at each reporting period, an entity is required to recognize an allowance that reflects its current estimate of credit losses expected to be incurred over the life of the financial instrument based on historical experience, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts.
The guidance became effective on January 1, 2020, including interim periods within that year and requires a modified retrospective transition approach through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the period of adoption. Under the modified retrospective method of adoption, prior year reported results are not restated. The Company has performed its analysis of the impact on its financial instruments that are within the scope of this guidance and has concluded that there was no material impact to its consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, “Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement” (“ASU No. 2018-13”) as part of the FASB’s broader disclosure framework project. ASU No. 2018-13 removes, modifies and adds certain disclosures, providing greater focus on requirements that clearly communicate the most important information to the users of the financial statements with respect to fair value measurements. The adoption of ASU No. 2018-13 as of January 1, 2020 did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The amendments in this ASU simplify the accounting for income taxes, eliminates certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and clarifies certain aspects of the current guidance to improve consistent application among reporting entities. ASU 2019-12 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and interim periods within annual periods beginning after December 15, 2022, though early adoption is permitted, including adoption in any interim period for which financial statements have not yet been issued. This standard is not expected to have a material impact to the Company’s consolidated financial statements after evaluation.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging Contracts in Entity s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity s Own Equity. ASU 2020-06 will simplify the accounting for convertible instruments by reducing the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock. Limiting the accounting models results in fewer embedded conversion features being separately recognized from the host contract as compared with current GAAP. Convertible instruments that continue to be subject to separation models are (1) those with embedded conversion features that are not clearly and closely related to the host contract, that meet the definition of a derivative, and that do not qualify for a scope exception from derivative accounting and (2) convertible debt instruments issued with substantial premiums for which the premiums are recorded as paid-in capital. ASU 2020-06 also amends the guidance for the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity to reduce form-over-substance-based accounting conclusions. ASU 2020-06 will be effective for public companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the impact that the adoption of ASU 2020-06 will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures.
Other new pronouncements issued but not effective as of December 31, 2020 are not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Other accounting standards that have been issued or proposed by the FASB or other standards-setting bodies that do not require adoption until a future date are not expected to have a material impact on our financial statements upon adoption.