ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide information necessary to understand our audited consolidated financial statements for the two-year period ended December 31, 2020 and highlight certain other information which, in the opinion of management, will enhance a reader’s understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. In particular, the discussion is intended to provide an analysis of significant trends and material changes in our financial position and the operating results of our business during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for the two-year period ended December 31, 2020 and related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward Looking Statements
The information contained in this Item 7 contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. Actual results may materially differ from those projected in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain risks and uncertainties set forth in this report. Although management believes that the assumptions made and expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, there is no assurance that the underlying assumptions will, in fact, prove to be correct or that actual results will not be different from expectations expressed in this report.
We desire to take advantage of the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. This filing contains a number of forward-looking statements that reflect management’s current views and expectations with respect to our business, strategies, products, future results and events, and financial performance. All statements made in this filing other than statements of historical fact, including statements addressing operating performance, clinical developments, which management expects or anticipates will or may occur in the future, including statements relating to our technology, market expectations, future revenues, financing alternatives, statements expressing general optimism about future operating results, and non-historical information, are forward looking statements. In particular, the words, “believe,” “expect,” intend,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “may,” variations of such words, and similar expressions identify forward-looking statements, but are not exclusive means of identifying such statements, and their absence does not mean that the statement is not forward-looking. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties, including those discussed below. Our actual results, performance or achievements could differ materially from historical results as well as those expressed in, anticipated, or implied by these forward-looking statements. We do not undertake any obligations to revise these forward-looking statements to reflect any future events or circumstances.
Readers should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which are based on management’s current expectations and projections about future events, are not guarantees of future performance, are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions (particularly in “Item 1A - Risk Factors”) and apply only as of the date of this filing. Our actual results, performance or achievements could differ materially from the results expressed in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements. Factors which could cause or contribute to such differences could include, but are not limited to, the risks to be discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in the press releases and other communications to shareholders issued by us from time to time which attempt to advise interested parties of the risks and factors which may affect our business. We undertake no obligations to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise. For additional information regarding forward-looking statements, see Item 1 - Our Business - “Forward-Looking Statements.”
Corporate Overview
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focusing the development and manufacturing of drug formulation and drug delivery technologies in novel dosage forms to improve drug safety, efficacy and patient adherence. Our mission to improve lives by redefining how medications are delivered and experienced. Our business strategy is to develop products using our proprietary technology, license the product rights to partners responsible for clinical development, regulatory approval, marketing and sales and retain exclusive manufacturing rights. We operate in a 25,000 square foot cGMP manufacturing plant in Oxnard, CA.
We were incorporated in the State of Nevada on May 15, 2014. The Company was formerly named Makkanotti Group Corp. which was formed to engage in the business of manufacturing food paper bags in Nicosia, Cyprus. On November 7, 2016, the board of directors and the majority stockholder of the then outstanding shares of our common stock executed a written consent to change our name from Makkanotti Group Corp. to CURE Pharmaceutical Holding Corp. The Certificate of Amendment to Articles of Incorporation was filed with the State of Nevada on November 30, 2016. On September 27, 2019, we reincorporated from the State of Nevada to the State of Delaware.
Further, on November 7, 2016, we, in a reverse take-over transaction, acquired a specialty pharmaceutical and bioscience company based in California that specializes in drug delivery technologies, by executing a Share Exchange Agreement and Conversion Agreement (“Exchange Agreement”) by and among us and a holder of a majority of our issued and outstanding capital stock prior to the closing (the “Majority Stockholder”), on the one hand, and CURE Pharmaceutical, all of the shareholders of CURE Pharmaceutical’s issued and outstanding share capital (the “CURE Pharm Shareholders”) and the holders of certain convertible promissory notes of CURE Pharmaceutical (“CURE Pharm Noteholders”), on the other hand. Hereinafter, this share exchange transaction is described as the “Share Exchange.”
As a result of the Share Exchange, CURE Pharmaceutical became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, and the CURE Pharm Shareholders and CURE Pharm Noteholders became our controlling shareholders owning, at such time, approximately 65% of our issued and outstanding common stock. For accounting purposes, CURE Pharmaceutical was the surviving entity. As a result of the recapitalization and change in control, CURE Pharmaceutical was deemed to be the accounting acquirer in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations.
On May 14, 2019, the Company, and Merger Sub, a Delaware corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, completed the transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement with CHI., a Delaware corporation. As agreed in the Merger Agreement and pursuant to the Merger, CHI became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and the stockholders of CHI received shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share in exchange for all of the issued and outstanding shares of CHI.
On October 2, 2020, the Company completed its acquisition of Sera Labs, a Delaware corporation pursuant to the Sera Labs Merger Agreement, by and among the Company, Sera Labs Merger Sub, a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, Sera Labs and Mrs. Duitch, in her capacity as the security holder’s representative regarding the Sera Labs Merger.
Nature of Business
We are a biopharmaceutical company focusing on the development and manufacturing of drug formulation and drug delivery technologies in novel dosage forms to improve drug safety, efficacy and patient adherence. Our mission is to improve lives by redefining how medications are delivered and experienced. Our primary business model is to develop wellness and drug products using our proprietary technology, which development may include preclinical and clinical studies and regulatory approval, and grant product rights to partners responsible for marketing, sales and distribution, while retaining exclusive manufacturing rights.
Our technology platform includes oral dissolving film (“OTF”), and encapsulation systems (“microCURE”) compatible with OTF, chews, oral solutions, topical and transdermal dose forms. We apply our technology to pharmaceutical drugs and dietary supplements for the wellness market. OTF products are about the size of a postage stamp and composed of excipients such as polymers, stabilizers, lipids and surfactants which are all generally recognized as safe. They can be designed to deliver active ingredients to the gastrointestinal, or GI, tract when placed on the tongue and swallowed, or directly to the blood stream when placed under the tongue (sublingual) or on the inner lining of the cheek and lip (buccal).
We sell multiple commercial wellness products under our distribution partners’ brands. We are developing a 50,000IU, once per week, Vitamin D3 OTF for oral administration to be distributed by Meroven Pharmaceuticals in the United States and the MENA region. Our pharmaceutical drug program includes:
CUREfilm Blue
A 25mg and 50 mg sildenafil OTF for the treatment of erectile dysfunction. We have completed our pre-IND meeting with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”), confirming a 505(b)(2) regulatory path.
CUREfilm Canna
We are developing several cannabinoid products with optimized pharmacokinetic profiles using microCURE and CUREfilm technology.
CUREfilm Anti-Viral
We are developing an orally bio-available anti-viral of an existing therapeutic leveraging existing pre-clinical/clinical safety and toxicity data.
CUREfilm Central Nervous System (CNS)
In the area of CNS indications, we are developing a novel dosage form of a difficult to treat disease states utilizing our proprietary CUREfilm dosage form. These could include but are not limited to mental health disorders such as depression, PTSD, addiction disorders, obsessive compulsive disorder, and anxiety.
Impact of COVID-19
Our financial results and operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 were not significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The measures we have taken to ensure the availability and functioning of our critical infrastructure, and to promote the safety and security of our employees remain in place. In accordance with public and private sector policies and initiatives to reduce the transmission of COVID-19, we have imposed travel restrictions, adopted policies aimed at promoting social distancing, and implemented work-from-home arrangements for employees where practicable. These measures and our compliance with local and national guidelines aimed at containing the virus could impact our operations and disrupt our business. Currently, our single operating facility is operational, and no reduction in our work force has taken place.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2.1 million as compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in revenue included $1.0 million of revenue attributed to the Sera Labs acquisition on October 2, 2020 as well as $0.2 million increase in Sleep OTF product sales and $0.1 million in new product sales for Vitamin D3 and Electrolyte OTF.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold was $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.2 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost of goods sold increased by $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, which was due to (i) the acquisition of Sera Labs on October 2, 2020, which added additional $0.5 million of cost of goods sold and (ii) increase in revenues from Sleep, Vitamin D3 and Electrolyte OTF products have increased compared to the same period in 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Research and development expenses increased by $0.5 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in research and development expenses is mainly due to the Company’s continuous development of our CUREfilm Blue. We engaged a third party contractor to assist in the development in our CUREfilm Blue that will take us into our pre-clinical trials. In addition, we initiated several clinical tests at the end of 2019 that was carried into the year ended December 31, 2020. Finally, the Company has continued the development of CUREfilm D, CUREfilm Canna and various other OTF and other delivery forms during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Our expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 are summarized as follows in comparison to our expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Consulting
Consulting expenses decreased by approximately $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to the Company decreasing the number of consultants used during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. In addition, a majority of the expenses related to noncash consulting services where the Company issued common stock shares in exchange for services performed over a period of time as well as recording the fair market value of warrants vested during the year ended December 31, 2019 for services performed. The Company did not issue as many common stock shares in exchange for services and did not issue as many warrants in exchange for services during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Salaries and wages
Salaries and wages expense increased by approximately $0.4 million, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the Company adding approximately $0.4 million of salaries and wages from the acquisition of Sera Labs on October 2, 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expense increased by approximately $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was due to the following factors: (i) adding $1.1 million of general and administrative expenses form the acquisition of Sera Labs on October 2, 2020, (ii) increase in our D&O insurance an increase in D&O premiums, and (iii) increase in cash payments to our board of directors during 2020 where the Company only started paying our board of directors cash payments towards the end of 2019.
Professional and Investor Relations
Professional and investor relations expenses increased by approximately $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was due to the Company increasing our investor relation efforts to help increase awareness of our Company with potential new investors as well as to update our existing shareholder base. In addition, the Company increased our legal professional services during the year ended 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 as to assist the Company in strategic planning and business acquisitions, patent and technology acquisitions as well as general and corporate compliance services.
Non-cash Compensation
Non-cash compensation expense increased by approximately $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is mainly due to the Company recording the fair value of vested stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units issued from our 2017 Equity Incentive Plan during the year ended December 31, 2020. The fair values of the vested stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units during the year ended 2020 were more compared to the fair values of the vested stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units in the same period in 2019. This was due to the amount of stock options issued to Nicole Kidman and Sera Labs during the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, the Company issued and recognized restricted stock units to our board of directors towards the end of 2019 and recognized a full years’ worth of restricted stock units issued to our board of directors during 2020.
Change in Fair Value Contingent Stock Consideration
Change in fair value stock consideration increased by approximately $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same time period in 2019. This was primarily due to the classification of the contingent shares offered in the CHI acquisition as a liability on May 14, 2019 and assessing the change in fair value of these contingent shares during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, which resulted in a decrease in the liability and an increase in the change in fair value stock consideration of $4.7 million. On June 5, 2020, the Company and CHI entered into a settlement arrangement in order to settle the contingent shares in full and as result incurred a loss on the settlement of the contingent shares of $10.3 million. The net effect of these transaction in 2020 resulted in a change in fair value stock consideration of $5.6 million.
Other Expense
Total net other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased approximately $4.0 million, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is due to (i) recording the change in fair value of the Series A and Series B Notes at issuance, on the date of the partial conversion of the Series A Note and on December 31, 2020 and (ii) recording the debt discounts, transaction costs and fair value of placement agent warrants issued in connection to the Series A and Series B Notes as interest expense. The increase was offset by the decrease from the following: (i) recording of fair value of warrants issued relating to convertible promissory notes during the year ended December 31, 2019 and none in the same period in 2020, (ii) change in the warrant values relating to convertible promissory notes issued during the year ended December 31, 2019 and none in the same period in 2020, (iii) during the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a loss on conversion relating to convertible promissory notes of $3.7 million due to additional shares to be issued as a result of a lower conversion price compared to the fair market value at the date of issuance and none in the same period in 2020 and (iv) a decrease in the change in fair value of derivative liabilities.
Liquidity & Capital Resources
Working Capital Deficit
Working capital deficit as of December 31, 2020 was approximately $10.6 million, as compared to a working capital deficit of approximately $5.6 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, current assets were approximately $3.9 million, primarily attributable to a decrease in cash of approximately $2.3 million.
As of December 31, 2020, current liabilities were approximately $14.5 million, comprised primarily of (i) approximately $9.9 million in loans, notes and convertible notes payable, (ii) approximately $2.1 million in accounts payable; (iii) approximately $1.0 million in contract liabilities, (iv) approximately $1.3 million in accrued expenses, payroll liabilities and sales tax payable and (v) approximately $0.1 million of finance and operating lease payables. Comparatively, as of December 31, 2019, current liabilities were approximately $11.8 million, comprised primarily of (i) approximately $0.7 million in loans, notes and convertible notes payable, (ii) $0.09 million in derivative liability, (iii) approximately $1.2 million in accounts payable; and (iv) approximately $0.2 million in accrued expenses. Current liabilities increased by approximately $2.6 million, which was primarily attributable to (i) a decrease in contingent share consideration from the settlement with CHI on June 5, 2020 and no longer needing to fair value the contingent shares relating to the CHI acquisition, (ii) an increase in contract liabilities for deposits received from Sera Labs customers of approximately $0.5 million, and (iii) issuance of the Series A and B Notes and fair valuing the Series A and B Notes at issuance and then recording the change in fair value of the Series A and B Notes at the time of the partial conversion of Series A Note on December 9, 2020 and on December 31, 2020 of approximately $6.7 million.
Cash Flows and liquidity
Net cash used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $9.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to the net loss of approximately $30.6 million, partially offset by (i) the amortization of the debt discount of approximately $1.5 million, (ii) stock based compensation of approximately $0.6 million, (iii) change in fair value of convertible promissory notes of approximately $9.4 million, (iv) the fair value of vested stock options, restricted stocks and restricted stock units of approximately $2.8 million, (v) change in fair value of contingent share consideration of approximately $5.8 million, (vi) an increase in prepaid expenses of approximately $0.3 million, (vii) an increase in accounts payable of approximately $0.5 million, (viii) an increase in accrued expense, payroll liabilities and sales tax of approximately $0.5 million and (ix) an decrease in contract liabilities of approximately $1.4 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $8.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to the net loss of approximately $21.1 million, partially offset by (i) the amortization of the debt discount of approximately $1.2 million, (ii) stock based compensation of approximately $2 million, (iii) the loss on conversion of convertible stock of approximately $3.7 million, (iv) the fair value of vested stock options, restricted stocks and restricted stock units of approximately $2.1 million, (v) warrant expense from convertible promissory notes of approximately $2.2 million, (vi) change in fair value of contingent share consideration of approximately $1.7 million, (vii) change of derivative liabilities of approximately $0.5 million, (viii) the fair value of warrant granted for commission expense of approximately $1.2 million, (ix) an increase in prepaid expenses of approximately $1.3 million and (x) a decrease in accrued expenses of approximately $0.6 million.
Net cash provided by (used in) Investing Activities
Net cash used from investing activities of approximately of $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to (i) cash acquired from the acquisition of Sera Labs of approximately of $1.4 million and (ii) collection of note receivable of approximately $1.0 million, which was offset by (i) the purchase of property and equipment for approximately $0.7 million; (ii) purchase of note receivable of approximately $1.5 million and (iii) investment of $0.3 million.
Net cash provided from investing activities of approximately $7.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to (i) cash acquired from the CHI acquisition of $8.5 million, which was offset by (i) the purchase of an intangible asset for approximately $0.05 million; (ii) the purchase of property and equipment for approximately $0.4 million; and (iii) purchase of note receivable and investment of $0.5 million. Correspondingly, during the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used by investing activities was due to (i) the purchase of an intangible asset for approximately $0.08 million and (ii) the purchase of property and equipment for approximately $0.06 million
Net cash provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $7.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to (i) approximately $5.0 million received from the issuances of new convertible notes payable, (ii) approximately $2.6 million in proceeds from issuance of notes and loans payable, (iii) approximately $1.4 million from exercise of warrants, and (iv) approximately $1.5 million for repayment of loan and note payables.
Net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $4.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to (i) approximately $3.4 million received from the issuances of new convertible notes payable, (ii) approximately $2.5 million in proceeds from issuances of common stock, (iii) approximately $1.2 million for repayment of convertible promissory notes and (iv) approximately $0.8 million for repayment of loan and note payables. Correspondingly, during the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $4.6 million. This was primarily attributable to (i) proceeds of $4.2 million received from the issuances of new convertible notes payable, (ii) approximately $0.5 million in proceeds from issuances of common stock and (iii) approximately $0.4 million for repayment of loans, notes and convertible promissory notes.
We may need to raise additional operating capital in calendar year 2021 in order to maintain our operations and to realize our business plan. Without additional sources of cash and/or the deferral, reduction, or elimination of significant planned expenditures, we may not have the cash resources to continue as a going concern thereafter.
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the basis that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $81.2 million and a working capital deficit of approximately $10.6 million. Our operating activities consume the majority of our cash resources. We anticipate that we will continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows from operations, at least into the near future, as we execute our commercialization and development plans and strategic and business development initiatives.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the auditors’ opinion contained a going concern paragraph, which stated that the Company had an accumulated deficit, working deficit and net loss. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for one year from the issuance of the financial statements.
We have an accumulated deficit balance as of December 31, 2020. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on our obtaining adequate capital to fund operating losses until it establishes a revenue stream and becomes profitable. We are continually analyzing our current costs and are attempting to make additional cost reductions where possible. We expect that we will continue to generate losses from operations throughout 2021.
Historically, we have had operating losses and negative cash flows from operations which cast significant doubt upon our ability to continue as a going concern. As such, we have needed to raise capital in order to fund its operations. This need may be adversely impacted by uncertain market conditions and changes in the regulatory environment. We have previously funded, and intend to continue funding, our losses primarily through the issuance of common stock and/or convertible promissory notes, combined with or without warrants, and cash generated from our product sales and research and development and license agreements. On October 30, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (“Purchase Agreement”) with an institutional investor (the “Investor”) for the purchase of two new series of convertible notes with an aggregate principal amount of $11.5 million under which it consummated the sale to the Investor of a Series A subordinated convertible note (the “Series A Note”) with an initial principal amount of $4.6 million and a Series B senior secured convertible note (the “Series B Note,” and together with the Series A Note, the “Convertible Notes” and, each a “Convertible Note”) with an initial principal amount of $6.9 million in a private placement (the “Private Placement”).
The Series A Note was sold with an original issue discount of $0.6 million and the Series B Note was sold with an original issue discount of $0.9 million. The Investor paid for the Series A Note issued to the Investor by delivering $4.0 million in cash consideration and paid for the Series B Note issued to the Investor by delivering a secured promissory note (the "Investor Note”) with an initial principal amount of $6.0 million. The Investor will be required to prepay the Investor Note in certain amounts (each a "Mandatory Prepayment”) on the first date after the effectiveness of a resale registration statement (or the availability of Rule 144 promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended) if certain other conditions are satisfied as of such date.
While we believe the funds available through this financing will be sufficient to meet our working capital requirements throughout 2021, if we are unable to satisfy the conditions required to initiate Mandatory Prepayment under the Investor Note then we would need to obtain alternative financing. There can be no assurance that if such alternative financing is needed that it will be available on terms acceptable to us or will be enough to fully sustain operations. If we are unable to raise sufficient additional funds, we will have to develop and implement a plan to extend payables, reduce expenditures, or scale back our business plan until sufficient additional capital is raised to support further operations.
Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to successfully accomplish the plans described in the preceding paragraph and eventually attain profitable operations. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of assets and liabilities that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern.
Future Financing
We will require additional funds to implement the growth strategy for our business. As mentioned above, we intend to continue funding, our losses primarily through the issuance of common stock and/or convertible promissory notes, combined with or without warrants, and cash generated from our product sales and research and development and license agreements. We are currently discussing various financing alternatives with potential investors, but there can be no assurance that these funds will be available on terms acceptable to us or will be enough to fully sustain operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As a “smaller reporting company” as defined in Rule 12(b) of the Exchange Act, we are not required to provide the information required by this item.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements and related notes. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. We have identified below our critical accounting policies and estimates that we believe require the greatest amount of judgment. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates which are subject to significant judgment, including those related to the going concern assessments of our consolidated financial statements, allocation of direct and indirect expenses, useful lives associated with long-lived intangible assets, machinery and equipment, loss contingencies, valuation allowances related to deferred income taxes, and assumptions used to value stock-based awards, debt or other equity instruments. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates compared to historical experience and trends, which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. To the extent that there are material differences between our estimates and our actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe the assumptions and estimates associated with the following have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Going concern assessment
With the implementation of FASB’s standard on going concern, ASU No. 2014-15, we assess going concern uncertainty in our consolidated financial statements to determine if we have sufficient cash and cash equivalents on hand and working capital, including available loans or lines of credit, if any, to operate for a period of at least one year from the date our consolidated financial statements are issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period” as defined by ASU No. 2014-15. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to us, we consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections, and estimates, and we make certain key assumptions, including the timing and nature of projected cash expenditures or programs, and our ability to delay or curtail those expenditures or programs, if necessary, among other factors. Based on this assessment, as necessary or applicable, we make certain assumptions around implementing curtailments or delays in the nature and timing of programs and expenditures to the extent we deem probable those implementations can be achieved and we have the proper authority to execute them within the look-forward period in accordance with ASU No. 2014-15.
Business combinations
We account for business combinations, such as the CHI Merger and the Sera Labs Merger, in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805, Business Combinations, which requires the purchase price to be measured at fair value. When the purchase consideration consists, in part or entirely of our common shares, we calculate the purchase price by determining the fair value, as of the acquisition date, of shares issued in connection with the closing of the acquisition. We recognize estimated fair values of the tangible assets and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development (“IPR&D”), and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date, and we record as goodwill any amount of the fair value of the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in excess of the purchase price.
Contingent consideration liabilities
ASC 805 requires that contingent consideration be estimated and recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date as part of the total consideration transferred. Contingent consideration is an obligation of the acquirer to transfer additional assets or equity interests to the selling shareholders in the future if certain future events occur or conditions are met, such as the attainment of product development milestones. Contingent consideration also includes additional future payments to selling shareholders based on achievement of components of earnings, such as “earn-out” provisions or percentage of future revenues, including royalties paid to the selling shareholders based on a percentage of revenues generated from CHI and Sera Labs over the contractual period.
The fair value of milestone-based contingent consideration was determined using a scenario analysis valuation method which incorporates our assumptions with respect to the likelihood of achievement of revenue and gross margin percentage milestones, as defined in the Sera Labs Merger Agreement, credit risk, timing of the contingent consideration payments and a risk-adjusted discount rate to estimate the present value of the expected payments, all of which require significant management judgment and assumptions. Since the contingent consideration payments are based on nonfinancial, binary events, management believes the use of the scenario analysis method is appropriate.
The fair value of all contingent consideration after the Sera Labs Merger Date is reassessed by us as changes in circumstances and conditions occur, with the subsequent change in fair value recorded in our consolidated statements of operations. Changes in key assumptions can materially affect the estimated fair value of contingent consideration liabilities and, accordingly, the resulting gain or loss that we record in our consolidated financial statements. See Note 17 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Goodwill and intangible assets
In accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, in-process research and development projects acquired in a business combination that are not complete as of the acquisition date are capitalized and accounted for as indefinite-lived intangible assets until completion or abandonment of the related research and development efforts. Upon successful completion of the project, the capitalized amount is amortized over its estimated useful life. If a project is abandoned, all remaining capitalized amounts are written off immediately. We consider various factors and risks for potential impairment of IPR&D assets, including the current legal and regulatory environment, uncertainties posed by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the competitive landscape. Adverse clinical trial results, significant delays or inability to scale up, the inability to bring a product or service to market and the introduction or advancement of competitors’ product or services could result in partial or full impairment of the related intangible assets. Consequently, the eventual realized value of the IPR&D project may vary from its fair value at the date of acquisition, and IPR&D impairment charges may occur in future periods. During the period between completion or abandonment, the IPR&D assets will not be amortized but will be tested for impairment on an annual basis and between annual tests if we become aware of any events occurring or changes in circumstances that would indicate a reduction in the fair value of the IPR&D projects below their respective carrying amounts.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net identifiable assets and liabilities. Goodwill, similar to IPR&D, is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least annually, or if circumstances indicate its value may no longer be recoverable. Qualitative factors considered in this assessment include industry and market conditions, overall financial performance, and other relevant events and factors affecting our business. Based on the qualitative assessment, if it is determined that the fair value of goodwill is more likely than not to be less than its carrying amount, the fair value of a reporting unit will be calculated and compared with its carrying amount and an impairment charge will be recognized for the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value. Since October 2020, we operate in two segments, (Cure Pharma Products/Services and The Sera Labs) and considered to be the two reporting units and, therefore, goodwill is tested for impairment at the segment/reporting unit level.
Accounting for warrants
We determine the accounting classification of warrants we issue, as either liability or equity classified, by first assessing whether the warrants meet liability classification in accordance with ASC 480-10, Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Characteristics of both Liabilities and Equity, then in accordance with ASC 815-40, Accounting for Derivative Financial Instruments Indexed to, and Potentially Settled in, a Company’s Own Stock. Under ASC 480, warrants are considered liability classified if the warrants are mandatorily redeemable, obligate us to settle the warrants or the underlying shares by paying cash or other assets, and warrants that must or may require settlement by issuing variable number of shares. If warrants do not meet the liability classification under ASC 480-10, we assess the requirements under ASC 815-40, which states that contracts that require or may require the issuer to settle the contract for cash are liabilities recorded at fair value, irrespective of the likelihood of the transaction occurring that triggers the net cash settlement feature. If the warrants do not require liability classification under ASC 815-40, in order to conclude equity classification, we also assess whether the warrants are indexed to our common stock and whether the warrants are classified as equity under ASC 815-40 or other GAAP. After all such assessments, we conclude whether the warrants are classified as liability or equity. Liability classified warrants require fair value accounting at issuance and subsequent to initial issuance with all changes in fair value after the issuance date recorded in the statements of operations. Equity classified warrants only require fair value accounting at issuance with no changes recognized subsequent to the issuance date. We do not have any liability classified warrants as of any period presented. See Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Fair Value Option for Convertible Notes
We have elected the fair value option to account for the Series A and B Notes that were issued on October 30, 2020 and record these at fair value with changes in fair value recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. As a result of applying the fair value option, direct costs and fees related to the Series A and B Notes are recognized in earnings as incurred and not deferred. Values are based on prices or valuation techniques that require inputs that are both unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement. These inputs reflect management’s and, if applicable, an independent third-party valuation firm’s own assumptions about the assumptions a market participant would use in pricing the asset or liability. We believe accounting for the Series A and B Notes at fair value better aligns the measurement methodologies of assets and liabilities, which may mitigate certain earnings volatility.
When the inputs used to measure fair value fall within different levels of the hierarchy, the level within which the fair value measurement is categorized is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement in its entirety. For example, a Level 3 fair value measurement may include inputs that are observable (Levels 1 and 2) and unobservable (Level 3).
Stock-based compensation
We recognize compensation expense related to share-based payments in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”), which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for share-based payment awards made to directors and employees based on estimated fair values. We estimate the fair value of employee stock-based payment awards on the grant-date and recognize the resulting fair value over the requisite service period on a straight-line basis. For stock-based awards that vest only upon the attainment of one or more performance goals, compensation cost is recognized if and when we determine that it is probable that the performance condition or conditions will be, or have been, achieved. We utilize the Black-Scholes option pricing model for determining the fair value of stock options. Our determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include, but are not limited to, expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we estimated the expected volatility using our own stock price volatility to the extent applicable or a combination of our stock price volatility and the stock price volatility of stock of peer companies, for a period equal to the expected term of the options. The expected term of options granted is based on our own experience and, in part, based upon the “simplified method” provided under Staff Accounting Bulletin, Topic 14, or SAB Topic 14, as necessary. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury rates in effect during the corresponding period of grant. Although the fair value of employee stock options is determined in accordance with FASB guidance, the key inputs and assumptions may change as we develop our own company estimates, experience and key inputs including our expected term, and stock price volatility based on the trading history of our stock in the public market. Changes in these subjective assumptions can materially affect the estimated value of equity grants and the stock-based compensation that we record in our consolidated financial statements.
Leases
We account for leases in accordance with ASC 842, Leases. We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Leases are classified as either financing or operating, with classification affecting the pattern of expense recognition in the consolidated statements of operations. Under the available practical expedients for the adoption of ASC 842, we account for the lease and non-lease components as a single lease component. We recognize right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities for leases with terms greater than twelve months in the consolidated balance sheet. ROU assets represent the right to use an underlying asset during the lease term and lease liabilities represent the obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As most leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use an incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. We use the implicit rate when it is readily determinable. The operating lease ROU asset also includes any lease payments made and excludes lease incentives. Lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Operating leases are included as operating right-of-use assets and operating lease liabilities, current and long-term, in the consolidated balance sheets. Financing leases are included as finance right-of-use assets and in financing lease liabilities, current and long-term, in the consolidated balance sheets. We disclose the amortization of our ROU assets and operating lease payments as a net amount, “Amortization of right-of-use assets”, on the consolidated statements of cash flows.
On January 1, 2019, the adoption date of ASC 842, and based on the available practical expedients under the standard, we did not reassess any expired or existing contracts, reassess the lease classification for any expired or existing leases and reassess initial direct costs for exiting leases. We also elected not to capitalize leases that have terms of twelve months or less.
The adoption of ASC 842 did not have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements because we did not have any significant operating leases at the time of adoption. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we entered into various operating leases and an embedded operating lease in accordance with ASC 842 discussed in Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. Our accounting for financing leases (previously referred to as “capital leases”) remained substantially unchanged.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We assess the impairment of long-lived assets, which consists primarily of long-lived intangible assets, machinery and equipment, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that such assets might be impaired and the carrying value may not be recoverable. If events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable and the expected undiscounted future cash flows attributable to the asset are less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss equal to the excess of the asset’s carrying value over its fair value is recorded.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, which prescribes the use of the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax asset or liability account balances are calculated at the balance sheet date using current tax laws and rates in effect. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Our judgments regarding future taxable income may change over time due to changes in market conditions, changes in tax laws, tax planning strategies or other factors. If our assumptions and consequently our estimates change in the future, the valuation allowance may be increased or decreased, which may have a material impact on our statements of operations.
The guidance also prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not sustainable upon examination by taxing authorities. We will recognize accrued interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. No amounts were accrued for the payment of interest and penalties as of the financial statement periods presented herein. We account for uncertain tax positions by assessing all material positions taken in any assessment or challenge by relevant taxing authorities. We are currently unaware of any tax issues under review. See Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Revenue recognition
We followed the revenue recognition standard ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC) 606. Pursuant to ASC 606, revenues are recognized when control of services performed is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. ASC 606 provides for a five-step model that includes, (i) identifying the contract with a customer, (ii) identifying the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determining the transaction price, (iv) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations, and (v) recognizing revenue when, or as, an entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Product revenue
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we acquired The Sera Labs products. In determining whether all of the revenue recognition criteria (i) through (v) above are met with respect to CBD and Personal Protection Equipment product order is considered a single performance obligation and is generally considered complete when the product result is delivered or made available to the customer and, as such, there are shipping and/or handling fees incurred by us or billed to customers. Although we bill a list price for all products ordered and completed for all payer types, we recognize realized revenue when all the revenue recognition criteria have been met. These contracts do not have variable price considerations. For all payers, we must take into account the uncertainty of receiving payment, or being subject to claims for refund, from payers with whom we do not have a sufficient payment collection history or contractual reimbursement agreements. Historically, we have de minims claims for returns.
Pharma Products and Services revenue
The Cure Pharmaceutical’s formulation and product development income include services for the development of OTF products utilizing our CureFilm Technology. Our development contracts have up to four phases. Revenue is recognized based on progress toward completion of the performance obligation in each phase. The method to measure progress toward completion requires judgment and is based on the nature of the products or services to be provided. We generally use the input method to measure progress for our contracts because it best depicts the transfer of assets to the customer, which occurs as we incur costs for the contracts. Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress, the progress toward completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. Revenue is recorded proportionally as costs are incurred. Costs to fulfill these obligations mainly include materials, labor, supplies and consultants. We generally identify each sale of our pharma service offering as a single performance obligation.
We establish an allowance for doubtful accounts based on the evaluation of the collectability of accounts receivables after considering a variety of factors, including the length of time receivables are past due, significant events that may impair the customer’s ability to pay, such as a bankruptcy filing or deterioration in the customer’s operating results or financial position, and historical experience. If circumstances related to customers change, estimates of the recoverability of receivables would be further adjusted. We continuously monitor collections and payments from customers and maintain a provision for estimated credit losses and uncollectible accounts, if any, based upon historical experience and any specific customer collection issues that have been identified. Amounts determined to be uncollectible are written off against the allowance for doubtful accounts. As of December 31, 2020, we have $0.04 million recorded allowance for doubtful accounts on accounts receivables.
New and Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
Information on Recently Issued Accounting Standards that could potentially impact the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related disclosures is incorporated by reference to Part II, Item 8, Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, included in this report.
JOBS Act
As a company with less than $1.07 billion in revenue during our last fiscal year, we qualify as an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. An emerging growth company may take advantage of reduced reporting requirements that are otherwise applicable to public companies. These provisions include:
·
an exemption from compliance with the auditor attestation requirement in the assessment of our internal control over financial reporting pursuant to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
·
reduced disclosure about executive compensation arrangements in our periodic reports, registration statements and proxy statements;
·
exemptions from the requirements to seek non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements; and
·
delay implementing new accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies.
We may take advantage of these provisions until the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO. However, if certain events occur prior to the end of such five-year period, including if we become a “large accelerated filer,” our annual gross revenue is $1.07 billion or more or we issue more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt in any three-year period, we will cease to be an emerging growth company prior to the end of such five-year period.
We have elected to take advantage of certain of the reduced disclosure obligations in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and may elect to take advantage of other reduced reporting requirements in future filings. As a result, the information that we provide to our stockholders may be different from what you might receive from other public reporting companies in which you hold equity interests.
We have elected not to delay implementing new accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that we can elect to opt out of the extended transition period at any time, which election is irrevocable.