Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with "Selected Consolidated Financial Data" and our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including, but not limited to, those presented under "Risks Related to Our Business" included in Item 1A and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a leader in the distribution of avocados, prepared avocado products, and other perishable food products throughout the United States. Our expertise in marketing and distributing avocados, prepared avocados, and other perishable foods allows us to deliver a wide array of fresh and prepared food products to retail grocery, foodservice, club stores, mass merchandisers, food distributors and wholesalers on a worldwide basis. We procure avocados from California, Mexico and other growing regions around the world. Through our various operating facilities, we (i) sort, pack, and/or ripen avocados, tomatoes and/or Hawaiian grown papayas, (ii) create, process and package guacamole and salsa and (iii) create, process and package a portfolio of healthy fresh foods including fresh-cut fruit, fresh-cut vegetables, and prepared foods. We report our operations in three different business segments: Fresh products, Calavo Foods and RFG. See Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
Our Fresh products business grades, sizes, packs, cools, and ripens (if desired) avocados for delivery to our customers. During fiscal 2021, we operated four packinghouses and four operating and distributing facilities (aka value-added depots or VADs) that handle avocados that are sold across the United States and to select international markets. We believe that our continued success in marketing avocados is largely dependent upon securing a reliable, high-quality supply of avocados at reasonable prices, and keeping the handling costs low as we ship avocados to our packinghouses and distribution centers. We believe our diversified avocado sources help provide a level of relative supply stability that may, over time, serve to increase the availability and demand for avocados among consumers in the United States and elsewhere in the world. Significant fluctuations in the volume of avocados delivered have an impact on the per pound packing costs of avocados we handle. Generally, larger crops will result in a lower per pound handling cost. As a result of our investment in packinghouse equipment, distribution centers with value-added ripening and packing capabilities, and personnel, we believe that our cost structure is geared to optimally handle larger avocado volume. We believe our efforts in distributing our other various perishable foods, such as tomatoes and papayas, complement our offerings of avocados. From time to time, we continue to explore the distribution of other crops that provide reasonable returns to our business.
Our Calavo Foods business processes avocados into a wide variety of guacamole products, and distributes the processed product to our customers. All of our prepared avocado products shipped to North America are “cold pasteurized” and include both frozen and fresh guacamole. Due to the high-quality, no preservative nature of our guacamole and the variety of packaging formats that we offer, we believe that we are well positioned to address the diverse taste and needs of today’s foodservice and retail customers. Additionally, we also prepare various fresh salsa products. Our Calavo Foods segment maintains relationships with foodservice companies and food retailers. We continue to seek to expand our relationships with major foodservice companies and food retailers and develop alliances that will allow our products to reach a larger percentage of the marketplace.
Our RFG business produces, markets and distributes nationally a portfolio of healthy, high quality fresh packaged food products for consumers sold through the retail and other channels. RFG products include fresh-cut fruit and vegetables, fresh prepared entrée salads, wraps, sandwiches and fresh snacking products, as well as ready-to-heat entrees and other hot bar and various deli items, meals kit components and salad kits. RFG products are marketed under the Garden Highway Fresh Cut, Garden Highway, and Garden Highway Chef Essentials brands, as well as store-brand and private label programs.
The operating results of all of our businesses have been, and will continue to be, affected by quarterly and annual fluctuations and market downturns due to a number of factors, including but not limited to pests and disease, weather
patterns, changes in demand by consumers, food safety advisories impacting the fresh perishable food categories in which we currently operate, the timing of the receipt, reduction, or cancellation of significant customer orders, the gain or loss of significant customers, market acceptance of our products, our ability to develop, introduce, and market new products on a timely basis, the availability, quality and price of raw materials, new product introductions by our competitors, the utilization of production capacity at our various plant locations, change in the mix of products that our Fresh, Calavo Foods and RFG segments sell, and general economic conditions. We believe, however, that we are currently positioned to address these risks and deliver favorable operating results for the foreseeable future.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has created challenging and unprecedented conditions for our business, and we are committed to taking action in support of a Company-wide response to the crisis. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. We believe we are well-positioned for the future as we continue to navigate the crisis and prepare for an eventual return to a more normal operating environment. We have successfully implemented contingency plans in the U.S. and in Mexico to monitor the evolving needs of our businesses in those countries, as well as those related to our Peru partner in consignment avocado sales.
The effects of the pandemic have been more pronounced in the portions of our business servicing foodservice customers and to a lesser extent certain segments of our retail business, including behind-the-glass deli and grab-and-go convenience items.
In early 2021, health agencies approved vaccines for combating the COVID-19 virus. However, actual vaccination results are ultimately dependent on, among other factors, vaccine availability and their acceptance by individuals which are difficult to predict. In the third quarter of fiscal 2021, the delta variant of the SARS-COV-2 virus became the dominant strain in the U.S. and elsewhere and led to various pandemic restrictions being reinstated. In November 2021, the omicron variant of the SARS-COV-2 virus has started to spread throughout the world, which has led to further pandemic restrictions. Accordingly, the pace of the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic is not presently known. We cannot reasonably estimate the duration or extent of the pandemic’s adverse impact on our business, operating results, and long-term liquidity position.
COVID-19 Recovery Economic Impact
The recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and the current economic climate is increasing labor costs, commodity costs and logistical costs. We are experiencing operational challenges that impact our production facilities and our logistics network; the impact of prices for petroleum-based products, packaging materials and commodity costs; and the availability of sufficient labor is increasing costs companywide.
Beginning in the third quarter of fiscal 2021, in response to the inflationary costs described above, we began to notify our customers of our plans to institute price increases for our RFG and Foods products. Management believes the price increases will largely be accepted by our customers without significant loss of sales, will reverse the margin compression experienced by RFG and Foods segments during the pandemic, and will enable us to continue to invest in initiatives that drive growth.
Dividend payment
On December 3, 2021, we paid a $1.15 per share dividend in the aggregate amount of $20.3 million to shareholders of record on November 12, 2021.
Project Uno
During the third quarter of 2021, the Company launched Project Uno, a strategic set of initiatives that seeks to identify areas of operating efficiencies and cost savings to expand profit margins, cash flow and return on invested capital. We have undertaken multiple productivity and transformation initiatives, including (1) closure of the RFG Florida plant and transfer of its viable operations into RFG Georgia, (2) implementing broader supply chain operational improvements, (3) integrating our commercial, logistics, IT, procurement and accounting functions across the three divisions, (4) product rationalization initiatives which are aimed at eliminating unprofitable or slow moving SKUs and (5) outsourcing certain functions in our North American business to third-party service providers and the associated implementation of new procurement technology solutions. We incurred asset impairment and other costs as part of these productivity and transformation initiatives with the objective of obtaining longer term operating efficiencies and cost savings. The asset impairment involved Florida leasehold improvements, equipment and inventory totaling $9.4 million. The other costs included consulting, executive recruitment and severance costs, moving and shut-down costs and other costs associated with carrying out the initiatives totaling $2.2 million. The Company will continue to carry out the existing productivity initiatives as well as additional initiatives under this strategy in fiscal 2022.
Litigation
From time to time, we are involved in litigation arising in the ordinary course of our business that we do not believe will have a material adverse impact on our financial statements.
Mexico tax audits
We conduct business both domestically and internationally and, as a result, one or more of our subsidiaries files income tax returns in U.S. federal, U.S. state and certain foreign jurisdictions. Accordingly, in the normal course of business, we are subject to examination by taxing authorities, primarily in Mexico and the United States.
2011 Assessment
On June 16, 2021, Calavo reached a settlement agreement with the MFM regarding the 2011 Assessment. Under the terms of the settlement, Calavo agreed to pay approximately $47.8 million Mexican pesos (approximately $2.4 million USD) as a full and final settlement of all taxes, fines and penalties asserted by the MFM. The settlement included $1.5 million USD of income taxes and $0.9 million USD of value added taxes, with both amounts including penalties and interest and inflationary adjustments, which have been recorded in the accompanying financial statements as a discreet item in Income Tax Provision, and in Expenses related to Mexican Tax matters, respectively. An additional $0.3 million USD of related professional fees have also been recorded as expenses related to the Mexican tax matters. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements.
2013 Assessment
In January 2017, we received preliminary observations from SAT related to an audit for fiscal year 2013 outlining certain proposed adjustments primarily related to intercompany funding, deductions for services from certain vendors/suppliers and IVA. We provided a written rebuttal to these preliminary observations during our second fiscal quarter of 2017. During the period from our third fiscal quarter of 2017 through our third fiscal quarter of 2018, we attempted to resolve our case with the SAT through the conclusive agreement submitted before PRODECON, having several working meetings attended by representatives of the SAT, CDM and the PRODECON. However, we were unable to materially resolve our case with the SAT through the PRODECON process.
As a result, in July 2018, the SAT’s local office in Uruapan issued to CDM a final tax assessment (the “2013 Assessment”) totaling approximately $2.6 billion Mexican pesos (which includes annual adjustments for inflation, and equals approx. $127.9 million USD at October 31, 2021) related to Income Tax, Flat Rate Business Tax, and value added tax, related to this fiscal 2013 tax audit. This amount has been adjusted for inflation as of October 31, 2021 to the amount of $3 billion Mexican pesos (approx. $147.6 million USD). Additionally, the tax authorities have determined
that we owe our employee’s profit-sharing liability, totaling approximately $118 million Mexican pesos (approx. $5.8 million USD at October 31, 2021).
We have consulted with both an internationally recognized tax advisor as well as a global law firm with offices throughout Mexico, and we continue to believe that this tax assessment is without merit. In August 2018, we filed an Administrative Appeal on the 2013 Assessment, appealing our case to the SAT’s central legal department in Michoacan. Furthermore, in August 2018, we received a favorable ruling from the SAT’s central legal department in Michoacan on another tax matter (see Note 15 regarding IVA refunds) indicating that they believe that our legal interpretation is accurate on a matter that is also central to the 2013 Assessment. We believe this recent ruling significantly undermines the 2013 Assessment.
On June 25, 2021, we became aware that the Administrative Appeal had been resolved by the SAT against CDM on March 12, 2021, and that we had allegedly failed to timely respond to and challenge the SAT’s notification of such resolution, therefore rendering the 2013 Assessment as definitive. Based on legal counsel from our tax advisory firm, we and our tax advisory firm have concluded that the March notification was not legally communicated. In addition, the SAT has placed liens on the fixed assets of CDM, with a net book value of approximately $26 million USD, and on bank accounts of CDM totaling approximately $1 million USD in order to guaranty the 2013 Assessment. For reasons explained below, we do not believe that these liens pose a risk to the ongoing business operations of CDM.
We strongly disagree with above actions taken and conclusions reached by the SAT, and have since taken the following measures in vigorous defense of our position:
● Retained a global law firm with offices throughout Mexico to provide legal representation before the SAT, as well as retained the legal division of an internationally recognized tax advisor, to provide legal representation before the Federal Tax Court.
● On August 17, we filed a writ with the SAT requesting a substitution of a financial bond for the above-mentioned liens.
● On August 18, we filed an Administrative Reconsideration (the Reconsideration) before the Central Legal Department of the SAT located in Mexico City, asserting that the resolution in March of the Administrative Appeal was wrongly concluded, in particular with respect to the following matters:
o Failure to recognize CDM as a “maquiladora”
o Considering the Company to have a permanent establishment in Mexico,
o Including fruit purchase deposits transferred by the Company to CDM as taxable,
o Application of 16% IVA tax to fruit purchase deposits
o Imposing double-taxation on the fruit purchase transactions
● On August 27, we filed a formal complaint, or queja, (the Complaint) before the PRODECON to request their assistance with having the SAT act upon the Reconsideration. This complaint was later withdrawn in September, but may still be reinstated if deemed appropriate in the future. It should be noted that although the SAT is not obligated to act upon the Reconsideration, however, we believe that having the option of re-filing the PRODECON Complaint makes it likely that the SAT will respond to the Administrative Reconsideration and be open to settlement discussions.
● On August 20, we filed an Annulment Suit (the Suit) with the Federal Tax Court, which among other things, strongly contends that the notifications made by the SAT to CDM and its designated advisors of the resolution of the Administrative Appeal in March were not legally communicated. In addition, the Suit asserts the same matters central to the Reconsideration, as described above, as wrongly concluded in the resolution of the Administrative Appeal.
● On September 22, we had an initial in-person meeting with the SAT in Mexico City to formally present and discuss the Reconsideration. The SAT agreed to review our Reconsideration in more detail. We are awaiting the SAT’s response to setup a follow up meeting to further discuss the Reconsideration.
We believe that the Suit will be accepted by the Tax Court, which will render the 2013 Assessment as non-definitive, and which will allow CDM to petition the Tax Court for a halt to any collection procedures by the SAT and a substitution of a bond for any liens placed on CDM assets.
While we continue to believe that the 2013 Assessment is completely without merit, and that we will prevail on the Suit in the Tax Court, we also believe it is in the best interest of CDM and the Company to settle the 2013 Assessment as quickly as possible. Furthermore, we believe that the above actions taken by CDM will encourage the SAT agree to reach a settlement. In accordance with our cumulative probability analysis, based on factors such as recent settlements made by the SAT in other cases, the 2011 Assessment settlement reached by CDM with the MFM, and the value of CDM assets, we have recorded a provision of $11 million USD in the accompanying financial statements as a discrete item in Income Tax Provision. The provision includes estimated penalties, interest and inflationary adjustments. We incurred $0.6 million USD of related professional fees, which have been recorded in Expenses related to Mexican Tax matters.
FreshRealm Separation
On February 3, 2021, Calavo and FreshRealm entered into a Limited Liability Company Member Separation and Release Agreement (the “Separation Agreement”) described below.
Calavo was previously a limited liability company member in FreshRealm and was a party to that certain FreshRealm, LLC Seventh Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement, dated as of February 27, 2019, by and among FreshRealm and its members. Calavo and FreshRealm were also parties to that certain Sixth Amended and Restated Senior Promissory Note, effective August 10, 2018, as amended (the “Prior Note”), pursuant to which Calavo loaned to FreshRealm principal plus accrued interest in the total sum of $34.5 million. We recorded a reserve of $34.5 million on this balance in the third quarter of fiscal 2020.
Pursuant to the Separation Agreement, among other terms: (i) Calavo terminated its limited liability company interest and equity ownership in FreshRealm; (ii) Calavo and FreshRealm simultaneously entered into an Amended and Restated Senior Secured Loan Agreement and Promissory Note (the “Amended Note”), which amended and restated the Prior Note; (iii) FreshRealm issued an additional Secured Promissory Note to Calavo in the amount of approximately $5 million that is subordinated to the Amended Note (the “Second Note”, together with the Amended Note, the “Notes”); (iv) in the event FreshRealm paid Calavo the sum of $6 million (the “Loan Payoff Amount”) by March 31, 2022 (the “Loan Payoff Period”), the Notes shall be deemed paid in full; (v) the parties agreed to a mutual release of any claims; and (vi) the parties agreed to indemnify each other from any subsequent third party claims.
In July 2021, FreshRealm paid Calavo the Loan Payoff Amount of $6.0 million, and we recorded the receipt as a recovery of the reserve for collectability of the FreshRealm note receivable on the statement of operations. Therefore, the Notes mentioned above, have been deemed paid in full. If FreshRealm undergoes a sale of its business either through a merger or a majority sale of its assets or equity interests before February 3, 2022, FreshRealm must pay Calavo twenty percent (20%) of the purchase price proceeds from such sale of FreshRealm. See Note 16 in the consolidated financial statements.
Closure of RFG Florida facility
On October 18, 2021, the Company announced the closure of RFG’s food processing operations at its Green Cove Springs (near Jacksonville), Florida facility, as part of its Project Uno profit improvement program. As of November 15, the Green Cove facility of RFG has ceased operations. The Company’s Fresh avocado operations at this facility will continue in operation and are not affected. RFG will continue to serve customers of this location from its other food processing locations, primarily in Georgia.
The closure resulted in a reduction of 140 employees, impairment of leasehold improvements, writedowns of inventory and other assets, and certain cash expenditures for the relocation of machinery and equipment and the closure of the leased facilities.
As of October 31, 2021, the Company has leasehold improvements with a net book value of $8.8 million, right of use assets with a net book value of $4.8 million, and a lease liabilities of $6.0 million recorded on the balance sheet, all related to the closed facility. The facility lease has a maturity date of October 31, 2031. The Company intends to seek a sub-lease tenant to assume the vacated space, and believes such a sub-lease can be obtained at a lease rate, and for a lease
period, sufficient to realize the right of use asset. However, a full impairment of the leasehold improvements has been recorded. Management will continue to evaluate the actual amounts and duration of expected future sub-lease revenues. Should the actual sub-lease revenues be less than those currently expected, the Company may need to record impairment of some or all of its investment in the right of use asset.
Following is a summary of the impairment and other charges recorded during the year ended October 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we re-evaluate all of our estimates, including those related to the areas of customer and grower receivables, IVA tax receivables, inventories, useful lives of property, plant and equipment, promotional allowances, equity income/losses and impairment analysis from unconsolidated entities, loans to unconsolidated entities, income taxes, retirement benefits, and commitments and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Additionally, we frequently engage third party valuation experts to assist us with estimates described below. Actual results may materially differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions as additional information becomes available in future periods.
Management has discussed the development and selection of critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors and the Audit Committee has reviewed our disclosure relating to critical accounting estimates in this Annual Report.
We believe the following are the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Promotional allowances. We provide for promotional allowances at the time of sale, based on volume purchased and our historical experience. Our estimates are generally based on evaluating the relationship between promotional allowances and gross sales. The derived percentage is then applied to the current period’s sales revenues in order to arrive at the appropriate debit to sales allowances for the period. The offsetting credit is made to accrued liabilities. When certain amounts of specific customer accounts are subsequently identified as promotional, they are written off against this allowance. Actual amounts may differ from these estimates and such differences are recognized as an adjustment to net sales in the period they are identified. We estimate that a one percent (100 basis point) change in the derived percentage for the entire year would impact results of operations by approximately $0.1 million.
2013 Mexican Tax Audit Assessment. In January 2017, we received preliminary observations from SAT related to an audit for fiscal year 2013 outlining certain proposed adjustments primarily related to intercompany funding, deductions for services from certain vendors/suppliers and IVA. We provided a written rebuttal to these preliminary observations during our second fiscal quarter of 2017. During the period from our third fiscal quarter of 2017 through our third fiscal quarter of 2018, we attempted to resolve our case with the SAT through the conclusive agreement submitted before PRODECON, having several working meetings attended by representatives of the SAT, CDM and the PRODECON. However, we were unable to materially resolve our case with the SAT through the PRODECON process.
As a result, in July 2018, the SAT’s local office in Uruapan issued to CDM a final tax assessment (the “2013 Assessment”) totaling approximately $2.6 billion Mexican pesos (which includes annual adjustments for inflation, and
equals approx. $127.9 million USD at October 31, 2021) related to Income Tax, Flat Rate Business Tax, and value added tax, related to this fiscal 2013 tax audit. This amount has been adjusted for inflation as of October 31, 2021 to the amount of $3 billion Mexican pesos (approx. $147.6 million USD). Additionally, the tax authorities have determined that we owe our employee’s profit-sharing liability, totaling approximately $118 million Mexican pesos (approx. $5.8 million USD at October 31, 2021).
While we continue to believe that the 2013 Assessment is completely without merit, and that we will prevail on the Suit in the Tax Court, we also believe it is in the best interest of CDM and the Company to settle the 2013 Assessment as quickly as possible. Furthermore, we believe that the above actions taken by CDM will encourage the SAT agree to reach a settlement. In accordance with our cumulative probability analysis, based on factors such as recent settlements made by the SAT in other cases, the 2011 Assessment settlement reached by CDM with the MFM, and the value of CDM assets, we have recorded a provision of $11 million USD in the accompanying financial statements as a discrete item in Income Tax Provision. The provision includes estimated penalties, interest and inflationary adjustments. We incurred $0.6 million USD of related professional fees, which have been recorded in Expenses related to Mexican Tax matters. See Note 7 in our consolidated financial statements for futher information.
Mexican IVA taxes receivable. As of October 31, 2021, and October 31, 2020, CDM IVA receivables totaled $37.5 million (762.1 million Mexican pesos) and $30.2 million (640.7 million Mexican pesos). Historically, CDM received IVA refund payments from the Mexican tax authorities on a timely basis. Beginning in fiscal 2014 and continuing into fiscal 2021, however, the tax authorities began carrying out more detailed reviews of our refund requests and our supporting documentation. Additionally, they are also questioning the refunds requested attributable to IVA paid to certain suppliers that allegedly did not fulfill their own tax obligations. We believe these factors and others have contributed to delays in the processing of IVA claims by the Mexican tax authorities. Currently, we are in the process of collecting such balances primarily through regular administrative processes, but these amounts may ultimately need to be recovered through Administrative Appeals and/or legal means.
During the first quarter of fiscal 2017, the tax authorities informed us that their internal opinion, based on the information provided by the local SAT office, considers that CDM is not properly documented relative to its declared tax structure and therefore CDM cannot claim the refundable IVA balance. CDM has strong arguments and supporting documentation to sustain its declared tax structure for IVA and income tax purposes. CDM started an Administrative Appeal for the IVA related to the request of the months of July, August and September of 2015 (the “2015 Appeal”) in order to assert its argument that CDM is properly documented and to therefore change the SAT’s internal assessment. In August 2018, we received a favorable ruling from the SAT’s Legal Administration in Michoacan on the 2015 Appeal indicating that they believe CDM’s legal interpretation of its declared tax structure is indeed accurate. While favorable on this central matter of CDM’s declared tax structure, the ruling, however, still does not recognize the taxpayers right to a full refund for the IVA related to the months of July, August and September 2015. Therefore, in October 2018, CDM filed a substance-over-form Annulment Suit in the Federal Tax Court to recover its full refund for IVA over the subject period, which is currently pending resolution.
In spite of the favorable ruling from the SAT’s Legal Administration in Michoacan, as discussed above, the local SAT office continues to believe that CDM is not properly documented relative to its declared tax structure. As a result, they believe CDM cannot claim certain refundable IVA balances, specifically regarding our IVA refunds related to January through December of 2013, 2014, and 2015, and January and February of 2017. CDM has strong arguments and supporting documentation to sustain its declared tax structure for IVA and income tax purposes. With assistance from our internationally recognized tax advisory firm, as of October 31, 2021, CDM has filed (or has plans to file) Administrative Appeals for the IVA related to the preceding months. A response to these Administrative Appeals is currently pending resolution.
In light of the foregoing, the Company is currently considering its options for resolution of the VAT receivables. In the unlikely event of an unfavorable resolution of the Administrative Appeals, we plan to file Annulment Suits with the Mexican Federal Tax Court. If these suits result in an unfavorable ruling, there is an option to appeal to the Collegiate Circuit Court. The estimated time for the resolution of these suits could be 2 - 3 years. This estimated time could be impacted and delayed by the situation of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We believe that our operations in Mexico are properly documented and our internationally recognized tax advisors believe that there are legal grounds to prevail in collecting the corresponding IVA amounts. Therefore, we believe that it is probable that the Mexican tax authorities will ultimately authorize the refund of the corresponding IVA amounts. However, there is no assurance that we will collect the full amount reflected in our financial statements.
Goodwill and acquired intangible assets. Goodwill, defined as unidentified asset(s) acquired in conjunction with a business acquisition, is tested for impairment on an annual basis and between annual tests whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below the operating segment. We can use a qualitative test, known as "Step 0," or a two-step quantitative method to determine whether impairment has occurred. In Step 0, we elect to perform an optional qualitative analysis and based on the results skip the two step analysis. In fiscal 2021 and 2020, the Company’s estimated fair value significantly exceeded its carrying value in Step 1 of the Company’s impairment test. The fair value of the Company’s reporting units is determined using a combination of valuation techniques, including a discounted cash flow methodology. To corroborate the discounted cash flow analysis, a market approach is utilized using observable market data such as comparable companies in similar lines of business that are publicly traded. The Company concluded based on its Step 1 test that no goodwill impairment existed in the fiscal years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020. Goodwill impairment testing requires significant judgment and management estimates, including, but not limited to, the determination of (i) the number of reporting units, (ii) the goodwill and other assets and liabilities to be allocated to the reporting units and (iii) the fair values of the reporting units which includes forecasted cash flow. The estimates and assumptions described above, along with other factors such as discount rates, will significantly affect the outcome of the impairment tests and the amounts of any resulting impairment losses.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain items from our consolidated statements of operations, expressed as percentages of our total net sales, for the periods indicated:
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The below tables include non-GAAP measures EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted diluted EPS, which are not prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or “GAAP.”
EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) attributable to Calavo Growers, Inc. excluding (1) interest income and expense, (2) income taxes (benefit) provision, (3) depreciation and amortization and (4) stock-based compensation expense. Adjusted EBITDA is EBITDA with further adjustments for (1) non-cash net losses recognized from unconsolidated entities, (2) goodwill impairment, (3) write-off of long-lived assets, (4) acquisition-related costs, (5) restructuring and certain severance costs, (6) certain litigation and other related costs, and (7) one-time items. Adjusted
EBITDA is a primary metric by which management evaluates the operating performance of the business, on which certain operating expenditures and internal budgets are based and by which, in addition to other factors, the Company’s senior management is compensated. The adjustments to calculate EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA are items recognized and recorded under GAAP in particular periods but might be viewed as not necessarily coinciding with the underlying business operations for the periods in which they are so recognized and recorded.
Adjusted net income is defined as net income (loss) attributable to Calavo Growers, Inc. excluding (1) non-cash net losses recognized from unconsolidated entities, (2) goodwill impairment, (3) write-off of long-lived assets, (4) acquisition-related costs, (5) restructuring and certain severance costs, (6) certain litigation and other related costs, and (7) one-time items. Adjusted net income and the related measure of adjusted diluted EPS exclude certain items that are recognized and recorded under GAAP in particular periods but might be viewed as not necessarily coinciding with the underlying business operations for the periods in which they are so recognized and recorded. We believe adjusted net income affords investors a different view of the overall financial performance of the Company than adjusted EBITDA and the GAAP measure of net income (loss) attributable to Calavo Growers, Inc.
Reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures are provided in the financial tables below.
Items are considered one-time in nature if they are non-recurring, infrequent or unusual and have not occurred in the past two years or are not expected to recur in the next two years, in accordance with SEC rules. One-time items are identified in the notes to the reconciliations in the financial tables below.
Non-GAAP information should be considered as supplemental in nature and not as a substitute for, or superior to, any measure of performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. None of these metrics are presented as measures of liquidity. The way the Company measures EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income and adjusted diluted EPS may not be comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies and may not be identical to corresponding measures used in Company agreements.
Adjusted Net Income (Non-GAAP, Unaudited)
The following table presents adjusted net income and adjusted diluted EPS, each a non-GAAP measure, and reconciles them to net income (loss) attributable to Calavo Growers, Inc., and Diluted EPS, which are the most directly comparable GAAP measures. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” above (in thousands, except per share amounts).
(a) For the year ended October 31, 2020, and 2019, FreshRealm incurred losses totaling $24.1 million and $30.6 million, of which we recorded $7.2 million and $14.1 million of non-cash losses during fiscal 2020 and 2019. For the year ended October 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we incurred income from Agricola Don Memo totaling $1.7 million, $1.1 million, and $0.1 million.
(b) During the second quarter of fiscal 2019, we sold our Temecula, Calif., packinghouse for $7.1 million in cash ($6.7 million, net of transaction costs totaling $0.4 million) and, concurrently, leased back a portion of the facility representing approximately one-third of the total square footage. As a result, we recognized a gain of approximately $1.9 million ($1.6 million net of sales commission) in our second quarter of fiscal 2019.
(c) In July 2021, as part of the FreshRealm Separation Agreement, FreshRealm paid Calavo the Loan Payoff Amount of $6.0 million, and we recorded the receipt on the statement of operations as a recovery of the reserve for collectability of the FreshRealm note receivable. In addition, we recovered $0.1 million in receivables that we previously reserved. During the third quarter of fiscal 2020, the results of operations of FreshRealm deteriorated significantly, with declining sales and continuing losses. We therefore recorded an impairment of 100% of our equity investment of $2.8 million, and we recorded a reserve for 100% of our note receivable of 34.2 million (which includes accrued interest of $4.1 million), and $0.3 million in trade accounts receivable as of October 31, 2020, which resulted in a loss of $37.3 million. For the year ended October 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred $0.1 million and $0.3 million of professional fees related to FreshRealm and to the Loss on reserve for FreshRealm note receivable and impairment of investment.
(d) For fiscal 2021 and 2020, results include higher stock-based compensation expense related to senior management transitions, which does not impact the underlying cost structure of the Company.
(e) In the first quarter of fiscal 2021, we incurred professional service costs related to a considered but non-consummated acquisition. In fiscal 2020, we incurred expenses related to the acquisition of SFFI Company, Inc. doing business as Simply Fresh (SFFI). SFFI is a processor and supplier of a broad line of fresh-cut fruit, principally serving the foodservice and hospitality markets.
(f) In the first quarter of fiscal 2019, we adopted a new accounting standard update which requires us to record changes in fair value of equity investments, including our investment in Limoneira (LMNR) common stock, in net income during the period. For the year ended October 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we recorded income of $3.9 million, losses of $8.5 million and losses of $9.6 million in unrealized net gain (loss) on Limoneira shares related to these mark-to-market adjustments. Additionally, we sold 51,271 shares of Limoneira stock during fiscal 2019 and recorded a loss of $0.1 million.
(g) For the year ended October 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred $0.4 million and $0.1 million related to rent paid for RFG corporate office space that we have vacated and plan to sublease.
(h) For the year ended October 31, 2021, we recorded $0.9 million of consulting expenses related to an enterprise-wide strategic business operations study conducted by a third-party management consulting organization for the purpose of restructuring to improve the profitability of the organization and efficiency of its operations. In fiscal 2021, we incurred $0.9 million related to management recruiting and severance costs in connection with the restructuring initiative.
(i) In June 2021, we paid $2.4 million in full settlement of the 2011 Assessment. Of this amount, $1.5 million has been recorded as a discrete item in Income Tax Provision and $0.9 million is related to value added tax expense and recorded as Expenses related to the Mexican tax matters. An additional $0.3 million of related professional fees have also been recorded as expenses related to the Mexican tax matters. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
In July 2021, based on our evaluation of the most probable outcomes of the 2013 Assessment, we have recorded an accrual of $11 million in the accompanying financial statements as a discrete item in Income Tax Provision. An additional $0.6 million of related professional fees have also been recorded as Expenses related to the Mexican tax matters. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
(j) On October 18, 2021, we announced the closure of RFG’s food processing operations at our Green Cove Springs (near Jacksonville), Florida facility, as part of our Project Uno profit improvement program. As of November 15, the Green Cove facility of RFG has ceased operations. We wrote down $8.7 million of leasehold improvements, $0.1 million of equipment, and $0.6 million of inventory (recognized through cost of goods sold). We also paid $0.4 million in employee severance.
(k) Tax impact of non-GAAP adjustments are based on the prevailing year-to-date tax rates in each period and adjusted to the one-time tax charges mentioned in note (c).
Reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA (Non-GAAP, Unaudited)
The following table presents EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, each a non-GAAP measure, and reconciles them to net income (loss) attributable to Calavo Growers, Inc., which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” above (in thousands, except per share amounts).
See prior page for footnote references
Net Sales
We believe that the fundamental consumption trends for our products continue to be favorable. Firstly, U.S. avocado demand continues to grow, with per capita consumption in 2020/21 reaching 9.1 pounds per person, and approximately double the estimate from a decade ago. We believe that the healthy eating trend that has been developing in the U.S. contributes to such growth, as avocados are cholesterol and sodium free, dense in fiber, vitamin B6, antioxidants, potassium, folate, and contain unsaturated fat, which helps lower cholesterol. Also, a growing number of research studies seem to suggest that phytonutrients, which avocados are rich in, help fight chronic illnesses, such as heart disease and cancer.
Additionally, we believe that the demographic changes in the U.S. will impact the consumption of avocados and avocado-based products. The Hispanic community currently accounts for approximately 19% of the U.S. population and the total number of Hispanics is estimated to double by the year 2050. Avocados are considered a staple item purchased by Hispanic consumers, as the per-capita avocado consumption in Mexico is significantly higher than that of the U.S.
We anticipate avocado products will further penetrate the United States marketplace, driven by year-round availability of imported fresh avocados, a rapidly growing Hispanic population, and the promotion of the health benefits of avocados. As one of the largest marketers of avocado products in the United States, we believe that we are well positioned to leverage this trend and to grow our Fresh products and Calavo Foods segments of our business. Additionally, we also believe that avocados and avocado based products will further penetrate other marketplaces that we currently operate in as interest in avocados continues to expand.
In October 2002, the USDA announced the creation of a Hass Avocado Board to promote the sale of Hass variety avocados in the U.S. marketplace. This board provides a basis for a unified funding of promotional activities based on an assessment on all avocados sold in the U.S. marketplace. The California Avocado Commission, which receives its funding from California avocado growers, has historically shouldered the promotional and advertising costs supporting avocado sales. We believe that the incremental funding of promotional and advertising programs in the U.S. will, in the long term, positively impact average selling prices and will favorably impact our avocado businesses. During fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, on behalf of avocado growers, we remitted approximately $1.0 million, $1.3 million and $1.1 million to the California Avocado Commission. During fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, we remitted approximately $8.3 million, $8.4 million and $7.2 million to the Hass Avocado Board related to avocados. Similarly, Avocados from Mexico (AFM) was formed in 2013 as the marketing arm of the Mexican Hass Avocados Importers Association (MHAIA) and the Association of Growers and Packers of Avocados From Mexico (APEAM). During fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, we remitted approximately $5.7 million, $5.2 million and $5.4 million to APEAM primarily related to these marketing activities for Mexican avocados.
We also believe that our other fresh products, primarily tomatoes, are positioned for future growth. The tomato is the fourth most popular fresh-market vegetable (though a fruit scientifically speaking, tomatoes are more commonly considered a vegetable) behind potatoes, lettuce, and onions in the U.S. Although stabilizing in the first decade of the 2000s, annual average fresh-market tomato consumption remains well above that of the previous decade. Over the past few decades, per capita consumption of tomatoes has been on the rise due primarily to the enduring popularity of salads, salad bars, and submarine sandwiches. Perhaps of greater importance has been the introduction of new and improved tomato varieties, the increased development of hot-house grown tomatoes (such as those grown by our ADM affiliate), heightened consumer interest in a wider range of tomatoes, a surge of new immigrants who eat vegetable-intensive diets, and expanding national emphasis on health and nutrition.
Papayas have become more popular as the consumption in the U.S. has more than doubled in the past decade. Papayas have high nutritional benefits. They are rich in anti-oxidants, the B vitamins, folate and pantothenic acid, potassium and magnesium, and fiber.
Additionally, through the acquisition of RFG, we substantially expanded and accelerated the Company’s presence in the fast-growing refrigerated fresh packaged foods category through an array of retail product lines for produce, deli, and foodservice departments. RFG products include fresh-cut fruit and vegetables, fresh prepared entrée salads, wraps, sandwiches and fresh snacking products as well as ready-to-heat entrees and other hot bar and various deli items, meals kits and salad kits. Value-added fruits and vegetables have continued to grow faster than their broader produce categories as consumers increasingly place value on the convenient nature of those products and producers like RFG continue to develop new formulations of value-added products. RFG has also expanded the capacity to provide products for a larger portion of the Fresh Deli department, which remains one of the fastest growing aisles in retail grocery.
The following tables set forth sales by product category and sales allowances, by segment (dollars in thousands):
Net sales to third parties by segment exclude inter-segment sales and cost of sales. For fiscal year 2021, 2020 and 2019, inter-segment sales and cost of sales of $2.5 million, $1.7 million and $2.2 million between Fresh products and RFG were eliminated. For fiscal year 2021, 2020 and 2019, inter-segment sales and cost of sales of $4.2 million, $4.0 million and $4.0 million between Calavo Foods and RFG were eliminated.
The following table summarizes our net sales by business segment:
Summary
Net sales for the year ended October 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, decreased an insignificant amount. The decrease in sales for the year ended October 31, 2021, when compared to the same corresponding prior year period, was due to a decline in the RFG segment, offset by increases from the Fresh products and Calavo Foods segments.
For the year ended October 31, 2021, the decrease in RFG sales was due primarily to decreased sales from fresh-cut fruit & vegetables. The increase in Fresh products sales was due primarily to an increase in sales of avocados. The increase in Calavo Foods was due primarily to an increase in the sales of prepared avocado products. See discussion below for further details.
All three segments of our business are subject to seasonal trends, which can impact the volume and/or quality of fruit sourced in any particular quarter.
Net sales to third parties by segment exclude value-added services billed by our Uruapan packinghouse and our Uruapan processing plant to the parent company. Additionally, net sales to third parties by segment exclude sales between Avocados de Jalisco and the parent company. All intercompany sales are eliminated in our consolidated results of operations.
Fresh products
Fiscal 2021 vs. Fiscal 2020:
Net sales delivered by the Fresh products business increased by approximately $3.5 million, or 1%, for the year ended October 31, 2021, when compared to the same period for fiscal 2020. This increase in Fresh product sales during fiscal 2021, was primarily related to increased sales prices, partially offset by a decrease in sales of tomatoes.
Sales of avocados increased $13.0 million, or 3%, for the year ended October 31, 2021, when compared to the same prior year period. The average avocado sales price per carton increased 3% compared to the same prior year period.
Sales of tomatoes decreased $10.3 million, or 19%, for the year ended October 31, 2021, when compared to the same prior year period. This decrease in tomato sales was primarily due to a 21% decrease in the average sales price per carton compared to the same prior year period. This was partially offset by an increase of 2% in the volume of tomatoes.
Fiscal 2020 vs. Fiscal 2019:
Net sales delivered by the Fresh products business decreased by approximately $36.1 million, or 6%, for the year ended October 31, 2020, when compared to the same period for fiscal 2019. This decrease in Fresh product sales during fiscal 2020, was primarily related to decreased sales prices due to higher supply of avocados, partially offset by an increase in sales of tomatoes.
Sales of avocados decreased $47.3 million, or 8%, for the year ended October 31, 2020, when compared to the same prior year period. The average avocado sales price per carton decreased 14% compared to the same prior year period. Partially offsetting this decrease, the volume of avocados sold during the year ended October 31, 2020 increased 7% compared to the prior year period.
Sales of tomatoes increased $13.0 million, or 32%, for the year ended October 31, 2020, when compared to the same prior year period. This increase in tomato sales was primarily due to a 30% increase in the average sales price per carton compared to the same prior year period.
RFG
Fiscal 2021 vs. Fiscal 2020:
Sales for RFG for the year ended October 31, 2021, when compared to the same period for fiscal 2020, decreased $8.3 million, or 2%. The decrease was primarily due to lower sales out of the Midwest, relating to the closure of RFG’s co-packing partner in that region, which occurred in April 2020. This was partially offset by additional sales in regions where RFG has added manufacturing capacity. Additionally, changing consumer demand and buying patterns related to COVID-19 adversely impacted RFG’s sales during the year ended October 31, 2021.
Fiscal 2020 vs. Fiscal 2019:
Sales for RFG for the year ended October 31, 2020, when compared to the same period for fiscal 2019, decreased $81.3 million, or 17%. The decrease was primarily due to lower sales out of the Midwest region of the United States, relating to the closure of RFG’s co-packing partner in that region. This was partially offset by additional sales in regions where RFG has added manufacturing capacity, most notably the Georgia facility which opened in April 2019.
Calavo Foods
Fiscal 2021 vs. Fiscal 2020:
Sales for Calavo Foods for the year ended October 31, 2021, when compared to the same period for fiscal 2020, increased $2.3 million, or 3%. Sales of prepared avocado products increased by approximately $2.3 million, or 3%, primarily related to an increase in the sales price per pound, partially offset by a decrease in pounds sold. Sales of prepared avocado products were impacted primarily by a decline in demand from foodservice customers related to COVID-19 during the year.
Fiscal 2020 vs. Fiscal 2019:
Sales for Calavo Foods for the year ended October 31, 2020, when compared to the same period for fiscal 2019, decreased $19.5 million, or 21%. Sales of prepared avocado products decreased by approximately $19.0 million, or 21%, primarily related to a decrease in the total volume of pounds sold. Sales of prepared avocado products were impacted primarily by a decline in demand from foodservice customers related to COVID-19.
Gross Profit
The following table summarizes our gross profit and gross profit percentages by business segment:
Summary
Our cost of goods sold consists predominantly of ingredient costs (primarily fruit and other whole foods), packing materials, freight and handling, labor and overhead (including depreciation) associated with preparing food products, and other direct expenses pertaining to products sold. Gross profit decreased by approximately $32.5 million, or 36%, for the year ended October 31, 2021, when compared to the same period for fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to gross profit decreases across the RFG and Calavo Foods segments.
Fresh products
Fiscal 2021 vs. Fiscal 2020:
During our year ended October 31, 2021, as compared to the same prior year period, our Fresh products segment gross profit percentage was consistent to prior year. For the year ended October 31, 2021 and 2020, the gross profit percentage for avocados were 8.0%. Gross profit benefited for fiscal 2021 by the strengthening of the U.S. dollar in relation to the Mexican peso during the year ended October 31, 2021, which resulted in a $0.9 million net gain related the remeasurement of peso-dominated net assets at our Mexican subsidiaries. During the same period last year, we had a remeasurement loss of $1.0 million.
Note that significant fluctuations in the exchange rate between the U.S. Dollar and the Mexican Peso may have a material impact on future gross profit for our Fresh products segment.
For the year ended October 31, 2021 we generated gross profit of $3.7 million from tomato sales, down from $5.1 million in the corresponding prior year period. The decrease in tomato gross profit was due primarily to the year-over-year decrease in sales described in more detail earlier. The majority of our tomato sales are done on a consignment basis, in which the gross profit we earn is generally based on a commission agreed to with each party, which usually is a percent of the overall selling price; however, we also purchase some tomatoes on the spot market to meet specific customer requests and have certain fixed overhead costs associated with our tomato operations which impact the overall gross profit realized from tomato sales. The gross profit percentage for consignment sales are dependent on the volume of fruit we handle, the average selling prices, and the competitiveness of the returns that we provide to third-party growers/packers.
Fiscal 2020 vs. Fiscal 2019:
During our year ended October 31, 2020, as compared to the same prior year period, the decrease in our Fresh products segment gross profit percentage was the result of decreased profit for avocados. For the year ended October 31, 2020, the gross profit percentage for avocados decreased to 8.1% from 14.3% in fiscal year 2019. This decrease was related to the COVID-19 related impacts noted above, the poor fruit quality issues during our first quarter and related to our strong performance during historically favorable market conditions in last year’s second and third quarter.
In addition, remeasurement losses related to the Mexican peso for our Mexican subsidiaries during the period totaled $1.0 million compared to a loss of $0.4 million during the year ago period.
For the year ended October 31, 2020 we generated gross profit of $5.1 million from tomato sales, up from $4.3 million in the corresponding prior year period. The increase in tomato gross profit was due primarily to the year-over-year increase in sales described in more detail earlier.
RFG
Fiscal 2021 vs. Fiscal 2020:
RFG’s gross profit (loss) percentage for the year ended October 31, 2021 was (0.9)%, compared to 5.3% in the same prior year period. The declines in gross profit for the year ended October 31, 2021, were due to increased commodity costs, lack of availability of key commodities, lower supply and higher turnover of labor that caused increase overtime costs and decreased efficiencies. In addition, RFG’s gross profit (loss) was negatively impacted by the decreased sales that resulted from the closure of our Midwest co-packing partner.
We continue to experience operational challenges to our production facilities and logistics networks, shortage of labor and impacts from increases in prices of petroleum-based products, packaging materials and commodities, all of which are increasing costs companywide with the effects especially pronounced at RFG.
Beginning in the third quarter of fiscal 2021, in response to the inflationary costs described above, we began to notify our customers of our plans to institute price increases for our RFG and Foods products. Management believes the price increases will largely be accepted by our customers without significant loss of sales, will reverse the margin compression experienced by RFG and Foods segments during the pandemic, and will enable us to continue to invest in initiatives that drive growth. However, we cannot assure that such price increases will not cause a loss of sales, will improve margins in our RFG and Foods segments or that we will be able to undertake future initiatives to drive growth.
In October 2021, we announced the closure of RFG’s food processing operations at its Green Cove Springs (near Jacksonville), Florida facility, as part of its Project Uno profit improvement program. As of November 15, the Green Cove facility of RFG has ceased operations. We wrote down $8.7 million of leasehold improvements, $0.1 million of equipment, and $0.6 million of inventory. We also paid $0.4 million in employee severance.
Fiscal 2020 vs. Fiscal 2019:
RFG’s gross profit percentage for the year ended October 31, 2020 was 5.3%, compared to 4.4% in the same prior year period. Gross profit and gross profit percentage generated by RFG’s pre-existing manufacturing operations (facilities opened more than one year) both increased compared to the same prior year period driven by better raw material costs and utilization and improved labor efficiency. New production facilities improved on both a year-over-year and sequential period basis.
Calavo Foods
Fiscal 2021 vs. Fiscal 2020:
Calavo Foods gross profit percentage decreased to 16.9% of net sales, during the year ended October 31, 2021 compared to 27.8% during the same prior year period. The decrease in Calavo Foods gross profit percentage was due primarily to an increase in fruit input costs, in addition to higher manufacturing costs relating to an overall decrease in guacamole pounds produced. Note that any significant fluctuation in the cost of fruit used in the production process or the exchange rate between the U.S. Dollar and the Mexican Peso may have a material impact on future gross profit for our Calavo Foods segment.
Fiscal 2020 vs. Fiscal 2019:
Calavo Foods gross profit percentage increased to 27.8% of net sales, during the year ended October 31, 2020 compared to 22.2% during the same prior year period. The increase in Calavo Foods gross profit percentage was due primarily to a decrease in fruit input costs, in addition to lower manufacturing costs relating to both the facility process improvements completed last year and the weaker Mexican Peso.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses of $56.7 million for the year ended October 31, 2021 include costs of marketing and advertising, sales expenses (including broker commissions) and other general and administrative costs. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $1.3 million, or 2.2%, for the year ended October 31, 2021, when compared to the same period for fiscal 2020. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in salaries and benefit expense due to the eliminations of staff positions ($1.9 million), a decrease in broker commission ($0.9 million) and a decrease in stock based compensation due to prior year stock grants for certain management transition expenses ($0.5 million). Partially offsetting these decreases is an increase in professional service fees ($1.4 million), an increase in travel and entertainment ($0.5 million) and an increase in IT expenses ($0.4 million).
Selling, general and administrative expenses of $58.0 million for the year ended October 31, 2020 include costs of marketing and advertising, sales expenses (including broker commissions) and other general and administrative costs. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $1.2 million, or 2.0%, for the year ended October 31, 2020, when compared to the same period for fiscal 2019. This was primarily related to a decrease in the accrual for performance-based senior management bonuses ($3.5 million), a decrease in broker commission ($0.8 million) and a decrease in marketing expenses ($0.5 million). Partially offsetting these decreases is an increase in professional service fees ($1.4 million), an increase in certain management transition expenses incurred ($0.9 million), an increase in insurance ($0.6 million) and an increase in IT expenses ($0.4 million).
For the year ended October 31, 2021, we recorded $0.9 million of consulting expenses related to an enterprise-wide strategic business operations study conducted by a third-party management consulting organization for the purpose of restructuring to improve the profitability of the organization and efficiency of its operations. We also recorded $0.9 million of management recruiting and severance costs related to this restructuring initiative. As part of the above consulting agreement, we have agreed to pay a “Success Fee” based on the improvement of financial results starting January 1, 2022. No accrual is considered necessary related to this Success Fee as of October 31, 2021.
Loss from Unconsolidated Entities
Loss from unconsolidated entities includes our allocation of earnings or losses from our investments in FreshRealm and Don Memo. For the year ended October 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we recognized losses of $1.7 million and income of $1.1 million and income of $0.1 million of income related to Don Memo. For the year ended October 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $7.2 million and $14.1 million of losses related to FreshRealm. See Note 16 for additional information regarding FreshRealm.
Interest Income
The decrease in interest income in fiscal 2021 as compared to 2020 is primarily due to the discontinuation of accruing interest for FreshRealm, which was effective August 1, 2020. The decrease in interest income in fiscal 2020 as compared to 2019 is primarily due to the reserve on the loans to FreshRealm in the third quarter of fiscal 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense is primarily generated from our line of credit borrowings with Farm Credit West, PCA (FCW) and Bank of America, N.A. (Bank of America). For fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, the decrease in interest expense was primarily related to lower London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) interest rates, offset by a higher average debt balance. For fiscal 2020, as compared to fiscal 2019, the decrease in interest expense was primarily related to lower LIBOR interest rates, offset by a higher average debt balance. With the fifth amendment to our credit facility, the LIBOR reference interest rate will be replaced by the BSBY Bloomberg rate.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net includes dividend income, as well as certain other transactions that are outside of the normal course of operations. During fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, we received $0.5 million, million as dividend income from Limoneira.
Income Taxes Benefit (Provision)
Our tax provision is determined using an estimated annual effective tax rate and adjusted for discrete taxable events that may occur during the respective quarter.
In June 2021, we paid $2.4 million related to the settlement of the 2011 Assessment (See Note 7 for further information). Of this amount, $1.5 million was included as a discrate item in income tax provision and $0.9 million which was related to value added taxes was included in expenses related to Mexican tax matters in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations.
In July 2021, based on our evaluation of the most probable outcomes of the 2013 Assessment, we have recorded an accrual for uncertain tax positions of $11 million in the accompanying financials, which has been recorded as a discrete item in tax provision expense. An additional $0.6 million of related professional fees have also been recorded as expenses related to the Mexican tax matters. See Note 7 for further information.
Our effective tax rate without the above discrete items was approximately 146.6% for the year ended October 31, 2021. Our effective tax rate for year ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately 23.7% and 26.0%. The distortive effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 differs from that of prior fiscal periods primarily due to the impacts of one-time tax events including the 2011 and 2013 Mexico Assessments, tax rate arbitrage on carryback claims under the CARES Act, and near break-even pre-tax operations relative to prior fiscal periods. See Note 9 for further information.
CARES Act
On March 27, 2020, the President of the United States signed and enacted into law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act. The CARES Act is a relief package intended to assist many aspects of the country’s economy of which certain components of the Act impacted the Company's 2020 income tax provision. We are recording approximately $1.3 million of tax benefit as a result of the provision allowing taxpayers to carry back net operating losses to offset taxable income to previously filed tax returns.
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest
For fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, the net losses attributable to noncontrolling interest is due to losses from Avocados de Jalisco.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating activities for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019 provided cash flows of $13.6 million, $28.9 million and $72.1 million. Fiscal year 2021 operating cash flows reflect our net loss of $11.9 million, net increase of noncash charges (depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, provision for losses on accounts receivable, losses from unconsolidated entities, net losses on Limoneira shares, interest income on Notes to FreshRealm, deferred taxes, loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment, loss on the reserve for FreshRealm, impairment related to RFG Florida facility closure and gain on the sale of the Temecula packinghouse) of $20.2 million and a net increase from changes in the non-cash components of our working capital accounts of approximately $5.3 million.
Increases in operating cash flows caused by working capital changes include a net increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $15.1 million, an increase in payable to growers of $11.7 million, a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $3.6 million, and a decrease in inventory of $0.4 million, partially offset by, an increase in accounts receivable of $15.0 million, an increase in other assets of $7.8 million, an increase in advances to suppliers of $1.6 million and a decrease in income taxes receivable of $0.9 million.
The increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities is primarily related to an $11 million accrual related to the 2013 Mexican Tax Assessment (See Note 7) and to an increase in payables related to RFG. The increase in payable to growers is mostly due to increased sales prices for Mexican avocados in the month of October 2021 compared to October 2020. The decrease in our inventory, as of October 31, 2021 when compared to October 31, 2020, is primarily due to lower inventory of guacamole. The increase in our accounts receivable, as of October 31, 2021, when compared to October 31, 2020, is primarily due an increase in sales in October 2021 compared to October 2020. The increase in income taxes receivable is due to the timing of estimated payments made during the year ended October 31, 2021. The increase in other assets is primarily related to the increase in IVA receivable in fiscal 2021. The increase in advances to suppliers is mainly due to advances to our tomato growers for fiscal 2021 compared to prior year.
Cash used in investing activities was $9.6 million, $31.9 million and $31.9 million for fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019. Fiscal year 2021 cash flows used in investing activities includes the purchases of property, plant and equipment of $11.7 million, a $3.5 million bridge loan to Agricola Belher and infrastructure advances to Don Memo for $1.3 million, partially offset by, $6.0 million received from FreshRealm related to the separation agreement and $0.9 million received from Agricola Belher for the repayment of infrastructure advances.
Cash used in financing activities was $5.2 million, $0.9 million and $33.8 million for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019. Cash used during fiscal year 2021 primarily relates to the payment of a $20.3 million dividend, payments on long-term obligations of $1.2 million and the payment of minimum withholding taxes on net share settlement of equity awards of $0.9 million, partially offset by, net proceeds on our credit facilities totaling $17.2 million.
Our principal sources of liquidity are our existing cash reserves, cash generated from operations and amounts available for borrowing under our existing credit facilities. In addition, we have our investment in Limoneira stock as an additional source of liquidity (see details below on amendment to credit facility). Restricted cash, cash and cash equivalents as of October 31, 2021 and 2020 totaled $2.9 million and $4.1 million. Our working capital at October 31, 2021 was $38.0 million, compared to $29.6 million at October 31, 2020. Our investment in Limoneira stock amounted to $27.1 million and $23.2 million at October 31, 2021 and 2020.
We believe that cash flows from operations, the available Credit Facility, and other sources will be sufficient to satisfy our future capital expenditures, grower recruitment efforts, working capital and other financing requirements for at least the next twelve months. We will continue to pursue grower recruitment opportunities and expand relationships with retail and/or foodservice customers to fuel growth in each of our business segments. We have a revolving credit facility with Bank of America as administrative agent and Farm Credit West as joint lead arranger. Under the terms of this agreement, we may draw on funds for both working capital and long-term productive asset purchases. Total credit available under this agreement is $100 million and it expires in January 2026. See Note 6 in the consolidated financial statements. Upon notice to Bank of America, we may from time to time, request an increase in the Credit Facility by an amount not exceeding $50 million. For our line of credit the weighted-average interest rate was 2.2% and 1.9% at
October 31, 2021 and 2020. Under this credit facility, we had $37.7 million and $36.9 million outstanding as of October 31, 2021 and 2020.
As of October 31, 2021, the Company was out of compliance with the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (“FCCR”) for the quarter ended as of that date, and expected to be out of compliance with this requirement for the first half of fiscal 2022. In response to this event of default, the Company and Bank of America have entered into the Fourth Amendment, Limited Waiver and Limited Consent to Credit Agreement (the “Amendment”) on December 1, 2021. The principal terms of the Amendment are as follows:
● The interest rate was increased by 0.50%.
● The FCCR will not be tested for the quarters ended October 31, 2021, January 31, 2022 and April 30, 2022. Testing will resume for the quarter ended July 31, 2022.
● The quarterly FCCR will be replaced by a cumulative monthly minimum Consolidated EBITDA requirement, with the first measurement to occur as of January 31, 2022 for the three months then ended, and continuing monthly thereafter through June 2022.
● Consolidated financial statements must be submitted monthly for the month and year-to-date period, beginning with the financial statements for the month of November 2021 and continuing through June 2022.
● The Company will pledge the 1,677,000 shares it holds of Limoneira stock as collateral (which collateral is in addition to the general business assets of the Company that already secure the credit facility). The pledge will be lifted upon such time as the Company has certified compliance with a 1.15 to 1.0 minimum FCCR for two consecutive fiscal quarters.
● Calavo de Mexico will be added as a guarantor of the line of credit
The above terms and conditions will remain in effect until such time as the Company has certified compliance with a 1.15 to 1.0 minimum FCCR for two consecutive fiscal quarters. In addition, pursuant to the Amendment, Bank of America and the Lenders consented to the Borrower’s intercompany transfer of up to $25 million to Calavo de Mexico (“CDM”), for the purpose of providing CDM the alternative to offer cash security as collateral in favor of the Mexican Federal Tax Administration Service (the “Mexican SAT”) for its tax obligations imposed by the Mexican SAT with respect to an assessment for the year ending December 31, 2013 (“2013 Tax Assessment”, See Note 7). This cash security would be intended as a substitute for the liens the Mexican SAT placed on the fixed assets of CDM as described in Note 7. The Amendment further provides that any payments in settlement of the 2013 Tax Assessment of up to $25 million may be excluded as cash tax payments in the calculation of the quarterly FCCR. Such advance may be made only once the January 2022 financial statements of the Company are delivered to Bank of America and the Company is otherwise in compliance with the terms of the credit agreement.
Bank of America has waived the default as of October 31, 2021, and therefore we are in compliance with all financial covenants. We expect to remain in compliance at minimum through December 2022.
The Company and Bank of America have also entered into a fifth Amendment to our credit facilty, through which the LIBOR reference interest rate will be replaced by the BSBY Bloomberg rate.
The following table summarizes contractual obligations pursuant to which we are required to make cash payments. The information is presented as of our fiscal year ended October 31, 2021:
The California avocado industry is subject to a state marketing order whereby handlers are required to collect assessments from the growers and remit such assessments to the California Avocado Commission (CAC). The assessments are primarily for advertising and promotions. The amount of the assessment is based on the dollars paid to the growers for their fruit, and, as a result, is not determinable until the value of the payments to the growers has been calculated.
Amounts remitted to the Hass Avocado Board (HAB) in connection with their assessment program are likewise not determinable until the fruit is actually delivered to us. HAB assessments are primarily used to fund marketing and promotion efforts.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In October 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Updated (ASU) 2018-17, Targeted Improvements to Related Party Guidance for Variable Interest Entities. This ASU provides that indirect interests held through related parties in common control arrangements should be considered on a proportional basis for determining whether fees paid to decision makers and service providers are variable interests. This ASU was effective for us beginning the first day of our 2021 fiscal year. The adoption of this ASU did not have an impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
On November 1, 2020, the Company adopted an ASU, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other-Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40): Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That Is a Service Contract. This update provides guidance regarding the capitalization of implementation costs incurred in a cloud computing arrangement that is a service contract. This ASU was adopted prospectively and cloud computing implementation costs incurred on November 1, 2020 or later are included in other noncurrent assets in the consolidated balance sheet and are presented within operating cash flows. As of October 31, 2021, capitalized implementation costs included in other noncurrent assets were less than $0.1 million and there was no accumulated amortization or amortization expense recorded during the year ended October 31, 2021.
In January 2017, the FASB issued an ASU, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, which removes the requirement to compare the implied fair value of goodwill with its carrying amount as part of step 2 of the goodwill impairment test. The ASU permits an entity to perform its annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount and to recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. This ASU was effective for us beginning the first day of our 2021 fiscal year. The adoption of this ASU did not have an impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
On November 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326). This standard requires a financial asset to be presented at the net amount expected to be collected. The financial assets of the Company in scope of ASU 2016-13 were primarily accounts receivable. The Company estimates an allowance for expected credit losses on accounts receivable that result from the inability of customers to make required payments. In estimating the allowance for expected credit losses, consideration is given to the current aging of receivables, historical experience, and a review for potential bad debts. The adoption of this ASU did not have an impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.