ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report.
On June 28, 2021, CEL-SCI announced results from its 9.5 year pivotal Phase 3 study for its immunotherapy Multikine® (Leukocyte Interleukin, Injection) in the treatment of advanced (stages III and IV) primary (previously untreated) squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN). The Phase 3 results showed a long-term 5-year overall survival (OS) benefit in the treatment arm that received Multikine treatment followed by surgery and radiation. This survival benefit was robust and durable, with no safety issues, something not commonly seen with cancer drugs. In fact, the survival benefit increased over time and at 5-years the overall survival benefit reached an absolute 14.1% advantage for the Multikine treated arm over control (n=380, total study patients treated with surgery plus radiation), control arm 48.6%, Multikine arm 62.7% survival.
The study used the standard of care treatment for advanced primary head and neck cancer patients as a comparison. The patients received surgery followed by either radiation or chemoradiation (chemotherapy and radiation at the same time), as determined by the physician. This means that there were 2 treatment arms, 1) surgery plus radiation or 2) surgery plus chemoradiation. The arm that received Multikine treatment followed by surgery and radiation showed great survival benefit, but when chemotherapy was added in the second treatment arm, the immunological effect of Multikine was negated. Therefore when the two treatment arms were combined the study did not achieve its primary endpoint of a 10% improvement in overall survival.
However, the analysis of the separate treatment arms was prespecified in the protocol and carried out prior to CEL-SCI becoming unblinded. The OS benefit of 14.1% at 5 years for this treatment arm exceeded the 10% OS benefit set out for the study population as a whole. The OS results for this treatment arm are significant (two-sided p=0.0236, HR=0.68) and the effect is robust, durable and increasing over time. The results from the Phase 3 cancer study proved that Multikine met all of the protocol required benefits stated in the study protocol in patients in the treatment arm receiving surgery and radiation as their standard therapies. Based on this CEL-SCI will be filing for and seeking FDA approval for the use of Multikine in the treatment of advanced primary head and neck cancer in this patient population of about 210,000 patients annually worldwide.
Multikine (Leukocyte Interleukin, Injection) is the full name of this investigational therapy, which, for simplicity, is referred to in this report as Multikine. Multikine is the trademark that the Company has registered for this investigational therapy, and this proprietary name is subject to FDA review under the Company’s future anticipated regulatory submission for approval. Multikine has not been licensed or approved by the FDA or any other regulatory agency. Neither has its safety or efficacy been established for any use.
CEL-SCI also owns and is developing a pre-clinical technology called LEAPS (Ligand Epitope Antigen Presentation System). CEL-SCI is using its LEAPS technology platform to investigate its lead peptide-based immunotherapy (CEL-4000) as a vaccine treatment for rheumatoid arthritis.
All of CEL-SCI’s projects are under development. As a result, CEL-SCI cannot predict when it will be able to generate any revenue from the sale of any of its products.
Since inception, CEL-SCI has financed its operations through the issuance of equity securities, convertible notes, loans and certain research grants. CEL-SCI will likely continue to generate net operating losses as it continues the development of Multikine and brings other drug candidates into clinical trials. Until such time as CEL-SCI becomes profitable, any or all of these financing vehicles or others may be utilized to assist CEL-SCI’s capital requirements.
Results of Operations
No grant income was received during the year ended September 30, 2021. Prior year grant income included amounts earned on a Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) grant, which was not received in the current year. The nature and amount of grants awarded depends on the timing and availability of such funds.
During the year ended September 30, 2021, research and development expenses increased by approximately $5.3 million, or 30%, compared to the year ended September 30, 2020. Major components of this increase include approximately $0.5 million in expenses to prepare for the potential filing of a Biologics License Application (BLA) and commercial manufacture of Multikine, approximately $2.4 million increase in employee stock compensation expense, and an approximate $2.7 million increase in expenses related to the Phase 3 clinical trial. This increase was offset by a net decrease in other miscellaneous research and development expenses of approximately $0.3 million.
During the year ended September 30, 2021, general and administrative expenses increased by approximately $1.4 million, or 12%, compared to the year ended September 30, 2020. A major component of the increase is an approximate $1.1 million increase in employee stock compensation costs, most of which related to the options granted under the 2021 Non-Qualified Stock Option Plan, and an approximately $0.3 million net increase in other general and administrative costs.
During the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, CEL-SCI recorded derivative losses of approximately $0.7 million and $0.3 million, respectively. This variation was the result of the change in fair value of the derivative liabilities during the period which was caused by fluctuations in the share price of CEL-SCI’s common stock.
Other non-operating gain increased by approximately $0.8 million from approximately $0.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2020 to approximately $1.7 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. This gain relates to the Securities Purchase Agreement described in Note 12 to the financial statements included as part of this report. The amount of the gain or loss is a result of the timing of shares issued to Ergomed and the subsequent re-sale of those shares. No shares were issued to Ergomed during the year ended September 30, 2021. During the year ended September 30, 2020, the Company issued 150,000 shares to Ergomed and recorded a non-operating loss equal to the fair value of those shares of approximately $1.8 million. During the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, Ergomed received approximately $1.7 million and $2.7 million, respectively, from the resale of these shares.
Net interest expense increased by approximately $0.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the year ended September 30, 2020 primarily due to the amortization of the Company’s lease liabilities.
Research and Development Expenses
CEL-SCI’s research and development efforts involved Multikine and LEAPS. The table below shows the research and development expenses associated with each project during the reporting periods.
CEL-SCI’s Phase 3 clinical trial began in December 2010 after the completion and validation of CEL-SCI’s dedicated manufacturing facility. The Phase 3 clinical trial was fully enrolled in September 2016, reached its primary endpoint in April 2020 and achieved database lock in December 2020. The data was unblinded in June 2021, and the primary endpoint results were announced in June 2021. CEL-SCI is currently preparing the BLA to submit to the FDA.
As explained in Item 1 of this report, clinical and other studies necessary to obtain regulatory approval of a new drug involve significant costs and require several years to complete. The extent of the Company’s clinical trials and research programs are primarily based upon the amount of capital available to the Company and the extent to which the Company has received regulatory approvals for clinical trials. The inability of the Company to conduct clinical trials or research, whether due to a lack of capital or regulatory approval, will prevent the Company from completing the studies and research required to obtain regulatory approval for any products which the Company is developing. Without regulatory approval, the Company will be unable to sell any of its products. Since all of the Company’s projects are under development, the Company cannot predict when it will be able to generate any revenue from the sale of any of its products.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
CEL-SCI has had only limited revenues from operations since its inception in March 1983. CEL-SCI has relied primarily upon capital generated from the public and private offerings of its common stock and convertible notes. In addition, CEL-SCI has utilized short-term loans to meet its capital requirements. Capital raised by CEL-SCI has been used to acquire an exclusive worldwide license to use, and later purchase, certain patented and unpatented proprietary technology and know-how relating to the human immunological defense system and for clinical trials. Capital has also been used for patent applications, debt repayment, research and development, administrative costs, and for CEL-SCI’s laboratory and manufacturing facilities. CEL-SCI does not anticipate realizing significant revenues until it enters into licensing arrangements regarding its technology and know-how or until it receives regulatory approval to sell its products (which could take a number of years). As a result, CEL-SCI has been dependent primarily upon the proceeds from the sale of its securities to meet all of its liquidity and capital requirements and anticipates having to do so in the future. During fiscal year 2021 and 2020, CEL-SCI raised net proceeds of approximately $54.0 million and $25.8 million, respectively, through a combination of the sale of common stock and the exercise of warrants and options.
In August 2007, CEL-SCI leased a building near Baltimore, Maryland. The building, which consists of approximately 73,000 square feet, has been remodeled in accordance with CEL-SCI’s specifications so that it can be used by CEL-SCI to manufacture Multikine for CEL-SCI’s Phase III clinical trials and sales of the drug if approved by the FDA. The lease expires on October 31, 2028, and required annual base rent payments of approximately $2.2 million during the twelve months ended September 30, 2021. See Item 2 of this report for more information concerning the terms of this lease.
In June 2021, the Company sold 1,400,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $22.62 per share and received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $29.4 million. Under the terms of the Underwriting Agreement the Company granted the Underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 210,000 shares of common stock solely to cover over-allotments. The underwriter fully exercised this option in June 2021 resulting in additional net proceeds to the Company of approximately $4.4 million.
In December 2020, the Company sold 1,000,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $14.65 per share and received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $13.6 million.
The following charts list the warrants that were exercised and the proceeds received during the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020.
Fiscal Year 2021
Fiscal Year 2020
CEL-SCI entered into Securities Purchase Agreements (SPAs) with Ergomed plc, one of CEL-SCI’s Clinical Research Organizations responsible for managing the Phase 3 clinical trial, to facilitate payment of amounts due Ergomed. Under the Agreements, CEL-SCI issued Ergomed shares of common stock and the net proceeds from the sales of those shares reduces outstanding amounts due Ergomed. Upon issuance, CEL-SCI expenses the full value of the shares as Other non-operating gain/loss and subsequently offsets the expense as amounts are realized through the sale by Ergomed and reduces accounts payable to Ergomed.
During the year ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, CEL-SCI issued Ergomed 0 and 150,000 shares, respectively.
The following table summarizes the Other Non-operating gains for the years ended September 30 relating to these agreements:
As of September 30, 2021, Ergomed had no shares remaining for resale. As of September 30, 2020, Ergomed held 102,521 shares.
During the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company’s cash increased by approximately $20.6 million after the purchase of $6.1 million of U.S. Treasury bills (T-bills). Net of the purchase of the T-bills, cash increased by approximately $26.7 million. Significant components of the increase include approximately $47.1 million in net proceeds from the sale of common stock through public offerings, approximately $6.7 million in proceeds from the exercise of warrants and options, the receipt of approximately $1.6 million in lease incentives and $0.2 million in sales of stock to employees, offset by net cash used to fund the Company’s operations, including its Phase 3 clinical trial, of approximately $18.8 million, approximately $9.0 million of equipment and leasehold improvement expenditures and approximately $1.1 million in lease payments.
During the year ended September 30, 2021, 1,597,870 warrants were exercised at a weighted average exercise price of $3.75 for total proceeds of approximately $6.0 million.
Prepaid expenses decreased by approximately $0.3 million during the year ended September 30, 2021 as compared to September 30, 2020 primarily due to the timing of payments and recognition of related expenses relating to the Company’s Phase 3 clinical trial status.
Supplies are purchased for use in the Company’s manufacturing and R&D efforts and vary with the study requirements. During the year ended September 30, 2021, the supplies increased by approximately $1.2 million in support of the work on modifications of the manufacturing facility to prepare the facility to produce Multikine for commercial purposes and before the Company’s Biologics License Application (BLA) can be submitted to the FDA.
Primarily as a result of CEL-SCI’s losses incurred to date, its expected continued future losses, and limited cash balances, CEL-SCI has included a disclosure in its financial statements expressing substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. CEL-SCI has included this disclosure on numerous occasions in the preceding years.
Future Capital Requirements
CEL-SCI’s material capital commitments include funding operating losses, funding its research and development program and making required lease payments. Additionally, the Company recently completed upgrading the manufacturing facility to prepare for the potential commercial production of Multikine. Total costs of this upgrade are approximately $10.6 million. The landlord of the property agreed to finance the final $2.4 million of costs and allow for the repayment through increased lease payments which began on March 1, 2021. As of September 30, 2021, the landlord had provided approximately $1.6 million of the total funding. Because of the change in lease payments, the new financing arrangement was considered a lease modification. The remaining $0.8 million lease incentive is expected to be realized in quarter ended December 31, 2021.
For information on employment contracts, see Item 11 of this report.
Further, CEL-SCI has contingent obligations with vendors for work that will be completed in relation to the Phase 3 trial. The timing of these obligations cannot be determined at this time. CEL-SCI estimates it will incur additional expenses of approximately $1.1 million for the filing of the clinical study report to the FDA. It should be noted that this estimate is based only on the information currently available from the CROs responsible for managing the Phase 3 clinical trial and does not include other related costs, e.g., the manufacturing of the drug.
CEL-SCI will need to raise additional funds, either through the exercise of outstanding warrants/options, through debt or equity financings or a partnering arrangement, to bring Multikine to market. The ability of CEL-SCI to complete the necessary clinical trials and obtain FDA approval for the sale of products to be developed on a commercial basis is uncertain. However, it is possible that CEL-SCI will not be able to generate enough cash to continue operations at its current level. CEL-SCI’s management has engaged in fundraising for over 25 years and believes that the manner in which it is proceeding will produce the best possible outcome for the shareholders. There can be no assurances that CEL-SCI will be successful in raising additional funds.
Clinical and other studies necessary to obtain regulatory approval of a new drug involve significant costs and require several years to complete. The extent of CEL-SCI’s clinical trials and research programs are primarily based upon the amount of capital available to CEL-SCI and the extent to which CEL-SCI has received regulatory approvals for clinical trials. The inability of CEL-SCI to conduct clinical trials or research, whether due to a lack of capital or regulatory approval, will prevent CEL-SCI from completing the studies and research required to obtain regulatory approval for any products which CEL-SCI is developing. Without regulatory approval, CEL-SCI will be unable to sell any of its products.
In the absence of revenues, CEL-SCI will be required to raise additional funds through the sale of securities, debt financings or other arrangements in order to continue with its research efforts. However, there can be no assurance that such financing will be available or be available on favorable terms. Ultimately, CEL-SCI must complete the development of its products, obtain appropriate regulatory approvals and obtain sufficient revenues to support its cost structure.
Since all of CEL-SCI’s projects are under development, CEL-SCI cannot predict with any certainty the funds required for future research and clinical trials, the timing of future research and development projects, or when it will be able to generate any revenue from the sale of any of its products.
CEL-SCI's cash flow and earnings are subject to fluctuations due to changes in interest rates on its bank accounts, and, to an immaterial extent, foreign currency exchange rates.
Critical Accounting Policies
CEL-SCI's significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to the financial statements included as part of this report. However, certain accounting policies are particularly important to the portrayal of CEL-SCI’s financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgments by management. As a result, the financial statements are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying those policies, management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. These estimates are based on CEL-SCI's historical experience, terms of existing contracts, observance of trends in the industry and information available from outside sources, as appropriate.
Management believes that the following critical accounting policies require the most significant judgments and estimates with respect to the preparation of CEL-SCI’s financial statements.
Lease Accounting -The measurement of the finance and operating lease right-of-use asset and lease liabilities requires the determination of an estimated lease term and an incrernental borrowing rate, which involves complex judgment by management. The determination of the incremental borrowing rates for new and modified lease contracts is a critical accounting policy. Significant judgment is required by management to develop inputs and assumptions used to determine the incremental borrowing rate for lease contracts.
Share-based Compensation- Share-based compensation cost to employees is measured at fair value as of the grant date in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718. The fair value of the stock options is calculated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes model requires various judgmental assumptions including volatility and expected option life. The compensation cost is recognized as expense over the requisite service or vesting period. Performance-based options are valued using a Monte-Carlo simulation model, which requires inputs based on estimates, including the likelihood of the occurrence of performance and market conditions, volatility and expected option life.
In October 2019, the Company adopted ASU 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718), which expands the scope of Topic 718 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees, and thus, the accounting for share-based payments to non-employees will be substantially aligned. Adoption of the new guidance had no impact on the financial statements and related disclosures.
Derivative Instruments-CEL-SCI enters into financing arrangements that consist of freestanding derivative instruments or hybrid instruments that contain embedded derivative features. CEL-SCI accounts for these arrangements in accordance with ASC 815, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, as well as related interpretations of these standards. In accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), derivative instruments and hybrid instruments are recognized as either assets or liabilities in the statement of financial position and are measured at fair value with gains or losses recognized in earnings or other comprehensive income depending on the nature of the derivative or hybrid instruments. Fair value is generally calculated using a Black-Scholes valuation model. Embedded derivatives that are not clearly and closely related to the host contract are bifurcated and recognized at fair value with changes in fair value recognized as either a gain or loss in earnings if they can be reliably measured. When the fair value of embedded derivative features cannot be reliably measured, CEL-SCI measures and reports the entire hybrid instrument at fair value with changes in fair value recognized as either a gain or loss in earnings.