ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Part I, including matters set forth in the "Risk Factors" section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and our financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Except when stated otherwise, we present the discussion in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations on a consolidated basis.
Overview
Carvana is a leading e-commerce platform for buying and selling used cars. We are transforming the used car buying and selling experience by giving consumers what they want - a wide selection, great value and quality, transparent pricing, and a simple, no pressure transaction. Each element of our business, from inventory procurement to fulfillment and overall ease of the online transaction, has been built for this singular purpose.
See Part I, Item 1 - "Business" for a detailed description and discussion of the Company's business.
COVID-19 Update
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak to be a global pandemic, and a number of state and local government authorities issued shelter in place and stay at home orders which negatively impacted our operations and the demand for used vehicles during the first half of 2020. During the second quarter of 2020 we began to see a recovery in general market conditions, and demand for used vehicles increased across our network, resulting in a 25%, 39% and 43% increase in our used vehicle sales during the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 compared to 2019, respectively. We believe we have been relatively successful in navigating the impact of COVID-19 on our business to date and believe our business model makes us well-positioned to scale up and down to meet expected customer demand during and after the current COVID-19 pandemic.
Our most important priority continues to be the well-being of our employees and customers. We have taken several steps to provide a safe and healthy working environment. In addition, we believe our online sales model, which allows customers to buy a car without ever coming into physical contact with another person, is the safest way to buy a car.
There are ongoing related risks to our business that depend on future developments related to the continuously evolving COVID-19 pandemic. Please see the “Results of Operations” section of this Item below and certain risk factors described in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly the first risk factor included there, for more detailed descriptions of the impacts and risks to our business.
We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact to our business and our results of operations and financial condition as conditions evolve as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Used Vehicle Unit Sales
Since launching to customers in Atlanta, Georgia in January 2013, we have experienced rapid growth in sales through our website www.carvana.com. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the number of vehicles we sold to retail customers grew by 37.5% to 244,111, compared to 177,549 in the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our retail units sold grew by 88.7% to 177,549, compared to 94,108 in the year ended December 31, 2018. Our used vehicle sales were negatively impacted at the onset of COVID-19 in the United States but have rebounded since then. We expect our used vehicle sales could be negatively impacted in future periods as a result of the continued economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We view the number of vehicles we sell to retail customers as the most important measure of our growth, and we expect to continue to focus on building a scalable platform to increase our retail units sold. This focus on retail units sold is motivated by several factors:
•Retail units sold enable multiple revenue streams, including the sale of the vehicle itself, the sale of automotive finance receivables originated to finance the vehicle, the sale of VSCs, the sale of GAP waiver coverage, and the sale of vehicles acquired from customers.
•Retail units sold are the primary driver of customer referrals and repeat sales. Each time we sell a vehicle to a new customer, that customer may refer future customers and can become a repeat buyer in the future.
•Retail units sold are an important driver of the average number of days between when we acquire the vehicle and when we sell it. Reducing average days to sale impacts gross profit on our vehicles because used vehicles depreciate over time.
•Retail units sold allow us to benefit from economies of scale due to our centralized online sales model. We believe our model provides meaningful operating leverage in acquisition, reconditioning, transport, customer service, and delivery.
We plan to invest in technology and infrastructure to support growth in retail units sold. This includes continued investment in our vehicle acquisition, reconditioning and logistics network, as well as continued investment in product development and engineering to deliver customers a best-in-class experience.
Markets and Population Coverage
Our growth in retail units sold is driven by increased penetration in our existing markets and expansion into new markets. We define a market as a metropolitan area in which we have commenced local advertising and offer free home delivery to customers with a Carvana employee in a branded delivery truck. Opening a new market involves hiring a team of customer advocates, connecting the market to our existing logistics network and initiating local advertising. As a market scales, we may elect to build a vending machine in the market to further increase customer awareness and enhance our fulfillment operations.
Our expansion model has enabled us to increase our rate of market openings in each of the past eight years. After opening Atlanta, Georgia in 2013, we opened two markets in 2014, six in 2015, 12 in 2016, 23 in 2017, 41 in 2018, 61 in 2019, and 120 in 2020, bringing our total number of markets to 266 as of December 31, 2020. Our 120 market openings during 2020 increased the total percentage of the U.S. population serviced in our markets to 73.7% as of December 31, 2020 from 66.9% as of December 31, 2019. Over time, we have continually improved our market expansion playbook, which we believe provides us with the capability to efficiently execute our growth plan. In light of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we plan to continually evaluate consumer demand and our operational capacity to determine our market opening and vending machine launch strategy.
When we open a market, we commence advertising using a blend of brand and direct advertising channels. Our advertising spend in each market is approximately proportionate to each market’s population, subject to adjustments based on specific characteristics of the market, used vehicle market seasonality, and special events such as vending machine openings. This historically has led to increased market penetration over time following the market opening. We also advertise on national television to increase brand awareness.
Market Cohorts
Many of our markets are in a nascent stage, making company-wide measures potentially less informative than measurements of more seasoned markets. The majority of our markets opened in 2019 and 2020. The graphs below provide alternative metrics related to unit sales performance and customer acquisition costs, examining our progress based on when we commenced operations in the market.
We measure penetration in each cohort based on our retail unit sales to customers in that cohort and an estimate of used vehicle market size in that cohort based on U.S. used vehicle sales per capita. Cohorts differ based on the number and average population of markets in the cohort, the timing of market openings in the first fiscal year of the cohort and other demographic or economic differences across cohorts. However, taken as a whole, they illustrate how our penetration over time evolves as markets age.
While COVID-19 and its related effects significantly impacted our company and industry this year, we have seen rapid growth in our cohorts following the initial wave of the pandemic. In the fourth quarter of 2020, our 2013-2019 cohorts grew retail units sold by 40%, and our oldest cohort of Atlanta grew by 12%, despite a year-over-year reduction in industry-wide used vehicles sales and the absence of a Cyber Monday promotion. In the month of December, our 2013-2019 cohorts grew by nearly 50%, and our oldest cohort of Atlanta grew by 24%.
The growth in our cohorts came despite significant supply chain constraints. Strong retail unit growth and increased COVID-19 cases around the country led to continued constraints in the fourth quarter of 2020. While production was our largest constraint, our accelerated growth in December also exacerbated constraints in our logistics network, leading to increased average delivery times year-over-year. We believe returning to normalized available inventory and delivery time levels would have had a significant positive impact on growth in the fourth quarter of 2020.
As of the fourth quarter of 2020, more than 90% of our 266 markets are ramping faster than Atlanta at the same age, and 101, 28, and 7 markets have now crossed the milestones of 1.0%, 1.5%, and 2.0% market penetration, respectively, an increase from 23, 7, and 2, respectively last year. As in past years, we generally continue to see similar trends across markets, including newer markets, smaller markets, and more proximate markets ramping even faster than average.
The following graphs present market penetration and customer acquisition costs by cohort as a time series by quarters in operation. Markets are first grouped into cohorts based on the year in which they began local delivery operations, and then data is aligned by first-quarter-in-operation results; however we only display data for periods in which all markets were active. For example, the 2020 cohort presented below is a single quarterly data point as of December 31, 2020 because markets that opened in the fourth quarter of 2020 have only been open for a single quarter. We chose this approach because it avoids a number of base-effect distortions that can occur by including periods in which not all markets were open.
Our market penetration chart provides a way to measure our retail unit sold growth in market cohorts controlling for differences in population across cohorts, but it does not adjust for changes in total used vehicle industry sales in a period. Industry-wide used vehicle sales data is known to be imperfect, with impacts from variable registration requirements and timing, incomplete geographic coverage, and lack of uniform data on independent dealers and peer-to-peer transactions among the challenges. Changes in industry sales were particularly impactful in 2020 given the significant variability in industry sales throughout the year.
During 2020, we sold 11,936 retail units in our 2013 cohort, 6,635 in our 2014 cohort, 22,822 in our 2015 cohort, 28,993 in our 2016 cohort, 62,103 in our 2017 cohort, 42,679 in our 2018 cohort, 22,344 in our 2019 cohort, and 11,313 in our 2020 cohort. We sold 35,286 retail units out-of-market, which primarily consist of retail units sold in smaller cities and towns around our core markets. Production costs of television campaigns and advertising costs outside of our markets, including pre-opening advertising costs and the portion of national television advertising representative of the population not served by an open market, totaled $58.5 million, $48.4 million, and $35.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. We expect out-of-market sales and advertising to decline as a percent of total unit sales and advertising costs as we open more markets.
Our advertising expense per retail unit chart provides a way to measure advertising leverage in our market cohorts over time. The data in the chart shows total cohort advertising expense, including advertising focused on buying cars from customers, divided by retail units sold in each cohort. All of our cohorts levered advertising expense per retail unit meaningfully year over year in the fourth quarter of 2020, despite the headwinds described earlier in this section. In addition, a significant portion of our advertising budget and operational capacity was utilized to drive growth in buying cars from customers, which grew 110% year over year in the fourth quarter and which is not included in the denominator of our advertising expense per retail unit calculation.
As we approach nationwide geographic coverage, utilize even more national marketing channels, and develop a national brand, we are increasingly viewing our business as an integrated national one, similar to other leading e-commerce players. As a result, we expect this to be the last time we present detailed cohort data as our rapid growth will continue to be evident at the company level.
The patterns in our markets and cohorts are a testament to our customer offering and the positive feedback inherent in our model. The rapid, consistent, and improving growth trends in our cohorts are driven over time by continually improving products, growing national brand awareness, increased selection, and an expanding delivery network.
Revenue and Gross Profit
Our increased penetration in existing markets and expansion into new markets has led to growth in retail unit sales. We generate revenue on retail units sold from four primary sources: the sale of the vehicles, gains on the sales of loans originated to finance the vehicles, wholesale sales of vehicles we acquire from customers, and sales of ancillary products such as VSCs and GAP waiver coverage.
Our largest source of revenue, used vehicle sales, totaled $4.7 billion, $3.4 billion, and $1.8 billion during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. As we increase penetration in existing markets and expand to new ones, we expect used vehicle sales to increase along with retail units sold. We generate gross profit on used vehicle sales from the difference between the retail selling price of the vehicle and our cost of sales associated with acquiring the vehicle and preparing it for sale.
Wholesale sales, which includes sales of trade-ins and other vehicles acquired from customers that do not meet the requirements for our retail inventory, totaled $445.2 million, $267.6 million, and $73.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. We expect wholesale sales to increase with retail units sold through trade-ins and as we expand our program of acquiring vehicles from customers who wish to sell us a car independent of a retail sale. We generate gross profit on wholesale vehicle sales from the difference between the wholesale selling price of the vehicle and our cost of sales associated with acquiring the vehicle and preparing it for sale.
Other sales and revenues, which primarily includes gains on the sales of automotive finance receivables we originate, sales commission on VSCs and sales of GAP waiver coverage totaled $400.7 million, $251.7 million, and $96.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. We expect other sales and revenues to increase with retail units sold. We also expect other sales and revenues to increase as we improve our ability to monetize loans we originate, including through securitization transactions, and sell and offer attractive financing solutions and ancillary products to our customers, including products customarily sold by automotive retailers or insurance products customarily sold by traditional insurance companies. Other sales and revenues are 100% gross margin products for which gross profit equals revenue.
The COVID-19 pandemic impacted our revenue and gross profit during the year ended December 31, 2020. Given the uncertainty and continuously evolving aspects of COVID-19, it may continue to impact our revenue and gross profit in future periods. First, the pandemic negatively impacted retail units sold, which directly impacted retail, wholesale, and other revenue and gross profit. However, since the drastic drop in demand in March and April, demand for retail units has rebounded, including 43% year-over-year growth in the fourth quarter. Second, the pandemic initially negatively impacted wholesale units sold and purchased for sale due to the unstable condition of the wholesale market, which directly impacted wholesale and retail revenue. However, the wholesale market has since stabilized through the second half of 2020. We believe the pandemic negatively impacted retail and wholesale gross profit per unit due to the impact of lower demand on average days to sale and industry-wide used vehicle pricing through June 30, 2020. However, during the last six months of 2020, our average days to sale decreased and average retail and wholesale selling prices increased as dealers and wholesale suppliers saw high industry-wide market prices. Finally, the pandemic impacted gain on loan sale revenue through June 30, 2020 due to higher required yields from loan investors during this period of uncertainty; however, these impacts abated during the last six months of the year. While these impacts could potentially reoccur or continue in the future and could be significant, we believe they are transitory, and we plan to stay lean during this period and maintain strength and flexibility.
During our growth phase, our highest priority, outside of safety, will continue to be providing exceptional customer experiences, increasing our brand awareness and building an infrastructure to support growth in retail units sold. Secondarily, we plan to pursue several strategies designed to increase our total gross profit per unit. These strategies include the following:
•Increase the purchase of vehicles from customers. We plan to grow the number of vehicles that we purchase from our customers either as trade-ins or independent of a retail sale. This in turn will grow our wholesale business, provide additional vehicles for our retail business, which are more profitable compared to the same vehicle acquired at auction, and expand our inventory selection.
•Reduce average days to sale. Our goal is generally to increase both our number of markets and our sales at a faster rate than we increase our inventory size, which we believe would decrease average days to sale due to a relative increase in demand versus supply. Reductions in average days to sale lead to fewer vehicle price reductions, and therefore higher average selling prices, all other factors being equal. Higher average selling prices in turn lead to higher gross profit per unit sold, all other factors being equal.
•Leverage existing IRC infrastructure. As we scale, we intend to more fully utilize the capacity in our eleven existing IRCs, which collectively have capacity to inspect and recondition approximately 600,000 vehicles per year at full utilization.
•Increase utilization of our logistics network. As we scale, we intend to more fully utilize our in-house logistics network to transport cars to our IRCs after acquisition from customers or wholesale auctions.
•Increase conversion of existing products. We plan to continue to improve our website to highlight the benefits of our complementary product offerings, including financing, VSCs, GAP waiver coverage, and trade-ins.
•Add new products and services. We plan to utilize our online sales platform to offer additional complementary products and services to our customers.
•Increase monetization of our finance receivables. We plan to continue selling finance receivables in securitization transactions and otherwise expand our base of financial partners who purchase the finance receivables originated on our platform to reduce our effective cost of funds.
•Optimize purchasing and pricing. We are constantly improving the ways in which we predict customer demand, value vehicles sight unseen and optimize what we pay to acquire those vehicles. We also regularly test different pricing of our products, including vehicle sticker prices, trade-in and independent vehicle offers, and ancillary product prices, and we believe we can improve by further optimizing prices over time.
Seasonality
Absent the impact of COVID-19, used vehicle sales exhibit seasonality with sales peaking late in the first calendar quarter and diminishing through the rest of the year, with the lowest relative level of vehicle sales expected to occur in the fourth calendar quarter. Due to our rapid growth, our overall sales patterns to date have not reflected the general seasonality of the used vehicle industry, but we expect this to change once our business and markets mature. Absent the impact of COVID-19, used vehicle prices also exhibit seasonality, with used vehicles depreciating at a faster rate in the last two quarters of each year and a slower rate in the first two quarters of each year, all other factors being equal. We expect to experience seasonal and other fluctuations in our quarterly operating results, which may not fully reflect the underlying performance of our business. COVID-19 impacted used vehicle sales in the first and second quarters of 2020. The continuing impact of COVID-19 and related stimulus payments on seasonality is uncertain.
Investment in Growth
Absent the impact of COVID-19, we have aggressively invested in the growth of our business and we expect this investment to continue during normal conditions. We anticipate that our operating expenses will increase substantially as we continue to open new markets, expand our logistics network and increase our advertising spending. There is no guarantee that we will be able to realize the return on our investments.
The worldwide spread of COVID-19 is expected to result in a continued global slowdown of economic activity which is likely to continue to decrease demand for a broad variety of goods and services, including from our customers, while also disrupting sales channels, marketing activities and supply chains for an unknown period of time until the pandemic is contained. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have continued to monitor discretionary growth expenditures on hiring, travel, IRC and vending machine construction, and information technology investments. We also continue to closely monitor key metrics to determine when and how quickly to adjust our marketing, staffing, and purchasing levels to align with demand. We believe our business model makes us well-positioned to scale up or down to meet customer demand during and after the current COVID-19 pandemic.
Relationship with Related Parties
For discussion about our relationships with related parties, refer to Note 6 - Related Party Transactions of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and our Proxy Statement for our 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Key Operating Metrics
We regularly review a number of metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our progress and make strategic decisions. Our key operating metrics reflect the key drivers of our growth, including increasing brand awareness, opening new markets, and enhancing the selection of vehicles we make available to our customers. Our key operating metrics also demonstrate our ability to translate these drivers into retail sales and to monetize these retail sales through a variety of product offerings.
(1) Includes $2, $31, and $43, respectively, related to the 100k Milestone Gift discussed below.
Retail Units Sold
We define retail units sold as the number of vehicles sold to customers in a given period, net of returns under our seven-day return policy. We view retail units sold as a key measure of our growth for several reasons. First, retail units sold is the primary driver of our revenues and, indirectly, gross profit, since retail unit sales enable multiple complementary revenue streams, including financing, VSCs, GAP waiver coverage, and trade-ins. Second, growth in retail units sold increases the base of available customers for referrals and repeat sales. Third, growth in retail units sold is an indicator of our ability to successfully scale our logistics, fulfillment, and customer service operations.
Number of Markets
We define a market as a metropolitan area in which we have commenced local advertising and offer free home delivery to customers, which is typically conducted by a Carvana employee in a branded delivery truck. We view the number of markets we serve as a key driver of our growth. As we increase our number of markets, the population of consumers who have access to our fully integrated customer experience increases, which in turn helps to increase the number of vehicles we sell.
Average Monthly Unique Visitors
We define a monthly unique visitor as an individual who has visited our website within a calendar month, based on data provided by Google Analytics. We calculate average monthly unique visitors as the sum of monthly unique visitors in a given period, divided by the number of months in that period. We view average monthly unique visitors as a key indicator of the strength of our brand, the effectiveness of our advertising and merchandising campaigns, and consumer awareness of our brand.
Total Website Units
We define total website units as the number of vehicles listed on our website on the last day of a given reporting period, including available inventory for sale, vehicles currently engaged in a purchase or reserved by a customer, and units that can be reserved that generally have not yet completed the inspection and reconditioning process. We view total website units as a key measure of our growth. Growth in total website units increases the selection of vehicles available to consumers in all of our markets simultaneously, which we believe will allow us to increase the number of vehicles we sell. Moreover, growth in total website units indicates our ability to scale our vehicle purchasing, inspection and reconditioning operations. As part of our inventory strategy, over time we may choose not to expand total website units while continuing to grow sales, thereby improving other key operating metrics of the business. In prior periods, this key operating metric was called "inventory units available on website".
Average Days to Sale
We define average days to sale as the average number of days between when we acquire the vehicle and when we deliver it to a customer for all retail units sold in a period. However, this metric does not include any retail units that remain unsold at period end. We view average days to sale as a useful metric due to its impact on used vehicle average selling price.
Total Gross Profit per Unit
We define total gross profit per unit as the aggregate gross profit in a given period, divided by retail units sold in that period including gross profit generated from the sale of the used vehicle, gains on the sales of loans originated to finance the vehicle, commissions on sales of VSCs, revenue from GAP waiver coverage, and gross profit generated from wholesale sales of vehicles.
In the second half of 2018, we announced a commitment by our Chief Executive Officer, Ernest Garcia III ("Mr. Garcia"), to contribute 165 shares of Class A common stock to us from his personal shareholdings for every one of our then-existing employees upon their satisfying certain employment tenure requirements. In connection with such contributions, we made corresponding grants of 165 restricted stock units under our 2017 Incentive Plan to each employee who satisfied the requirements (the "100k Milestone Gift" or "Gift"). Under GAAP, the 100k Milestone Gift was treated as compensation expense, a portion of which related to the production of our used vehicle inventory and was therefore capitalized to inventory and subsequently recognized within costs of sales when the related inventory was sold. As of December 31, 2019, Mr. Garcia's commitment related to the 100k Milestone Gift had been fulfilled and as of March 31, 2020, all of the compensation expense related to the 100k Milestone Gift had been recognized. Total gross profit per unit includes $2, $31, and $43 per unit during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to the 100k Milestone Gift.
Components of Results of Operations
Used Vehicle Sales
Used vehicle sales represent the aggregate sales of used vehicles to customers through our website. Revenue from used vehicles sales is recognized upon delivery to the customer or pick up of the vehicle by the customer, and is reported net of a reserve for expected returns. Factors affecting used vehicle sales revenue include the number of retail units sold and the average selling price of these vehicles. Changes in retail units sold are a much larger driver of changes in revenue than are changes in average selling price.
The number of used vehicles we sell depends on the volume of traffic to our website, our number of markets, our inventory selection, the effectiveness of our branding and marketing efforts, the quality of our customer's purchase experience, our volume of referrals and repeat customers, the competitiveness of our pricing, competition from other used car dealerships and general economic conditions. Absent the impact of COVID-19, on a quarterly basis, the number of used vehicles we sell is also affected by seasonality, with demand for used vehicles reaching a seasonal high point late in the first quarter of each year, commensurate with the timing of tax refunds, and diminishing through the rest of the year, with the lowest relative level of used vehicle sales expected to occur in the fourth calendar quarter. The impact of COVID-19 and related stimulus payments on seasonality is uncertain.
Our retail average selling price depends on the mix of vehicles we acquire, retail prices in our markets, our average days to sale and our pricing strategy. We may choose to shift our inventory mix to higher or lower cost vehicles, or to raise or lower our prices relative to market to take advantage of supply or demand imbalances, which could temporarily lead to average selling prices increasing or decreasing. We also generally expect lower average days to sale to be associated with higher retail average selling prices due to decreased vehicle depreciation prior to sale, all other factors being equal.
Wholesale Vehicle Sales
Wholesale vehicle sales is equal to the aggregate proceeds we receive on vehicles sold to wholesalers. The vehicles we sell to wholesalers are primarily acquired from customers who sell a vehicle to us without purchasing a retail vehicle and from our customers who trade-in their existing vehicles when making a purchase from us. Factors affecting wholesale vehicle sales include the number of wholesale units sold and the average wholesale selling price of these vehicles. The average selling price of our wholesale units is primarily driven by the mix of vehicles we sell to wholesalers, as well as general supply and demand conditions in the applicable wholesale vehicle market, both of which have been impacted by COVID-19. Beginning in 2020,
wholesale vehicle sales includes aggregate proceeds we receive on vehicles sold to DriveTime through competitive online auctions that are managed by an unrelated third party.
Other Sales and Revenues
We generate other sales and revenues primarily through the sales of loans we originate and sell in securitization transactions or to financing partners, reported net of a reserve for expected repurchases, commissions we receive on VSCs and sales of GAP waiver coverage. In 2016, we entered into a master dealer agreement with DriveTime, pursuant to which we receive a commission for selling VSCs that DriveTime administers. The commission revenues we recognize on VSCs depends on the number of retail units we sell, the conversion rate of VSCs on these sales, commission rates we receive, VSC early cancellation frequency and product features. The GAP waiver coverage revenue we recognize depends on the number of retail units we sell, the number of customers that choose to finance their purchases with us, the frequency of GAP waiver coverage early cancellation, and the conversion rate of GAP waiver coverage on those sales.
We generally seek to sell the loans we originate to securitization trusts we sponsor and establish or to financing platforms. The securitization trusts issue asset-backed securities, some of which are collateralized by the finance receivables that we sell to the securitization trusts. We also sell the loans we originate under committed forward-flow arrangements, including a master purchase and sale agreement and master transfer agreements, and through fixed pool loan sales, with financing partners who generally acquire them at premium prices without recourse to us for their post-sale performance. Factors affecting revenue from these sales include the number of loans we originate, the average principal balance of the loans, the credit quality of the portfolio, and the price at which we are able to sell them in securitization transactions or to financing partners.
The number of loans we originate is driven by the number of used vehicles sold and the percentage of our sales for which we provide financing, which is influenced by the financing terms we offer our customers relative to alternatives available to the customer. The average principal balance is driven primarily by the mix of vehicles we sell, since higher average selling prices typically mean higher average balances. The price at which we sell the loan is driven by the terms of our securitization transactions and forward-flow arrangement, applicable interest rates, and whether or not the loan includes GAP waiver coverage.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes the cost to acquire, recondition, and transport vehicles associated with preparing them for resale. Vehicle acquisition costs are driven by the mix of vehicles we acquire, the source of those vehicles, and supply-and-demand dynamics in the wholesale vehicle market. Reconditioning costs consist of direct costs, including parts, labor, and third-party repair expenses directly attributable to specific vehicles, as well as indirect costs, such as IRC overhead. Transportation costs consist of costs incurred to transport the vehicles from the point of acquisition to the IRC. Cost of sales also includes any necessary adjustments to reflect vehicle inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value.
Used Vehicle Gross Profit
Used vehicle gross profit is the vehicle sales price minus our costs of sales associated with vehicles that we list and sell on our website. Used vehicle gross profit per unit is our aggregate used vehicle gross profit in any measurement period divided by the number of retail units sold in that period.
Wholesale Vehicle Gross Profit
Wholesale vehicle gross profit is the vehicle sales price minus our cost of sales associated with vehicles we sell to wholesalers. Factors affecting wholesale gross profit include the number of wholesale units sold, the average wholesale selling price of these vehicles, and the average acquisition price associated with these vehicles.
Other Gross Profit
Other sales and revenues consist of 100% gross margin products for which gross profit equals revenue. Therefore, changes in gross profit and the associated drivers are identical to changes in revenues from these products and the associated drivers.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses include expenses associated with advertising and providing customer service to customers, operating our vending machines and hubs, operating our logistics and fulfillment network and other corporate overhead expenses, including expenses associated with information technology, product development, engineering, legal, accounting, finance, and business development. We anticipate that these expenses will increase as we grow. SG&A expenses exclude the costs of inspecting and reconditioning vehicles and transporting vehicles from the point of acquisition to the IRC, which are included in cost of sales, and payroll costs for our employees related to the development of software products for internal use, which are capitalized to software and depreciated over the estimated useful lives of the related assets.
Interest Expense
Interest expense includes interest incurred on our Senior Notes, including amounts previously due to Verde, our Floor Plan Facility, and our Finance Receivable Facilities (each as defined in Note 9 - Debt Instruments of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K), as well as our notes payable, finance leases, and long-term debt, which are used to fund general working capital, our inventory, our transportation fleet, and certain of our property and equipment. Interest expense excludes interest incurred during various construction projects to build, upgrade, or remodel certain facilities, which is capitalized to property and equipment and depreciated over the estimated lives of the related assets.
Other (Income) Expense
Other (income) expense, net includes changes in fair value on our beneficial interests in securitizations and purchase price adjustment receivables, as discussed in Note 17 - Fair Value of Financial Instruments of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, along with other general expenses such as gains or losses from disposals of long-lived assets.
Income Tax Provision
Income taxes are recognized based upon our anticipated underlying annual blended federal and state income tax rates adjusted, as necessary, for any discrete tax matters occurring during the period. As the sole managing member of Carvana Group, LLC (“Carvana Group”), Carvana Co. consolidates the financial results of Carvana Group. Carvana Group is treated as a partnership and therefore not subject to U.S. federal and most applicable state and local income tax purposes. Any taxable income or loss generated by Carvana Group is passed through to and included in the taxable income or loss of its members, including Carvana Co., based on its economic interest held in Carvana Group. Carvana Co. is taxed as a corporation and is subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes with respect to its allocable share of any taxable income or loss of Carvana Group, as well as any stand-alone income or loss generated by Carvana Co. As of December 31, 2020, the Company's income tax benefit is generated at Car360, a wholly-owned subsidiary, acquired in April 2018.
Results of Operations
(1) Includes $4,145, $0, and $0, respectively, of wholesale revenue from related parties.
(2) Includes $104,738, $59,677, and $25,572, respectively, from related parties.
(3) Includes $510, $5,092, and $3,870, or $2, $28, and $41 per unit, respectively, related to the 100k Milestone Gift.
(4) Includes $17, $358, and $133 or $0, $9, and $9 per wholesale unit, respectively, related to the 100k Milestone Gift.
(5) All gross profit per unit amounts are per used vehicle sold, except wholesale vehicle gross profit, which is per wholesale vehicle sold.
Used Vehicle Sales
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Used vehicle sales increased by $1.3 billion to $4.7 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.4 billion during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in revenue was primarily due to an increase in the number of used vehicles sold to 244,111 from 177,549 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in units sold was driven by growth in existing markets due to expanded inventory selection, enhanced marketing efforts, increased brand awareness, and customer referrals. The increase in unit sales was also driven by growth to 266 markets as of December 31, 2020 from 146 markets as of December 31, 2019. Although we experienced a negative impact on retail units sold at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we started to see a rebound in sales later in the period with the reopening of the markets. We anticipate that unit sales will continue to grow as we increase penetration in existing markets and continue to launch new markets. In addition, the average selling price of our retail units sold increased to $19,420 in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $19,266 in the prior year, due primarily to vehicle mix.
Fiscal 2019 Versus 2018. Used vehicle sales increased by $1.6 billion to $3.4 billion during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $1.8 billion during the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in revenue was primarily due to an increase in the number of used vehicles sold to 177,549 from 94,108 during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in units sold was driven by growth in existing markets due to expanded inventory selection, enhanced marketing efforts, increased brand awareness, and customer referrals. The increase in unit sales was also driven by growth to 146 markets as of December 31, 2019 from 85 markets as of December 31, 2018. In addition, the average selling price of our retail units sold increased to $19,266 in the year ended December 31, 2019 from $18,968 in the prior year, due primarily to more vehicles acquired from customers, resulting in a broader inventory mix.
Wholesale Vehicle Sales
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Wholesale vehicle sales increased by $177.7 million to $445.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $267.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. We primarily obtain our wholesale inventory by acquiring vehicles from customers. As our retail unit sales have increased, so have the trade-ins we receive. Moreover, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we also acquired more vehicles from customers who did not purchase a retail unit from us. In addition, the average selling price of our wholesale units sold increased to $8,065 during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $6,707 during the year ended December 31, 2019, due to the mix of vehicles acquired from customers and strong wholesale market prices.
Fiscal 2019 Versus 2018. Wholesale vehicle sales increased by $194.0 million to $267.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $73.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. We primarily obtain our wholesale inventory by acquiring vehicles from customers. As our retail unit sales increased, so did the trade-ins we received. Moreover, during the year ended December 31, 2019, we also acquired more vehicles from customers who did not purchase a retail unit from us. In addition, the average selling price of our wholesale units sold increased to $6,707 during the year ended December 31, 2019 from $4,865 during the year ended December 31, 2018, due primarily to the mix of vehicles acquired from customers.
Other Sales and Revenues
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Other sales and revenues primarily consist of gains on the sales of loans we originate, commissions we receive on sales of VSCs and sales of GAP waiver coverage. Other sales and revenues increased by $149.0 million to $400.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $251.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily driven by originating and selling more finance receivables, resulting in an
increase in gain on loan sale. Additionally, the increase was due to an increase in retail units sold, which led to an increase in VSC sales and GAP waiver coverage sales, along with an increase in interest income during the year ended December 31, 2020 from interest earned on finance receivables held on balance sheet prior to selling them.
Fiscal 2019 Versus 2018. Other sales and revenues increased by $154.9 million to $251.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $96.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily driven by the increase in retail units sold, which led to an increase in loans originated and sold, as well as an increase in VSC sales and GAP waiver coverage sales. The increase also includes an increase in interest income during the year ended December 31, 2019 from interest earned on finance receivables held on balance sheet prior to our securitization transactions throughout the year.
Used Vehicle Gross Profit
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Used vehicle gross profit increased by $121.5 million to $359.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $237.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven primarily by an increase in retail units sold, as well as an increase in used vehicle gross profit per unit to $1,472 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1,340 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The per unit increase was primarily driven by acquiring more vehicles from customers.
Fiscal 2019 Versus 2018. Used vehicle gross profit increased by $143.5 million to $237.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $94.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was driven primarily by an increase in retail units sold, as well as an increase in used vehicle gross profit per unit to $1,340 for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $1,002 for the year ended December 31, 2018. The per unit increase was primarily driven by acquiring more vehicles from customers and incremental shipping revenue.
Wholesale Vehicle Gross Profit
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Wholesale vehicle gross profit increased by $16.8 million to $33.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $16.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven primarily by an increase in wholesale units sold to 55,204 during the year ended December 31, 2020 from 39,895 in the prior year, along with an increase in wholesale vehicle gross profit per wholesale unit to $610 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $422 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in number of wholesale vehicles sold and the improved gross profit per wholesale unit were primarily due to acquiring more vehicles from customers and strong wholesale market prices in the latter part of 2020.
Fiscal 2019 Versus 2018. Wholesale vehicle gross profit increased by $11.3 million to $16.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $5.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was driven primarily by an increase in wholesale units sold to 39,895 during the year ended December 31, 2019 from 15,125 in the prior year, along with an increase in wholesale vehicle gross profit per wholesale unit to $422 for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $367 for the year ended December 31, 2018. The number of wholesale units sold and the per-unit increase was primarily due to acquiring more vehicles from customers, resulting in more and higher quality vehicles sold at auction.
Other Gross Profit
Other sales and revenues consist of 100% gross margin products for which gross profit equals revenue. Therefore, changes in other gross profit and the associated drivers are identical to changes in other sales and revenues and the associated drivers.
Components of SG&A
(1) Compensation and benefits includes all payroll and related costs, including benefits, payroll taxes, and equity-based compensation, except those related to preparing vehicles for sale, which are included in cost of sales, those related to the development of software products for internal use, which are capitalized to software and depreciated over the estimated useful lives of the related assets, and those related to the 100k Milestone Gift.
(2) Market occupancy costs includes occupancy costs of our vending machines and hubs. It excludes occupancy costs related to reconditioning vehicles which are included in cost of sales and the portion related to corporate occupancy which are included in other costs.
(3) Logistics includes fuel, maintenance, and depreciation related to operating our own transportation fleet, and third party transportation fees, except the portion related to inbound transportation, which is included in cost of sales.
(4) Other costs include all other selling, general, and administrative expenses such as IT expenses, corporate occupancy, professional services and insurance, limited warranty, and title and registration.
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $339.4 million to $1.1 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $786.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was partially due to an increase in compensation and benefits of $101.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily driven by expansion of our teams to support our growth. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was also due to an increase in advertising expense of $82.4 million to $286.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $204.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in advertising to drive growth in units sold and acquired from customers. Market occupancy, logistics, and other expenses also increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to an increase in the number of
units sold, markets served, and in preparation for future growth. These increases were partially offset by efforts to decrease and balance discretionary spend as a result of the uncertain economic environment surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic.
Fiscal 2019 Versus 2018. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $361.5 million to $786.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $425.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was partially due to an increase in compensation and benefits of $104.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily driven by expansion of our logistics, customer care, and market operations teams. The increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses was also partially due to an increase in advertising expense of $92.8 million to $204.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $111.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to an increase in number of markets and related to increased advertising for buying cars from customers through national television and internet advertising. Market occupancy, logistics and other overhead costs also increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year primarily due to an increase in number of markets and units sold.
Interest Expense
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Interest expense increased by $50.9 million to $131.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $80.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to refinancing our Senior Notes, which resulted in approximately $33.7 million of debt extinguishment costs upon redemption of the 2023 Notes in the fourth quarter of 2020 (as defined and further discussed in Note 9 - Debt Instruments of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Despite lowering the interest rates on the Senior Notes, the higher outstanding balances throughout the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 led to an increase in interest expense of approximately $11.9 million. Interest expense also increased due to a $12.7 million increase in interest incurred on additional sale leaseback financing during the year. These increases in interest expense were partially offset by a decrease in interest incurred on our short-term revolving facilities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a decrease in the outstanding balance of our Floor Plan Facility. See Note 9 - Debt Instruments of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our outstanding debt.
Fiscal 2019 Versus 2018. Interest expense increased by $55.6 million to $80.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $25.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase is primarily due to the outstanding balance of the Senior Notes we issued in September 2018 and May 2019, which incurred interest expense of $44.3 million and $8.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively. These amounts include related party expense of $1.3 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively. Additionally, interest expense incurred on our short-term revolving facilities increased by $15.5 million to $25.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $9.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2018 due to an increase in the available capacity and resulting balance outstanding on our Floor Plan Facility, and due to the addition of our Finance Receivable Facilities, which we entered into in 2019.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Other (income) expense, net changed by $5.2 million to income of $1.4 million compared to expense of $3.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The changes are primarily due to fair value adjustments on our retained beneficial interests in securitizations. During the first quarter of the year ended December 31, 2020, the fair value of these assets carried at fair value declined as a result of the uncertainty in the capital markets. During the remainder of the year, the fair value on our beneficial interests in securitizations increased as capital markets and the economy rebounded.
Income Tax Provision
We recognized an income tax benefit of approximately $0.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to our wholly-owned subsidiary, Car360. The benefit was recognized as a result of decreased subscription revenue from third parties, resulting in a net loss for the period. We did not recognize an income tax expense or benefit during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement the consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, we also present the following non-GAAP measures: EBITDA and EBITDA margin. We believe the presentation of both GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures provides investors with increased transparency into financial measures used by our management team, and it also improves investors’ understanding of our underlying operating performance and their ability to analyze our ongoing operating trends. All historic non-GAAP financial measures have been reconciled with the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
In prior periods, we calculated non-GAAP measures including Gross Profit ex-Gift, Gross Profit per Unit ex-Gift, EBITDA ex-Gift, EBITDA Margin ex-Gift, Adjusted Net Loss and Adjusted Net Loss per Share, to exclude the impact of the 100k Milestone Gift program. As this program has concluded, it is not material to current or future years and the adjustment is no longer included within similar calculations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, there was approximately $0.5 million of stock based compensation related to the 100k Milestone Gift program within cost of sales, which would impact all measures. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, there was approximately $13.2 million and $11.8 million, respectively, of stock based compensation related to the 100k Milestone Gift impacting the calculation of EBITDA ex-Gift, EBITDA Margin ex-Gift, Adjusted Net Loss, and Adjusted Net Loss per Share, including $5.4 million and $4.0 million, respectively, within cost of sales impacting the calculation of Gross Profit ex-Gift and Gross Profit per Unit ex-Gift.
EBITDA and EBITDA Margin
EBITDA and EBITDA Margin are supplemental measures of operating performance that do not represent and should not be considered an alternative to net loss or cash flow from operations, as determined by GAAP. EBITDA is defined as net loss before interest expense, income tax expense, and depreciation and amortization expense. EBITDA Margin is EBITDA as a percentage of total revenues. We use EBITDA to measure the operating performance of our business and EBITDA Margin to measure our operating performance relative to our total revenues. We believe that EBITDA and EBITDA Margin are useful measures to us and to our investors because they exclude certain financial and capital structure items that we do not believe directly reflect our core operations and may not be indicative of our recurring operations, in part because they may vary widely across time and within our industry independent of the performance of our core operations. We believe that excluding these items enables us to more effectively evaluate our performance period-over-period and relative to our competitors. EBITDA and EBITDA Margin may not be comparable to similarly titled measures provided by other companies due to potential differences in methods of calculations. A reconciliation of EBITDA to net loss, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure, and calculation of EBITDA Margin is as follows:
(1) Includes $0.5 million, $13.2 million, and $11.8 million, respectively, related to the 100k Milestone Gift.
(2) Includes 0.0%, 0.4%, and 0.6%, respectively, related to the 100k Milestone Gift.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We generate cash from the sale of used retail vehicles, the sale of wholesale vehicles, and proceeds from the sale of finance receivables originated in connection with the sale of used vehicles. We generate additional cash flows through our financing activities including our short-term revolving inventory and finance receivable facilities, real estate and equipment financing, the
issuance of long-term notes, and new issuances of equity. Historically, cash generated from financing activities has funded growth and expansion into new markets and strategic initiatives and we expect this to continue in the future.
Our ability to service our debt and fund working capital, capital expenditures, and business development efforts will depend on our ability to generate cash from operating and financing activities, which is subject to our future operating performance, as well as to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory, and other conditions, some of which may be beyond our control. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the impact of COVID-19, our rate of revenue growth, our expansion into new markets, construction of IRCs and vending machines, and the timing and extent of our spending to support our technology and software development efforts.
We had the following liquidity resources available as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1) Based on pledging all eligible vehicles and finance receivables under the available capacity in the Floor Plan Facility and Finance Receivable Facilities, excluding the impact to restricted cash requirements
(2) We had $75.0 million available for sale and leaseback transactions under a master sale-leaseback agreement as of December 31, 2019 and an additional $18.5 million and $29.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, available under sale-leaseback arrangements with other parties.
(3) We have $249.7 million and $158.7 million of total unfunded gross real estate assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the short-term revolving facilities had total capacity of approximately $2.3 billion and $1.6 billion, an outstanding balance of $39.8 million and $568.8 million, and unused capacity of $2.2 billion and $1.0 billion, respectively.
We also had $6.3 million and $137.7 million of committed funds for future construction costs of IRCs with unfinished construction as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In addition, we had $47.7 million and $13.5 million of total unpledged beneficial interests in securitizations as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our outstanding principal amount of indebtedness, including finance leases, was $1.7 billion and $1.5 billion, respectively, summarized in the table below. See Note 9 - Debt Instruments and Note 15 - Leases of
our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for definitions and further information on our debt and finance leases.
(1) Amount includes notes payable and finance leases.
(2) Amount includes real estate financing and notes payable.
(3) As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, Verde held $0.0 million and $15.0 million of the Senior Notes, respectively.
(4) The unamortized debt issuance costs related to long-term debt are presented as a reduction of the carrying amount of the corresponding liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. Unamortized debt issuance costs related to revolving debt arrangements are presented within other current assets and other assets on our consolidated balance sheets. The unamortized premium is presented as an increase to the carrying amount of the Senior Notes at December 31, 2019 on our consolidated balance sheet.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Operating Activities
Our primary sources of operating cash flows result from the sales of used retail vehicles, wholesale vehicles, loans we originate, and ancillary products. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are purchases of inventory, cash used to acquire customers, and personnel-related expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $608.4 million, a decrease of $148.7 million compared to net cash used in operating activities of $757.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was an increase of $342.8 million compared to net cash used in operating activities of $414.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The changes in our net cash used in operating activities were primarily due to our increased net losses and changes in working capital, which is primarily related to the increase in our vehicle inventory.
Investing Activities
Our primary use of cash for investing activities is purchases of property and equipment to expand our operations. Cash used in investing activities was $345.9 million, $227.7 million, and $150.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, resulting in increases of $118.2 million and $77.4 million. The increases were primarily related to increases in purchases of property and equipment, specifically related to the construction of new IRCs and vending machines. Constructing new IRCs and vending machines allows us to recondition more vehicles and reach additional customers. To finance these investments we have entered into various financing transactions, such as sale-leasebacks.
Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities primarily relate to our short and long-term debt activity and proceeds from equity and unsecured senior note issuances which have been used to provide working capital and for general corporate purposes, including paying down our short-term revolving facilities. Cash provided by financing activities was $1.2 billion and $1.0 billion during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $150.4 million. The change primarily relates to increased proceeds from the issuance of Class A common stock by $761.3 million, along with an increase in net cash from long-term debt proceeds and payments of approximately $216.1 million partially due to refinancing our senior unsecured notes, which were partially offset by a net decrease of $795.5 million from changes in our short-term revolving facilities activity. Cash provided by financing activities was $1.0 billion and $466.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, an increase of $548.4 million. The net increase primarily related to increased proceeds from the issuance of Class A common stock by $125.3 million, along with a net increase of $318.3 million from changes in our short-term revolving facilities activity.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table sets forth the amounts of our significant contractual obligations and commitments with definitive payment terms as of December 31, 2020:
(1) All debt arrangements above are discussed and defined in Note 9 - Debt Instruments, included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) Represents the principal amounts outstanding as of December 31, 2020. Due to the uncertainty of forecasting the timing of expected variable interest rate payments, interest payment amounts are not included in the table. Borrowings under the Floor Plan Facility are generally payable within five business days of the sale of the underlying vehicle or fifteen business days of the
sale of the finance receivable originated in connection with the sale of the vehicle. In either case, the payment is expected to be within one year of December 31, 2020.
(3) Represents the principal amounts outstanding as of December 31, 2020. Due to the uncertainty of forecasting the timing of expected variable interest rate payments, interest payment amounts are not included in the table. Interest payments on borrowings under the Finance Receivable Facilities are expected to be paid in the first fifteen days of each calendar month.
(4) The securitization trusts distribute payments directly to the lender related to our pledged beneficial interests in securitizations. These amounts represent anticipated principal amount reductions based on the expected timing of these payments. Due to the uncertainty of forecasting the expected interest payments, interest payment amounts are not included in the table.
(5) Represents fixed interest payments on our outstanding Senior Notes, notes payable, and finance leases.
(6) Related party operating lease payments exclude rent payments due under the DriveTime Lease Agreement and the DriveTime Hub Lease Agreement for locations where we share space with DriveTime, as those are contingent upon the Company's utilization of the leased assets, and thus can vary, as further discussed in Note 6 - Related Party Transactions, included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(7) Includes minimum remaining fixed payments related to IRC and vending machine construction contracts, excluding variable installation costs, which fluctuate based on actual completion time.
Fair Value Measurements
We report money market securities, certain receivables, and beneficial interests in securitizations at fair value. See Note 17 - Fair Value of Financial Instruments, included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated into this item by reference.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the ordinary course of business, we sponsor and engage in securitization transactions to sell our finance receivables to a diverse pool of investors. These securitizations involve unconsolidated variable interest entities in which we retain at least 5% of the credit risk of the underlying finance receivables by holding at least 5% of the notes and certificates issued by these entities. We are exposed to market risk in the securitization market. See Note 8 - Securitizations and Variable Interest Entities, included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for further discussion regarding our transactions with unconsolidated variable interest entities.
Except as discussed above, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management, which have a material impact on the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the recognition of income and expenses. Management considers these accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The significant accounting policies and estimates which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are described below. Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for more detailed information regarding our critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with the five-step model prescribed by ASC 606 that includes: (1) identify the contract; (2) identify the performance obligations; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied.
We sell used vehicles directly to our customers through our website. The price of used vehicles are set forth in the customer contracts at stand-alone selling prices which are agreed upon prior to delivery. We satisfy our performance obligation for used vehicle sales upon delivery when the risks and rewards of ownership and control pass to the customer. We recognize revenue at the agreed upon purchase price stated in the contract, including any delivery charges, less an estimate for returns. Our return policy allows customers to initiate a return during the first seven days after delivery. Estimates for returns are based on an analysis of historical experience, trends and sales data. Changes in these estimates are reflected as an adjustment to revenue in the period identified. The amount of consideration received for used vehicle sales includes noncash consideration representing the value of trade-in vehicles, if applicable, as stated in the contract. Prior to the delivery of the vehicle, the payment is received or financing has been arranged. Payments from customers that finance their purchases with third parties are typically due and collected within 30 days of delivery of the used vehicle. In future periods additional provisions may be necessary due to a variety of factors, including changing customer return patterns due to the maturation of the online vehicle buying market, macro- and micro-economic factors that could influence customer return behavior and future pricing environments. If these factors result in adjustments to sales returns, they could significantly impact our future operating results. Revenue excludes any sales taxes, title and registration fees, and other government fees that are collected from customers.
We also sell vehicles to wholesalers. These vehicles sold to wholesalers are primarily acquired from customers that do not meet our quality standards to list and sell through our website. We satisfy our performance obligation for wholesale vehicles sales when the wholesale purchaser obtains control of the underlying vehicle, which is upon delivery when the transfer of title, risks and rewards of ownership and control pass to the wholesale purchaser. We recognize revenue at the amount we expect to receive for the used vehicle, which is the fixed price determined at the auction. The purchase price of the wholesale vehicle is typically due and collected within 30 days of delivery of the wholesale vehicle.
Customers purchasing used vehicles from us may enter into contracts for VSCs and, if they finance with us, GAP waiver coverage. The prices of VSCs and GAP waiver coverage are set forth in each contract. We sell and receive a commission on VSCs under a master dealer agreement with DriveTime, pursuant to which we sell VSCs that DriveTime administers and is the obligor. We receive a commission on GAP waiver coverage contracts where the administrator of the contract is obligated to reimburse the holder of the underlying finance receivable for a balance that is in excess of the value of the financed vehicle in the event of a total loss. We recognize commission revenue at the time of sale, net of a reserve for estimated contract cancellations. Our risk related to contract cancellations is limited to the commissions that we receive. Cancellations fluctuate depending on the customer-financing default or prepayment rates, and shifts in customer behavior, including those related to changes in the coverage or term of the product. To the extent that actual experience differs from historical trends, there could be significant adjustments to our contract cancellation reserves. DriveTime administers a portion of the GAP waiver coverage contracts we sell to our customers. GAP waiver coverage contracts administered by DriveTime obligate whoever holds the underlying finance receivable to not attempt collection of a balance that is in excess of the value of the financed vehicle in the event of a total loss. DriveTime GAP waiver coverage is recognized as the performance obligation is satisfied over the period of coverage, generally on a straight-line basis over the expected period the outstanding balance of the related finance receivable will exceed the value of the financed vehicle, less a reserve for cancellations. Upon selling the corresponding finance receivable, we recognize any remaining deferred revenue. The reserve for cancellations of VSCs and GAP waiver coverage is estimated based upon historical experience and recent trends and is reflected as a reduction of other sales and revenues. Changes in these estimates are reflected as an adjustment to revenue in the period identified.
Under the master dealer agreement with DriveTime, we are also contractually entitled to receive profit-sharing revenues based on the performance of the VSCs once a required claims period has passed. This is a form of variable consideration we recognize as revenue to the extent that it is probable that it will not result in a significant revenue reversal. We apply the expected value method, utilizing expected VSC performance based on historical claims and cancellation data from our customers, as well as other qualitative assumptions to estimate the amount we expect to receive. We reassess the estimate each reporting period with any changes reflected as an adjustment to other sales and revenues in the period identified. Profit-sharing payments will begin when the underlying VSCs reach a specified level of claims history.
Sales of finance receivables are recognized in accordance with ASC Topic 860, Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets. ASC 860 states that a transfer of an entire financial asset, a group of entire financial assets, or a participating interest in
an entire financial asset in which the transferor surrenders control over those financial assets is accounted for as a sale only if all of the following conditions are met:
•The transferred financial assets have been isolated from the transferor - put presumptively beyond the reach of the transferor and its creditors, even in bankruptcy or other receivership.
•Each transferee has the right to pledge or exchange the assets (or beneficial interests) it received, and no condition both constrains the transferee (or third-party holder of its beneficial interests) from taking advantage of its right to pledge or exchange the asset and provides more than a trivial benefit to the transferor.
•The transferor, its consolidated affiliates included in the financial statements being presented or its agents do not maintain effective control over the transferred financial assets or third-party beneficial interests related to those transferred assets.
For transfers of financial assets that meet the above conditions for sale treatment, including in our securitization transactions, we record the gain on the sale of a finance receivable upon receipt of proceeds in an amount equal to the fair value of the net proceeds received less the carrying amount of the finance receivable. Sales of automotive finance receivables are contingent on customers meeting certain underwriting standards established by the investors purchasing the related automotive finance receivable. To the extent that automotive finance receivables sold do not meet these underwriting standards we could potentially be required to repurchase the receivable which could have a significant impact on the amount of gain or loss on finance receivable sales previously recognized. Any significant estimated post-sale obligations or contingent obligations to the purchaser of the receivables would be accrued if probable and estimable in accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies at the time of sale. Any such obligations are considered in our determination of the accounting for the transfers of the finance receivables under ASC Topic 860, Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets.
Finance Receivables
Finance receivables include installment contracts we originate to facilitate vehicle sales. We classify these receivables as held for sale, as we do not intend to hold the finance receivables we originate to maturity. We typically sell the finance receivables we originate. We record a valuation allowance to report finance receivables at the lower of unpaid principal balance or fair value. To determine the fair value of finance receivables we utilize industry-standard modeling, such as discounted cash flow analysis, factoring in our historical experience, the credit quality of the underlying receivables, loss trends and recovery rates, as well as the overall economic environment. For purposes of determining the valuation allowance, finance receivables are evaluated collectively to determine the allowance as they represent a large group of smaller-balance homogeneous loans. To the extent that actual experience differs from historical trends, there could be significant adjustments to our valuation allowance. Principal balances of finance receivables are charged-off when we are unable to sell the finance receivable and the related vehicle has been repossessed and liquidated or the receivable has otherwise been deemed uncollectible. The estimates and trends used have historically been effective in our determination of our valuation allowance.
Valuation of Inventory
Vehicle inventory consists of used vehicles, primarily acquired at auction and directly from customers. Direct and indirect vehicle reconditioning costs including parts and labor, inbound transportation costs and other incremental costs are capitalized as a component of inventory. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Vehicle inventory cost is determined by specific identification. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price less costs to complete, dispose and transport the vehicles. Selling prices are derived from historical data and trends, such as sales price and inventory turn times of similar vehicles, as well as independent market resources. Each reporting period we recognize any necessary adjustments to reflect vehicle inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value through cost of sales. To the extent that there are significant changes to estimated vehicle selling prices or decreases in demand for used vehicles, there could be significant adjustments to reflect our inventory at net realizable value.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes pursuant to the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred income tax assets and liabilities related to the expected future tax consequences arising from temporary differences between the carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities based on enacted statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse. Any effects of changes in income tax rates or laws are included in income tax expense in the period of enactment. We reduce the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance if, based on the evidence available, it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. In making the assessment under the more
likely than not standard, appropriate consideration must be given to all positive and negative evidence related to the realization of the deferred tax assets. The assessment considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency, and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the duration of statutory carry forward periods by jurisdiction, our experience with loss carryforwards not expiring unutilized, and all tax-planning alternatives that may be available. A valuation allowance is recognized if under applicable accounting standards we determine it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets would not be realized.