ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. We use words such as “anticipate”, “estimate”, “plan”, “project”, “continuing”, “ongoing”, “expect”, “believe”, “intend”, “may”, “will”, “should”, “could”, and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements.
OVERVIEW
We are a life science company with two distinct business segments. Our consumer product segment is focused on manufacturing, marketing and selling hemp-based CBD products to a range of market sectors. Our specialty pharmaceutical segment is focused on developing and commercializing novel therapeutics utilizing CBD. We are traded on the OTC:QB, and our trading symbol is CVSI.
Our consumer product business segment manufactures, markets and sells a variety of consumer products containing hemp-based CBD under our PlusCBD™ brand in a range of market sectors including nutraceutical, beauty care and specialty foods.
Our specialty pharmaceutical business segment is developing cannabinoids to treat a range of medical indications. Our product candidates are based on proprietary formulations, processes and technology that we believe are patent-protectable, and we plan to vigorously pursue patent protection on our drug candidates.
We expect to realize revenue from our consumer products business segment to fund our working capital needs. However, in order to fund our pharmaceutical product development efforts, we will need to raise additional capital either through the issuance of equity and/or the issuance of debt. In the event we are unable to fund our drug development efforts, we may need to curtail, partner or delay such activity.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2020 vs. December 31, 2019
Revenues and gross profit
Revenue by channel
We had product sales of $24.4 million and gross profit of $11.0 million, representing a gross margin of 45.1% in 2020 compared with product sales of $53.7 million and gross profit of $35.1 million, representing a gross margin of 65.3% in 2019. Our product sales decreased by $29.3 million or 55% in 2020 when compared to 2019 results. The decline is primarily due to lower retail sales as a result of COVID-19 and increased market competition, which is largely due to the lack of a clear regulatory framework. As of December 31, 2020, our products were in 7,346 retail stores, of which 4,332 were with retailers in the FDM channel. The store count increased from 5,567 stores as of December 31, 2019. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, e-commerce sales accounted for 31.5% and 18.5% of revenue, respectively.
During the second half of 2020, we launched the following new products:
•Refresh of our PlusCBDTM branded product line
•30+new PlusCBDTM products
•Happy LaneTM, a new THC-free CBD brand
•CV AcuteTM, to support immune system and respiratory health
•CV DefenseTM, to provide daily immune support
•PlusCBDTMPet, a full line of hemp extracts formulated for dogs and cats
•ProCBDTM, a full product line exclusively through health care practitioners
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of raw materials, packaging, manufacturing overhead (including payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation, facilities, depreciation, supplies and quality assurance costs), merchant card fees and shipping. Cost of
goods sold in 2020 increased as a percentage of revenue due to higher overhead and production cost compared to 2019. The gross profit decrease of $24.1million or 69% to $11.0 million in 2020 is mostly driven by the decline in product sales. Gross margins decreased from 65.3% in 2019 to 45.1% in 2020. The decrease is primarily due to higher overhead cost and associated volume deleverage, increased production cost, and reduced sales pricing as a result of increased market competition.
Research and development expense
Research and development (“R&D”) expense decreased to $2.9 million in 2020 compared to $5.9 million in 2019. The decrease is related to reductions in R&D expenses for our specialty pharmaceutical segment of $1.5 million and for our consumer products segment of $1.4 million. We incurred $0.7 million and $2.1 million of R&D expense related to our consumer products segment in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The reduction in R&D expense in our consumer products segment is mostly related to lower personnel cost and cost for outside services for new consumer product developments. We incurred $2.2 million and $3.8 million of R&D expenses related to our specialty pharmaceutical segment in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The reduction in R&D expense in our specialty pharmaceutical segment is mostly related to reduced activities related to preclinical work, development cost associated with our active pharmaceutical ingredient ("API"), and expenses paid to outside consultants.
Selling, general and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses decreased to $30.7 million in 2020 compared to $46.5 million in 2019.
•Sales expense decreased due to a decrease in sales commissions resulting from lower retail sales primarily due to COVID-19.
•Marketing expense decreased due to lower marketing activity and third party consultant spending.
•General and administrative expense decreased primarily due to decreased share-based compensation and payroll expense, partially offset by impairment charge in 2020 for the founder RSU settlement. During 2019, we had stock-based compensation expense of $9.5 million and payroll expense of $1.6 million related to the settlement of our former founders' employment agreements. During 2020, we derecognized the tax receivable for founder RSU settlement of $6.2 million. For more information regarding the founder RSU settlement, please see Note 11, Related Parties, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use Adjusted EBITDA internally to evaluate our performance and make financial and operational decisions that are presented in a manner that adjusts from their equivalent GAAP measures or that supplement the information provided by our GAAP measures. Adjusted EBITDA is defined by us as EBITDA (net income (loss) plus depreciation expense, amortization expense, and interest expense, minus income tax benefit), further adjusted to exclude certain non-cash expenses and other adjustments as set forth below. We use Adjusted EBITDA because we believe it helps to provide insights in trends in our business in addition to GAAP financial measures, since Adjusted EBITDA eliminates from our results specific financial items that have less bearing on our core operating performance.
We use Adjusted EBITDA in communicating certain aspects of our results and performance, including in this Annual Report, and believe that Adjusted EBITDA, when viewed in conjunction with our GAAP results and the accompanying reconciliation, can provide investors with additional understanding of factors affecting our financial condition and results of operations than GAAP measures alone. In addition, we believe the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors in making period-to-period comparison of results because the adjustments to GAAP are not reflective of our core business performance.
Adjusted EBITDA is not presented in accordance with, or as an alternative to, GAAP financial measures and may be different from non-GAAP measures used by other companies. We encourage investors to review the GAAP financial measures included in this Annual Report, including our consolidated financial statements, to aid in their analysis and understanding of our performance and in making comparisons.
A reconciliation from our net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is detailed below:
(1)Represents stock-based compensation expense related to stock options and warrants awarded to employees, consultants and non-executive directors based on the grant date fair value using the Black-Scholes valuation model.
(2)Represents stock-based compensation expense related to accelerated vesting of RSU's, accelerated vesting of certain performance stock options and the modification of certain stock options associated with the separation of our founders.
(3)Represents accrued payroll and related benefits associated with the separation of our founders.
(4)Represents the derecognition of the tax receivable related to founder RSU settlement. For more information, please see Note 11, Related Parties, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our primary sources of capital came from (i) cash flows from our operations, predominantly from the sale of our CBD products, (ii) existing cash, (iii) government loans, and (iii) proceeds from third-party financings.
COVID-19 has spread (and continues to spread) worldwide, resulting in shutdowns of manufacturing and commerce. COVID-19 has resulted in government authorities implementing numerous measures to try to contain it, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and shutdowns. These measures have impacted, and may further impact, our workforce and operations, the operations of our customers and our partners, and those of our respective vendors and suppliers. Our critical business operations, including our headquarters, and many of our key suppliers, are located in regions which have been impacted by COVID-19. Our customers and suppliers worldwide have also been affected and may continue to be affected by COVID-19 related restrictions and closures.
COVID-19, along with the resulting government-imposed restrictions on businesses, shelter-in place orders and temporary retail and grocery store closures had a significant impact on our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, and we expect that it will continue to negatively impact our operations due to decreased consumer demand as well as potential production and warehouse limitations which results in an event or condition, before consideration of management’s plans, that could impact our ability to meet future obligations. In response to the continuing uncertainty resulting from COVID-19, we have implemented, and as necessary will continue to make, strategic cost reductions, including reductions in employee headcount, vendor spending, and the delay of expenses related to our drug development activities.
In addition, while the extent and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and our business in particular is difficult to assess or predict, the pandemic has resulted in, and may continue to result in, significant disruption of global financial markets, which may reduce our ability to access capital or our customers’ ability to pay us for past or future purchases, which could negatively affect our liquidity. A recession or financial market correction resulting from the lack of containment and spread of COVID-19 could impact overall spending, adversely affecting demand for our products, our business, and the value of our common stock.
On April 15, 2020, we applied for a loan from JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as lender, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the "PPP") of the CARES Act as administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the "SBA"). On April 17, 2020, the loan was approved, and we received proceeds in the amount of $2.9 million (the “PPP Loan”).
The PPP Loan, which took the form of a promissory note, matures on April 15, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 0.98% per annum (the “Promissory Note”). We did not provide any collateral or guarantees for the PPP Loan, nor did we pay any facility charge to obtain the PPP Loan. The Promissory Note provides for customary events of default, including, among others, those relating to failure to make payment, bankruptcy, breaches of representations and material adverse effects. We may prepay the principal of the PPP Loan at any time without incurring any prepayment charges.
Under the original rules, all or a portion of the PPP Loan may be forgiven by the SBA and lender upon application by the Company beginning 60 days but not later than 120 days after loan approval and upon documentation of expenditures in accordance with the SBA's requirements.
Under the CARES Act, loan forgiveness is available for the sum of documented payroll costs, covered rent payments, and covered utilities during the covered period of 8 weeks beginning on the date of loan approval. For purposes of the CARES Act, payroll costs exclude compensation of an individual employee in excess of $100,000, prorated annually. Not more than 25% of the forgiven amount may be for non-payroll costs. Forgiveness is reduced if full-time headcount declines, or if salaries and wages for employees with salaries of $100,000 or less annually are reduced by more than 25%. In the event the PPP Loan, or any portion thereof, is forgiven pursuant to the PPP, the amount forgiven is applied to outstanding principal.
The Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020 (the “PPP Flexibility Act”), enacted on June 5, 2020, amended the Paycheck Protection Program, among others, as follows: (i) extended the covered period from 8 weeks to 24 weeks from the date the PPP Loan is originated, during which PPP funds needed to be expended in order to be forgiven. A borrower may submit a loan forgiveness application any time on or before the maturity date of the loan - including before the end of the covered period - if the borrower has used all of the loan proceeds for which the borrower is requesting forgiveness; (ii) at least 60% of PPP funds must be spent on payroll costs, with the remaining 40% available to spend on other eligible expenses; and (iii) payments are deferred until the date on which the amount of forgiveness determined is remitted to the lender. If a borrower fails to seek forgiveness within 10 months after the last day of its covered period, then payments will begin on the date that is 10 months after the last day of the covered period. In addition, the PPP Flexibility Act modified the CARES Act by increasing the maturity date for loans made after the effective date from two years to a minimum maturity of five years from the date on which the borrower
applies for loan forgiveness. Existing PPP loans made before the new legislation retain their original two-year term, but may be renegotiated between a lender and a borrower to match the 5-year term permitted under the PPP Flexibility Act.
As of March 16, 2021, the balance due on the Promissory Note was $2.9 million. We intend to apply for loan forgiveness within the required timeframe. No assurance is provided that we will obtain forgiveness of the PPP Loan in whole or in part.
In October 2020, the Company entered into a finance agreement with First Insurance Funding in order to fund a portion of its insurance policies. The amount financed is $0.7 million and incurs interest at a rate of 3.60%. The Company is required to make monthly payments of $0.1 million through July 2021. The outstanding balance as of December 31, 2020 was $0.7 million.
On December 8, 2020, we entered into a common stock purchase agreement ("SPA") with Tumim Stone Capital, LLC ("Tumim"), pursuant to which Tumim committed to purchase up to $10.0 million in shares of our common stock, from time to time. The SPA provides, among other things, that we may direct, every three trading days, Tumim to purchase a number of shares of our common stock not to exceed an amount determined based upon the trading volume and stock price of our shares. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 450,000 shares of common stock pursuant to the SPA and recognized proceeds of $0.2 million. As of March 16, 2021, we have sold 5,941,816 additional shares of common stock and recognized proceeds of $3.1 million under the SPA during 2021.
During the first quarter of 2019, we issued 2,950,000 Restricted Stock Units ("RSU") to our founder, former President and Chief Executive Officer, Michael Mona Jr. ("Mona Jr."). The vesting of the RSU is treated as a taxable compensation and thus subject to income tax withholdings. No amounts were withheld (either in cash or the equivalent of shares of common stock from the vesting of the RSU's) or included in our payroll tax filing at the time of vesting. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported the taxable compensation associated with the RSU release to the taxing authorities and included the amount in Mona Jr's W-2 for 2019. In addition, the Company paid the employer and employee portion of the FICA taxes of $0.2 million, respectively. Although the primary tax liability is the responsibility of Mona Jr., we are secondarily liable and thus have recorded the liability on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. The liability may be relieved once the tax amount is paid by Mona Jr. and the Company has received the required taxing authority documentation from Mona Jr.. The deadline to file and pay personal income taxes for 2019 was on October 15, 2020. We initiated legal action against Mona Jr. in July 2020, in connection with which we requested that Mona Jr. provides to us, among other things, appropriate taxing authority documentation. As of March 16, 2021, Mona Jr. has not provided us with proof that he filed and paid his taxes for 2019. Therefore, we wrote off the previously recorded income tax receivable during the fourth quarter of 2020. Refer to Note 11. Related Parties to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Our sources of liquidity and cash flows are used to fund ongoing operations and for research and development projects for new products. Over the next two fiscal years, we anticipate that we will use our liquidity and cash flows from our operations to help fund our growth. In addition, as part of our business strategy, we occasionally evaluate potential acquisitions of businesses, products, and/or the development of new products. Accordingly, a portion of our available cash may be used at any time for the acquisition of complementary products, businesses, and/or the research and development of new products. Such potential uses of funds may require substantial capital resources, which may require us to seek additional debt or equity financing. We cannot assure you that we will be able to successfully identify suitable acquisition or investment candidates, complete acquisitions or investments, integrate acquired businesses and/or products into our current operations, expand into new markets, and/or development new products. Furthermore, we cannot provide assurances that additional financing will be available to us in any required time frame and on commercially reasonable terms, if at all.
We are dependent on cash flow from operations to satisfy our working capital requirements. No assurance can be given that cash flow from operations will be sufficient to provide for our liquidity for the next 12 months. However, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents on hand together with our equity commitment with Tumim and cost reduction measures described above, will provide sufficient liquidity to fund our operations for the next 12 months from the issuance of the consolidated financial statements and cover our ongoing operations and obligations. However, we shall continue to evaluate our capital expenditure needs based upon factors including but not limited to our cash from operations, growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of our sales and marketing, the timing of new product introductions, and the continuing market acceptance of our products. Should we be unable to generate sufficient revenue in the future to achieve positive cash flow from operations or satisfy our capital requirements, additional working capital will be required, and we may open a revolving line of credit with a bank, or we may have to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain expanded credit facilities to fund our operating expenses, pay our obligations, diversify our geographical reach, and grow our company. In the event such financing is needed in the future, there can be no assurance that such financing will be available to us, or, if available, that it will be in amounts and on terms acceptable to us. If we cannot raise additional funds when we need or want them, our prospects, financial condition and results of operations could be negatively affected. However, if cash flows from operations become insufficient to continue operations at the current level, and if no additional financing were obtained, then management would restructure the Company in a way to preserve its business while maintaining expenses within operating cash flows.
A summary of our changes in cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is provided below:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities includes our net loss adjusted for non-cash expenses such as stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, bad debt expense and other non-cash items. Operating assets and liabilities primarily include balances related to funding of inventory purchases and customer accounts receivable. Operating assets and liabilities that arise from the funding of inventory purchases and customer accounts receivable can fluctuate significantly from day to day and period to period depending on the timing of inventory purchases and customer behavior.
Net cash used in operating activities was $7.3 million in 2020 compared to $2.2 million in 2019, an increase of $5.1 million. The primary reason for this increase is our net loss of $22.3 million in 2020 due to lower sales as a result of COVID-19 and increased market competition. Our net loss was partially offset by non-cash items and changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.1 million in both 2020 and 2019. During 2020, we invested in additional technology to support our e-commerce activities and tenant improvements to our main facility. During 2019, we purchased additional manufacturing equipment for our planned expansion and tenant improvements to our main facility.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $3.2 million from 2019 to $3.3 million in 2020. Our financing activity for 2020 consisted of proceeds from the PPP Loan of $2.9 million and stock option exercises of $0.2 million. In addition, we sold 450,000 shares of common stock for proceeds of $0.2 million under our new SPA with Tumim. Our financing activities in 2019 consisted of proceeds from stock option exercises of $0.5 million, offset by repayment of our insurance financing of $0.5 million.
Inflation
We have not been affected materially by inflation during the periods presented, and no material effect is expected in the near future.
Known Trends or Uncertainties
We have seen some consolidation in our industry during economic downturns. These consolidations have not had a negative effect on our total sales; however, should consolidations and downsizing in the industry continue to occur, those events could adversely impact our revenues and earnings going forward.
As discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the world has been affected due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Until the pandemic has passed, there remains uncertainty as to the effect of COVID-19 on our business in both the short and long-term.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of these financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis management evaluates its critical accounting policies and estimates.
A “critical accounting policy” is one which is both important to the understanding of the financial condition and results of operations of the Company and requires management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, and often requires management to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Management believes the following accounting policies fit this definition:
Goodwill and Intangible Assets - We evaluate the carrying value of goodwill and intangible assets annually during the fourth quarter in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 350, Intangibles Goodwill and Other and between annual evaluations if events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying amount. Such circumstances could include, but are not limited to (1) a significant adverse change in legal factors or in business climate, (2) unanticipated competition, or (3) an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. All of the goodwill and intangible assets are assigned to our specialty pharmaceutical segment.
Goodwill is evaluated for impairment by first performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether a quantitative goodwill test is necessary. If it is determined, based on qualitative factors, that the fair value of the reporting unit may be more likely than not less than carrying amount, or if significant adverse changes in our future financial performance occur that could materially impact fair value, a quantitative goodwill impairment test would be required. Additionally, we can elect to forgo the qualitative assessment and perform the quantitative test. If the qualitative assessment indicates that the quantitative analysis should be performed, or if management elects to bypass a qualitative assessment, we then evaluate goodwill for impairment by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount, including goodwill. The quantitative assessment for goodwill requires us to estimate the fair value of our reporting units using either an income or market approach or a combination thereof.
Management makes critical assumptions and estimates in completing impairment assessments of goodwill and other intangible assets. Our cash flow projections look several years into the future and include assumptions on variables such as future sales and operating margin growth rates, economic conditions, probability of success, market competition, inflation and discount rates.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we performed our annual goodwill impairment test and determined, after performing a qualitative test of the reporting unit, that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount. Accordingly, there was no indication of impairment and the quantitative impairment test was not performed. We did not record any goodwill impairment charges for the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
We classify intangible assets into three categories: (1) intangible assets with definite lives subject to amortization; (2) intangible assets with indefinite lives not subject to amortization; and (3) goodwill. We determine the useful lives of our identifiable intangible assets after considering the specific facts and circumstances related to each intangible asset. Factors we consider when determining useful lives include the contractual term of any agreement related to the asset, the historical performance of the asset, our long-term strategy for using the asset, any laws or regulations which could impact the useful life of the asset and other economic factors, including competition and specific market conditions. Intangible assets that are deemed to have definite lives are amortized, primarily on a straight-line basis, over their useful lives to their estimated residual values, generally five years.
In-process research & development ("IPR&D") has an indefinite life and is not amortized until completion and development of the project, at which time the IPR&D becomes an amortizable asset. Until such time as the projects are either completed or abandoned, we test those assets for impairment at least annually at year end, or more frequently at interim periods, by evaluating qualitative factors which could be indicative of impairment. Qualitative factors being considered include, but are not limited to, macro-economic conditions, progress on drug development activities, and overall financial performance. If impairment indicators
are present as a result of our qualitative assessment, we will test those assets for impairment by comparing the fair value of the assets to their carrying value. Quantitative factors being considered include, but are not limited to, the current project status, forecasted changes in the timing or amounts required to complete the project, forecasted changes in timing or changes in the future cash flows to be generated by the completed products, a probability of success of the ultimate project and changes to other market-based assumptions, such as discount rates. Upon completion or abandonment, the value of the IPR&D assets will be amortized to expense over the anticipated useful life of the developed products, if completed, or charged to expense when abandoned if no alternative future use exists.
Our intangible assets are included in our specialty pharmaceutical segment. No impairments were identified during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenue Recognition - The majority of our revenue contracts represent a single performance obligation related to the fulfillment of customer orders for the purchase of our products, which is primarily related to our Plus CBD™ line of products. Net sales reflect the transaction prices for these contracts based on our selling list price, which is then reduced by estimated costs for trade promotional programs, consumer incentives, and allowances and discounts used to incentivize sales growth and build brand awareness. We recognize revenue at the point in time that control of the ordered product is transferred to the customer, which is typically upon shipment to the customer or other customer-designated delivery point. We accrue for estimated sales returns by customers based on historical sales return results. The computation of the sales return and discount allowances require that management makes certain estimates and assumptions that effect the timing and amounts of revenue and liabilities recorded. Shipping and handling fees charged to customers are included in product sales and totaled $0.2 million and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Taxes collected from customers that are remitted to governmental agencies are accounted for on a net basis and not included as revenue.
Stock-Based Compensation - Certain employees, officers, directors, and consultants participate in various long-term incentive plans that provide for granting stock options, restricted stock awards, restricted stock units, stock bonus awards and performance-based awards. Stock options generally vest in equal increments over a two- to four-year period and expire on the tenth anniversary following the date of grant. Performance-based stock options vest once the applicable performance condition is satisfied.
The risk-free interest rates are based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury constant maturities with remaining terms equivalent to the respective expected terms of the options. The Company estimates the expected term for stock options awarded to employees, non-employees, officers and directors using the simplified method in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Stock Compensation, because the Company does not have sufficient relevant historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns. Through September 30, 2019, the Company determined expected volatility based on the Company’s peer group, consisting of five companies in the industry in which the Company does business because the Company did not have sufficient historical volatility data. Starting on October 1, 2019, the Company had sufficient historical volatility data, and used its own volatility. In the future, as the Company gains historical data for the actual term over which stock options are held, the expected term may change, which could substantially change the grant-date fair value of future stock option awards, and, consequently, compensation of future grants.
We recognize stock-based compensation for equity awards granted to employees, officers and directors as compensation and benefits expense in the consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of stock options is estimated using a Black-Scholes valuation model on the date of grant. The fair value of restricted stock awards is equal to the closing price of our stock on the date of grant. Stock-based compensation is recognized over the requisite service period of the individual awards, which generally equals the vesting period. For performance-based stock options, compensation is recognized once the applicable performance condition is satisfied.
We recognize stock-based compensation for equity awards granted to consultants as selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of stock options is estimated using a Black-Scholes valuation model on the date of grant and unvested awards are revalued at each reporting period. The fair value of restricted stock awards is equal to our stock closing price on the date of grant multiplied by the number of shares awarded. Stock-based compensation is recognized over the requisite service period of the individual awards, which generally equals the vesting period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting standards and pronouncements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.