Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We are a clinical stage biotechnology company and a leader in the research and development of mitochondria based therapeutics (MBTs), an emerging class of drugs with the potential to treat a wide range of chronic and age-related diseases, including non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), obesity, fibrotic diseases including IPF, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) including COVID-19 associated ARDS, cancer, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D), and cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases. Our portfolio of programs has substantially expanded from two to five programs in the last year. This expanded pipeline greatly strengthens our belief that there are multiple therapeutic peptides that can be realized from the mitochondrial genome.
MBTs originate from almost two decades of research by our founders, resulting in their discovery of a novel group of mitochondrial-derived peptides (MDPs) encoded within the mitochondrial genome. Some of these naturally occurring MDPs and their analogs have demonstrated a range of biological activity and therapeutic potential in research models across multiple chronic and age-related diseases.
We are focused on building our organization, enhancing our scientific and management teams and their capabilities, planning and strategy, raising capital and the research and development of our MDPs. Our research efforts have focused on discovering and evaluating our MDPs for potential development as MBT drug candidates.
Our efforts have resulted in the identification of more than 100 previously unidentified peptides encoded within the mitochondrial genome and generated over 1,000 analogs. Many of these MDPs and their analogs have demonstrated various degrees of biological activity in cell based and/or animal models relevant to a wide range of diseases, such as NASH, obesity, fibrotic diseases, ARDS, cancer, and other diseases.
Clinical Program: Our first clinical candidate, CB4211, is a potential treatment for NASH and obesity. It is a novel peptide initially developed from a MOTS-c MDP. In July 2018, we initiated a Phase 1a/1b clinical study of CB4211. In November 2019, the double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 1a stage was completed and the blinded safety and tolerability data supported advancement to the Phase 1b stage of the study. The study was designed to initially assess the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of CB4211 following single and multiple-ascending doses in healthy subjects. In November 2019, we initiated recruitment for the Phase 1b stage which is designed to assess the safety, tolerability and activity of CB4211 in obese subjects with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Assessments will include changes in liver fat assessed by MRI-PDFF, body weight and biomarkers relevant to NASH and obesity. On March 30, 2020, we announced a delay in the completion of our Phase 1b study due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The delay was a result of a pause by some of our clinical research organization partners in all of their activities related to the study in response to COVID-19. On July 7, 2020, we announced the resumption of our Phase 1b study. In March 2021, we completed the enrollment for the Phase 1b clinical trial. While topline data is expected at the end of the second quarter of 2021, it is dependent upon a number of factors such as the last patient visit, and therefore, we cannot predict with certainty when such data will be available. Based on positive clinical results and additional funding from potential partnerships and general fundraising, we plan to initiate preparations for a Phase 2 study of CB4211 in 2021 and initiate a Phase 2 study in 2022.
Preclinical Programs: Our preclinical pipeline has substantially expanded from two to four programs in the last year, including one for IPF and other fibrotic diseases, one for COVID-19 associated acute respiratory distress syndrome and two for cancer. Our research efforts have further identified and focused on certain MDPs and their analogs that have demonstrated therapeutic potential for treating indications related to those diseases in preclinical models.
● CB5138 Analogs for IPF and other Fibrotic Diseases: Our discovery efforts have identified CB5138 Analogs, a family of novel peptides with potential for use as treatments for fibrotic diseases. In co-cultures of human lung cells, CB5138-1 decreased the expression of key fibrosis biomarkers, including alpha smooth muscle actin (αSMA), and collagen types I and III. CB5138-1 also decreased the transformation of healthy lung cells into fibrotic cells after induction by TGF-beta1, resulting in reduced production of the fibrotic components αSMA and pro-collagen I alpha 1. In vivo, CB5138-1 decreased lung fibrosis and inflammation in both the prophylactic mouse model of IPF, initiating treatment with the peptide immediately after fibrosis induction by bleomycin, and in the therapeutic mouse model of IPF, starting peptide treatment one week after induction. In addition, using the more exacting therapeutic model of IPF, two new analogs of CB5138 (CB5138-2 and CB5138-3) significantly reduced lung fibrosis assessed by the Ashcroft Score, reduced inflammation, and decreased fibrosis-related changes in lung weight, collagen deposition in lung tissue, and collagen secretion into lung fluid. In addition, we have demonstrated that a CB5138 Analog has enhanced effects when combined with nintedanib, the leading treatment for IPF, suggesting potential utility for combination therapy in IPF. In the first quarter of 2021, we identified CB5138-3 as the lead clinical candidate in this program and our goal is to initiate IND-enabling activities with the potential to file an IND in 2022.
● CB5064 Analogs for ARDS, including COVID-19 Associated ARDS: Our internal discovery efforts have identified CB5064 Analogs, a family of peptides that are agonists of the apelin receptor with potential for use as therapeutics for COVID-19 associated ARDS and ARDS in general. In May 2020, we initiated testing of CB5064 Analogs in preclinical models of ARDS. In the preclinical studies, acute lung injury was induced in mice by administration of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a bacterial toxin that produces similar symptoms to other causes of ARDS, including fluid accumulation and cytokine secretion. A single dose of CB5064 Analog was administered one hour prior to the LPS exposure and effects on lung weight and levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines were measured at 4 hours after LPS exposure. Treatment with CB5064 Analogs reduced fluid accumulation in the lungs and a corresponding broad reduction in levels of key pro-inflammatory cytokines secreted into the lung fluid, when compared to treatment with a placebo control. We previously demonstrated the beneficial effects of this novel family of peptides on glucose tolerance, insulin sensitivity and weight loss in an obese mouse model of T2D, as presented at the American Diabetes Association in 2019. In January 2021, we signed a Non-Clinical Evaluation Agreement (NCEA) with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) initiating a collaboration to evaluate the potential of CB5064 Analogs for the treatment of COVID-19 associated ARDS. In parallel with the work being conducted by NIAID, we are currently performing the required studies in this program to select a candidate. Based on successful outcomes of those studies and additional funding, we will nominate a clinical candidate followed by initiation of pre-IND work in 2021, with the longer-term goal of initiating a Phase 1 study.
● CB5046 Analogs for Cancer and Other Disease Indications: Our internal discovery efforts have identified CB5046 Analogs, a family of novel potent and selective peptide inhibitors of CXCR4, a key chemokine receptor involved in tumor growth, metastasis and avoidance of immune surveillance that is overexpressed in 75% of human tumors. CXCR4 is also involved in localization of healthy stem cells and in certain genetic diseases. We have demonstrated positive effects of one of the CB5046 Analogs when administered in combination with chemotherapy in an animal model of aggressive melanoma. We are screening multiple peptide analogs for in vitro activity and plan to explore the potential for use initially in stem cell mobilization and hematologic cancers.
● MBT3 Analogs for Cancer Immunotherapy: Our discovery efforts identified a novel peptide family, MBT3 Analogs. We have demonstrated the enhanced killing of cancer cells by human immune cells in the presence of an MBT3 Analog, and plan to further explore the therapeutic potential of this analog family for treatment of cancer, subject to resource availability and the requirements of our more-advanced programs.
We have financed our operations primarily with proceeds from sales of our equity securities, including our initial public offering, private placements of our securities, a debt offering, public sales of our securities and the exercise of outstanding warrants and stock options. Since our inception through December 31, 2020, our operations have been funded with an aggregate of approximately $76.5 million from the sale and issuance of equity instruments and debt.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses were $16.3 million and $13.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We incurred $5.2 million and $3.2 million in non-cash expenses during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our net losses excluding non-cash expenses were $11.1 million and $9.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $69.3 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses over the next several years. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and from year to year. Although we anticipate incurring increasing expenses as we advance CB4211 through the clinic and as we conduct preclinical development of our other research peptides, the extent of that increase is uncertain at this time and subject to change due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and other factors.
Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration of the outbreak, impact on our preclinical and clinical studies including patient enrollment and retention, employee or industry events, and effect on our suppliers, service providers and manufacturers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. The COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse effects are prevalent in the locations where we, our CROs, suppliers or third-party business partners conduct business and, as a result, we may experience more pronounced disruptions in our operations, liquidity, supply chain, facilities, and clinical trials. With respect to our clinical trials, we have experienced delays due to our clinical sites closing down during the pandemic, we have experienced delays in enrollment due to those closures and weather-related events in the state where our clinical sites are located. We may in the future experience more significant delays in enrollment, participant dosing, distribution of clinical trial materials, study monitoring and data analysis that could materially adversely impact our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods. Specifically, we may experience impact from restrictions on travel and in-person meetings, delays in site activations and enrollment of clinical trials, prioritization of hospital resources toward pandemic effort, delays in review by the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory agencies, and disruptions in our supply chain for our product candidates. As of the filing date of this Form 10-K, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our financial condition, results of operations or guidance is uncertain. The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic will not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods. See the section titled “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Financial Operations Review
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the near future. In the future, we will seek to generate revenue from product sales, either directly or under any future licensing, development or similar relationship with a strategic partner.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
● employee-related expenses including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
● expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including contract research organizations (CROs) that conduct research and development and preclinical activities on our behalf and the cost of consultants;
● the cost of laboratory equipment, supplies and manufacturing MBT test materials; and
● depreciation and other personnel-related costs associated with research and product development.
We record all research and development expenses as incurred. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in the year ending December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, as we incur additional costs related to our clinical activities and for discovery, evaluation and optimization of other MDPs as potential MBT drug candidates.
Our Research Programs
Our research and development programs include activities in support of the clinical development of our lead MBT candidate program, CB4211, as well as the operation of our platform technology related to the discovery and development of new MBTs, evaluation of newly discovered MDPs, design of novel improved analogs, evaluation of their therapeutic potential and optimization of their characteristics as potential MBT drug development candidates. Depending on factors of capability, cost, efficiency and intellectual property rights, we conduct our research programs at our laboratory facility, or externally, pursuant to contractual arrangements with CROs or under collaborative arrangements with academic institutions.
The success of our research programs and the timing of those programs and the possible development of research peptides into drug candidates is highly uncertain. As such, at this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing or estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete research and development of a commercial drug. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, we will receive material net cash inflows from our operations. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing medicines, including the uncertainty of:
● developing appropriate manufacturing processes and formulations;
● establishing an appropriate safety profile with toxicology studies;
● obtaining appropriate regulatory approval for conducting clinical trials;
● successfully designing, enrolling and completing clinical trials;
● receiving marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
● obtaining and enforcing patent and trade secret protection for our product candidates;
● launching commercial sales of the products, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
● maintaining an acceptable safety profile of the products following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Most of our potential MBT drug candidates are in early stages of investigational research. Candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to increase for the foreseeable future as our product candidate development programs progress. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our product candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control may impact our clinical development programs and plans.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. Other significant costs include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters and fees for accounting and consulting services and directors’ and officers’ insurance. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the year ending December 31, 2021 as we plan to expand our business.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented. The year-to-year comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of financial results to be achieved in future periods.
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating Expenses
Research and development expenses were $6.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $6.6 million in the prior year, a $0.3 million increase, or 5%. The increase in research and development expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to an increase in clinical costs of $0.9 million related to the timing of those expenses. This increase was partially offset by a decrease of $0.3 million in stock-based compensation as prior year grants became fully expensed during the current year period and a $0.2 million decrease in lab supply purchases related to the slow down experienced during the current year period from the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and administrative expenses were $6.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $6.0 million in the prior year, a $0.3 million increase, or 5%. The increase in general and administrative expenses was due to a $0.2 million increase in insurance costs related to higher D&O premiums and $0.1 million in legal fees related to an increase in compliance related matters during the current year period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $21.0 million in cash, cash equivalents and investments. As of December 31, 2019, we had $12.6 million in cash and cash equivalents. We maintain our cash in a checking and a savings account on deposit with a banking institution in the United States. Our cash equivalent balance as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 included $0 and $9.5 million, respectively, of U.S. Treasury Bills that had maturity dates of less than three months at the date of purchase. As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital and stockholders’ equity of $18.4 million and $18.5 million, respectively, and incurred a net loss of $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2019, we had working capital and stockholders’ equity of $10.9 million and $8.1 million, respectively, and incurred a net loss of $13.0 million.
On May 27, 2020, we entered into an At-the-Market Offering Sales Agreement (“ATM”) with Virtu Americas, LLC, as sales agent, pursuant to which we may sell shares of common stock with an aggregate offering price of up to $20,000,000. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold 2,350,067 shares of our common stock under the ATM program for proceeds of $4,308,352, net of commissions and professional fees of $214,456.
In August 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of our securities (the “Public Offering”) pursuant to which we sold 12,300,000 shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase 10,608,750 shares of common stock for proceeds of $13,655,531, net of commissions and professional fees of $1,368,919. The warrants issued in the Public Offering were immediately exercisable and have a term of five years and a per share exercise price of $1.44.
As reflected in the financial statements, we had an accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, as well as recurring losses and negative cash flows from operating activities from inception. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for at least one year from the issuance of these financial statements. However, based on current budget assumptions, projected cash burn, the cash and investments on hand as of December 31, 2020 and funding of approximately $1 million received from equity exercises subsequent to December 31, 2020, we believe that we have sufficient capital to meet our operating expenses and obligations for the next twelve months from the date of this filing. However, if unanticipated difficulties or circumstances arise, we may require additional capital sooner to support our operations. If we are unable to raise additional capital whenever necessary, we may be forced to decelerate or curtail our research and development activities and/or other operations until such time as additional capital becomes available. Such limitation of our activities would allow us to slow our rate of spending and extend our use of cash until additional capital is raised. There can be no assurance that such a plan would be successful. There is no assurance that additional financing will be available when needed or that we will be able to obtain such financing on reasonable terms.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $9.8 million and $10.1 million, respectively. Cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to our net loss of $16.3 million, which was partially offset by non-cash items of stock based-compensation, depreciation and amortization of the debt discount totaling $5.2 million. Cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to our net loss of $13.0 million, which was partially offset by non-cash items of stock based-compensation, depreciation and amortization of the debt discount totaling $3.2 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $18.2 million and net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $16.3 million. The cash used in investing activities was due to the timing of the purchases of our investments in certificates of deposit and treasury bills as compared to the timing of the maturities of those investments. The cash provided by investing activities was due to the timing of the purchases of our investments in certificates of deposit and treasury bills as compared to the timing of the maturities of those investments and the purchases of property and equipment we made during year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $18.3 million and $0.6 million, respectively. Cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to net proceeds of $13,655,531 and $4,308,352received from our underwritten public and At-the-Market offering, respectively, and the exercise of stock options and warrants. Cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to proceeds from the exercise of warrants and stock options totaling $0.6 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Operating Leases
We are a party to a lease agreement for laboratory space leased on a month-to month basis that is part of a shared facility in Menlo Park, California. In September 2020, we renewed our lease for office space in Fairfield, New Jersey for an additional year at the same annual cost of $13,080 per annum.
Rent expense amounted to $403,449 and $350,979 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 “Summary of Significant Account Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements” to our Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, for a summary of the relevant recent accounting pronouncements.
Other recent accounting standards that have been issued or proposed by the FASB or other standards-setting bodies that do not require adoption until a future date are not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements upon adoption.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (U.S. GAAP). U.S. GAAP requires us to make certain estimates and judgments that can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the dates of the financial statements, the disclosure of contingencies as of the dates of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods presented. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. If actual results or events differ materially from those contemplated by us in making these estimates, our reported financial condition and results of operations for future periods could be materially affected. See “Risk Factors” for certain matters that may affect our future financial condition or results of operations. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if the changes in estimate that are reasonably likely to occur could materially impact the financial statements. Our management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors.
The following critical accounting estimates reflect significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements:
● Fair value of financial instruments
● Share-based payments
● Valuation of deferred tax assets
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
We measure the fair value of financial assets and liabilities based on the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. We utilize three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
● Level 1 - quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
● Level 2 - quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets or inputs that are observable
● Level 3 - inputs that are unobservable (for example, cash flow modeling inputs based on assumptions)
The carrying amounts of cash, accounts payable, accrued liabilities and debt approximate fair value due to the short-term nature of these instruments.
Share-based Payments
We account for share-based payments using the fair value method. For employees and directors, the fair value of the award is measured on the grant date. For non-employees, fair value is generally measured based on the fair value of the services provided or the fair value of the common stock on the measurement date, whichever is more readily determinable. We have historically granted stock options at exercise prices no less than the fair market value as determined by the board of directors, with input from management.
See Note 3 “Summary of Significant Account Policies - Share-Based Payment” to our Financial Statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 regarding the specific assumptions used with respect to stock-based compensation for the periods presented.
Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of items that have been included or excluded in the financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the difference between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their respective financial reporting amounts (“temporary differences”) at enacted tax rates in effect for the years in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse.
The benefit of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns are recognized in the financial statements if such positions are more likely than not of being sustained. We have evaluated and concluded that there were no material uncertain tax positions requiring recognition in the Company’s financial statements as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The Company does not expect any significant changes in the unrecognized tax benefits within twelve months of the reporting date.