Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The purpose of this section is to discuss and analyze the Company’s consolidated financial condition, liquidity and capital resources and results of operations. This analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements, related disclosures and “Cautionary Statement for Forward-Looking Information,” which appear elsewhere in this Report.
Overview of Business
The Company generates revenues from sales of wine to wholesalers and direct to consumers, sales of bulk wine and grapes, custom winemaking services, special event fees, tasting fees and retail sales.
Our wines are primarily sold to distributors, who then sell to retailers and restaurants. As permitted under federal and local regulations, we have also been placing increased emphasis on generating revenue from direct sales to consumers which occur through wine clubs, at the wineries’ tasting rooms and through the internet and direct outreach to customers. Direct sales to consumers are more profitable for the Company as we are able to sell our products at a price closer to retail prices rather than the wholesale price sold to distributors. From time to time, we may sell grapes or bulk wine, because the wine does not meet the quality standards for the Company’s products, market conditions have changed resulting in reduced demand for certain products, or because the Company may have produced more of a particular varietal than it can use. When these sales occur, they may result in a loss.
Cost of sales includes grape and bulk wine costs, whether purchased or produced from the Company’s controlled vineyards, crush costs, winemaking and processing costs, bottling, packaging, warehousing and shipping and handling costs. For the Company controlled vineyard produced grapes, grape costs include annual farming labor costs, harvest costs and depreciation of vineyard assets. For wines that age longer than one year, winemaking and processing costs continue to be incurred and capitalized to the cost of wine, which can range from 3 to 36 months. Reductions to the carrying value of inventories are also included in costs of sales.
At December 31, 2020, wine inventory includes approximately 0.7 million cases of bottled and bulk wine in various stages of the aging process. Cased wine is expected to be sold over the next 12 to 36 months and generally before the release date of the next vintage.
Impact of COVID-19 on Operations
In March 2020, the coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”) outbreak was declared a national public health emergency which continues to affect the world and has adversely impacted global activity and contributed to significant economic declines and volatility in financial markets. The outbreak could have a continued material adverse impact on economic and market conditions and be followed by a period of global economic slowdown. The rapid development and fluidity of this situation precludes any prediction as to the ultimate material adverse impact of the coronavirus outbreak. The outbreak has adversely impacted the Company’s tasting room visitations, On-Premise business, and special events. The outbreak presents uncertainty and risk with respect to the Company, its future performance and financial results.
As of March 16, 2020, with the exception of key operations personnel, the Company has shifted its home office staff to remote workstations, which has been an effective transition to date. The Company will continue to operate remotely until management determines it is safe for employees to return to offices.
The Company has not experienced nor does it anticipate significant impact or disruptions to its supply chain network.
On March 16, 2020, the Company temporarily closed all of its tasting rooms, which are located in California, Oregon, and Washington, in compliance with shelter-in-place orders issued by local government offices. Following months of closures, each of the aforementioned states issued reopening guidelines and metrics that counties must achieve prior to business reopening. After remaining closed for nearly all of the second quarter and complying with reopening guidelines, the Company’s tasting rooms reopened during June 2020 in limited capacity and operating hours, and with additional safety measures in place. In the first several weeks of July 2020, businesses located in several Northern California counties were required to shut down indoor dining and winery tasting rooms. In late July 2020, the State of Washington required the shutdown of wineries, regardless of whether food is served. During this period, while the State of Oregon allowed indoor wine tastings with noted restrictions, the Company's Oregon-based tasting room, Archery Summit, operated almost entirely outdoors. Although outdoor operations were allowed to resume in August, COVID-19 containment measures and the 2020 wildfires limited the amount of traffic at the Company's tasting rooms. In mid-November 2020, further government restrictions and shutdown orders were issued for the State of Oregon with California and Washington following suit in December 2020, resulting in either shutdowns or outdoor-only tastings for all of the Company's tasting rooms.
All of the Company’s tasting rooms have been impacted by government orders and restrictions to significant and varying degrees at times. Much of the aforementioned restrictions or shutdowns of the operations of winery tasting rooms remain in place. Management and staff at all estate locations have taken the appropriate steps to continue accommodations for outdoor tastings, when permitted, to ensure the safety of all guests and staff. In addition to limiting the number of guests and requiring reservations, the Company has implemented various measures to prevent the spread of the virus including using available forms of PPE, assigning tasting room staff to discrete guest parties to limit contact exposure, screening workers before they enter facilities, practicing social distancing, implementing COVID-19 protocols and travel guidelines, and advising employees to adhere to prevention measures recommended by the Center for Disease Control (“CDC”).
The Company has experienced both reductions and increases in consumer demand in various channels due to the COVID-19 outbreak in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Our Direct to Consumer segment includes retail sales in the tasting rooms, remote sites and on-site events, wine club net sales, direct phone sales, and other sales made directly to the consumer without the use of an intermediary. Tasting room sales have been negatively impacted due to closures and operating limitations. The Company also sells wine directly to consumers through our website (http://www.crimsonwinegroup.com), third-party websites, direct phone calls, and other online sales (“Ecommerce”). The Company’s Ecommerce operations have been favorably impacted through changes in consumer behavior and our opportunistic email campaigns and web offers to our customers.
Our Wholesale segment includes all sales through a third party where prices are given at a wholesale rate. The Company sells wine (through distributors and directly) to restaurants, bars, and other hospitality locations (“On-Premise”). Demand for wines at On-Premise locations has been reduced due to COVID-19 containment measures restricting consumers from visiting, as well as in many cases both the temporary and permanent closures of On-Premise venues. The Company also sells wine (through distributors and directly) to supermarkets, grocery stores, liquor stores, and other chains and independent stores (“Off-Premise”). Demand for wines at Off-Premise locations has increased due to their classification as essential businesses that remain open during government imposed closings and/or restrictions due to COVID-19.
The extent of COVID-19’s impact on our financials and results of operations will depend on the length of time that the pandemic continues, the effect of governmental regulations imposed in response to the pandemic, its effect on the demand for our products and our supply chain, and uncertainties surrounding the aforementioned. We cannot at this time predict the full impact of COVID-19 on our financial and operational results.
Seasonality
As discussed in Item 1 of this Form 10-K, the wine industry in general historically experiences seasonal fluctuations in revenues and net income. The Company typically has lower sales and net income during the first quarter and higher sales and net income during the fourth quarter due to seasonal holiday buying as well as wine club shipment timing. We anticipate similar trends in the future.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations are based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in the financial statements and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, the Company evaluates all of these estimates and assumptions. The following areas have been identified as critical accounting estimates because they have the potential to have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements, and because they are based on assumptions which are used in the accounting records to reflect, at a specific point in time, events whose ultimate outcome will not be known until a later date. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Inventory - Inventory consists of mainly bulk and bottled wine and is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost being determined on the first-in, first-out method. Costs associated with winemaking, and other costs associated with the manufacturing of products for resale, are recorded as inventory. In accordance with general practice within the wine industry, wine inventories are included in current assets, although a portion of such inventories may be aged for periods longer than one year. As required, the Company reduces the carrying value of inventories that are obsolete or in excess of estimated usage to estimated net realizable value. The Company’s estimates of net realizable value are based on analyses and assumptions including, but not limited to, historical usage, future demand and market requirements. Reductions to the carrying value of inventories are recorded in cost of sales. If future demand and/or pricing for the Company’s products are less than previously estimated, then the carrying value of the inventories may be required to be reduced, resulting in additional expense and reduced profitability. Inventory write-downs of $6.4 million and $2.0 million were recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The majority of the increase in inventory write-downs for the 2020 period as compared to the 2019 period was related to the $3.5 million recognized for the 2020 vintage with smoke taint exposure from the 2020 wildfires.
In a strategic effort to maximize asset utilization in 2019, the Company increased focus on supply chain management. The Company reduced planned production in an effort to re-align supply with changes in forecasted demand. In the third quarter of 2019, the Company finalized a review of standard overhead applied to bulk wine inventory and bulk wine inventory reserves in the current market and subsequently increased its reserve estimate from 50% to 75% of total projected bulk wine sale losses. As a result of this change in estimate, bulk wine inventory was reduced by $1.2 million, resulting in a decrease to net income of $1.2 million or $0.05 per diluted share for fiscal year 2019.
Vineyard Development Costs - The Company capitalizes internal vineyard development costs when developing new vineyards or replacing or improving existing vineyards. These costs consist primarily of the costs of the vines and expenditures related to labor and materials to prepare the land and construct vine trellises. Amortization of such costs is recorded on a straight-line basis over the estimated economic useful life of the vineyard, which can be up to 25 years. As circumstances warrant, the Company re-evaluates the recoverability of capitalized costs, and will record impairment charges if required. The Company has not recorded any significant impairment charges for its vineyards unless related to the sale of an asset during the two year period ended December 31, 2020.
Review of Long-lived Assets for Impairment - For intangible assets with definite lives, impairment testing is required if conditions exist that indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. For intangible assets with indefinite lives and for goodwill, impairment testing is required at least annually or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that these assets might be impaired. Other than goodwill, the Company currently has no intangible assets with indefinite lives. All of the Company’s goodwill and substantially all definite-lived intangible assets resulted from the acquisitions of Seghesio Family Vineyards in May 2011 and Seven Hills Winery in January 2016. Amortization of definite-lived intangible assets is recorded on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from 7 to 20 years. The Company evaluates goodwill for impairment at the end of each year or more often if a triggering event occurs, and has concluded that goodwill is not impaired.
The Company evaluates long-lived assets, including definite-lived intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Long-lived assets consist primarily of property and equipment and intangible assets with definite lives. Circumstances that might cause the Company to evaluate its long-lived assets for impairment could include a significant decline in the prices the Company or the industry can charge for its products, which could be caused by general economic or other factors, changes in laws or regulations that make it difficult or more costly for the Company to distribute its products to its markets at prices which generate adequate returns, natural disasters, significant decrease in demand for the Company’s products or significant increase in the costs to manufacture the Company’s products.
Recoverability of long-lived assets is measured using a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset group to the fair value or future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset group. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. The Company groups its long-lived assets with other assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities (or asset group). This would typically be at the property level which is in the Business section of this Form 10-K.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded impairment charges of $1.3 million and $2.2 million, respectively, to write-down the carrying value of a portion of construction in progress expenses no longer viable to the long-term project related to renovations of tasting rooms, right-of-use lease asset related to the relocation of our administrative offices, vineyards and apple orchards held for sale to fair value less cost to sell.
Depletion allowances - The Company pays depletion allowances to its distributors based on their sales to their customers. These allowances are estimated on a monthly basis by the Company, and allowances are accrued as a reduction of sales. Subsequently, distributors will bill the Company for actual depletions, which may be different from the Company’s estimate. Any such differences are recognized in sales when the bill is received. The Company has historically been able to estimate depletion allowances without any material differences between actual and estimated expense.
Restructuring
During 2018, the Company committed to various restructuring activities (the “2018 Restructuring Program”) including the termination of a vineyard operating lease agreement in Oregon and certain departmental reorganizations. Restructuring charges of $0.1 million and $1.3 million were incurred in the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The Company has incurred $1.4 million of restructuring charges since the inception of the restructuring plan consisting of $0.9 million employee related costs, $0.4 million of asset impairment charges associated with leasehold improvements under the terminated vineyard operating lease agreement, and $0.1 million of other restructuring costs associated with departmental reorganization activities. The fair value of impaired leasehold improvements was determined using the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the assets. The Company’s restructuring activities under the 2018 Restructuring Program were substantially complete as of March 31, 2019.
During 2020, the Company committed to various restructuring activities (the “2020 Restructuring Program”) including the closure of the Double Canyon Vineyards tasting room, restructuring of management, changes in sales, marketing, and Direct to Consumer organizational structure, and transitioning of information technology services and export fulfillment to outsourced support models. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred $1.4 million of restructuring charges, consisting of $1.1 million employee related costs, $0.2 million of asset impairment charges associated with the tasting room assets upon closure, and $0.1 of other restructuring costs associated with departmental reorganization activities. The Company’s restructuring activities under the 2020 Restructuring Program were substantially complete as of September 30, 2020.
The Company recorded costs of $1.2 million for employee related restructuring activities and paid $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The liability related to restructuring activities was $0.3 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Results of Operations
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. See the Annual Report on Form 10-K/A for the year ended December 31, 2019 for additional information on the restatement of previously issued consolidated financial statements.
Net Sales
Wholesale net sales increased $0.8 million, or 3%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increased domestic wine sales as well as decreased price support compared to 2019, partially offset by decreased export wine sales to cruise and transportation segments and Asia. The increase in domestic wine sales was driven by increased consumer demand in Off-Premise locations and the timing of inventory fulfillment with new wholesale distributors, partially offset by a decrease in On-Premise sales due to COVID-19 containment measures.
Direct to consumer net sales decreased $0.4 million, or 2%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by reduced wine sold in the tasting rooms and during special events, as well as decreased wine club sales, partially offset by successful strategic Ecommerce offers compared to 2019. The decrease in wine sold in the tasting rooms is driven by the temporary closures of tasting rooms from March through June 2020 and again from November through December 2020 related to COVID-19 containment measures, reduced operating capacity due to COVID-19 containment measures, and temporary closures of tasting rooms related to poor air quality and extreme heat during the August and September 2020 wildfires in California and Oregon. Reduced wine sales from special events were due to cancellations of all special events from March 2020 through the end of the year. The decrease in wine club sales was driven by lower membership compared to 2019 and increased skipped club shipments, offered in lieu of cancellations, partially offset by increased order value of club shipments due to customizations. Overall, Direct to consumer cases sold increased compared to 2019, but net sales decreased due to the higher price support associated with Ecommerce sales.
Other net sales, which include bulk wine and grape sales, custom winemaking services, event fees and retail sales, decreased $3.4 million or 47%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by reduced event fees and non-wine retail sales due to capacity limitations of tasting rooms and event cancellations as a result of COVID-19 containment measures, lower sales from custom winemaking services caused by a lower harvest year for many clients, as well as a decrease in grapes sold as compared to 2019.
Gross Profit
Wholesale gross profit increased $0.8 million, or 7%, in 2020 as compared to 2019 driven by increased domestic wine sales as discussed above, decreased cost of goods sold and decreased price support. Decreased costs were primarily driven by a shift in sales mix to wine labels with a lower cost of goods sold, as well as a transition to a lower cost vintage on the top selling label. Decreased price support was related to a shift in channel mix, with a smaller portion of sales occurring in the On-Premise channel, which generally requires higher price support to achieve competitive pricing, in 2020 as compared to 2019. Gross margin percentage, which is defined as gross profit as a percentage of net sales, increased 150 basis points primarily driven by decreased cost of goods sold and decreased price support compared to the prior period.
Direct to consumer gross profit decreased $1.8 million, or 10%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by reduced wine sold in the tasting rooms and during special events, partially offset by successful strategic Ecommerce offers compared to 2019. The negative impact on hospitality services was due to operating limitations as a result of COVID-19 containment measures and intermittent closures due to the poor air quality and extreme heat related to the 2020 wildfires in California and Oregon. Direct to consumer gross margin percentage decreased 560 basis points in 2020 primarily driven by release of higher cost vintages on Direct to consumer labels and Ecommerce offers driving higher price support with a less favorable sales mix compared to 2019.
Other includes a gross loss on bulk wine and grape sales, custom winemaking services, event fees and non-wine retail sales and increased $4.4 million, or 135%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase in other gross loss is primarily driven by $3.5 million inventory write-downs related to the 2020 vintage grapes affected by smoke taint exposure, reduced event fees and non-wine retail sales due to the tasting rooms’ operating limitations and intermittent closures as discussed above
Operating Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $3.7 million, or 21%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by reduced compensation as a result of the 2020 Restructuring Program, decreased travel costs related to COVID-19, and reduced selling expenses compared to 2019. Both reductions in compensation and selling expenses were part of the Company's strategic initiatives for a more effective cost structure.
General and administrative expenses decreased $0.4 million, or 4%, in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to nonrecurring severance and employee recruiting services incurred in 2019, as well as decreased travel costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense, net, increased less than $0.1 million, or 3%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by a lower patronage dividend received and lower capitalized interest on vineyard development projects during the current period.
Other income, net, increased less than $0.1 million, or 9%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by the discontinuation of apple consignment sales, which yielded a loss, in 2019, partially offset by lower interest income and insurance proceeds received in 2020.
Income Tax Benefit
Our income tax benefit increased $1.0 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. The effective tax rate was 32.5% for 2020
as compared to 26.8% for 2019. The difference between the consolidated effective income tax rate and the U.S. federal statutory was primarily attributable to state taxes, the federal net operating loss carryback, and other adjustments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
The Company’s principal sources of liquidity are its available cash and cash equivalents, investments in available for sale securities, funds generated from operations and bank borrowings. The Company’s primary cash needs are to fund working capital requirements and capital expenditures. Despite the negative effects of COVID-19 on our business, the Company has maintained adequate liquidity to meet working capital requirements, fund capital expenditures, meet payroll, repay scheduled principal and interest payments on debt, and maintain compliance with debt covenants.
In response to the current macro-economic environment, we protected our financial position and liquidity as evidenced by the following items: we managed our operating expenses closely and limited discretionary spending; reduced and/or deferred capital projects where prudent; actively managed our working capital, including supporting our business partners most impacted by the pandemic through extended terms and closely monitoring our customers’ solvency and our ability to collect from them; and held back plans for a share repurchase program to preserve liquidity.
Revolving Credit Facility
In March 2013, Crimson and its subsidiaries entered into a $60.0 million revolving credit facility (the “2013 Revolving Credit Facility”) with American AgCredit, FLCA, as agent for the lenders identified in the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility, comprised of a revolving loan facility (the “Revolving Loan”) and a term revolving loan facility (the “Term Revolving Loan”), which together are secured by substantially all of Crimson’s assets. In March 2018, Crimson and its subsidiaries entered into the second amendment to the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility with American AgCredit, FLCA (the “Second Amendment”). The Second Amendment modified certain provisions of the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility, including, among other things, extending the Revolving Loan and Term Revolving Loan termination dates to March 31, 2023, extending the Term Revolving Loan conversion date to March 31, 2023 and extending the Term Revolving Loan maturity date to March 31, 2033.
The Revolving Loan is for up to $10.0 million in the aggregate for a five year term, and the Term Revolving Loan is for up to $50.0 million in the aggregate for a fifteen year term. All obligations of Crimson under the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility are collateralized by certain real property, including vineyards and certain winery facilities of Crimson, accounts receivable, inventory and intangible assets. In addition to unused line fees ranging from 0.15% to 0.25%, rates for the borrowings are priced based on a performance grid tied to certain financial ratios and the London Interbank Offered Rate. The 2013 Revolving Credit Facility can be used to fund acquisitions, capital projects and other general corporate purposes. Covenants include the maintenance of specified debt and equity ratios, limitations on the incurrence of additional indebtedness, limitations on dividends and other distributions to shareholders and restrictions on certain mergers, consolidations and sales of assets. No amounts have been borrowed under the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility to date.
Term Loans
Term loans consist of the following:
(i) On November 10, 2015, Pine Ridge Winery, LLC (“PRW Borrower”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Crimson, entered into a senior secured term loan agreement (the “2015 Term Loan”) with American AgCredit, FLCA (“Lender”) for an aggregate principal amount of $16.0 million. Amounts outstanding under the 2015 Term Loan bear a fixed interest rate of 5.24% per annum.
The 2015 Term Loan will mature on October 1, 2040 (the "2015 Term Loan Maturity Date"). On the first day of each January, April, July and October, commencing January 1, 2016, PRW Borrower is required to make a principal payment in the amount of $160,000 and an interest payment equal to the amount of all interest accrued through the previous day. A final payment of all unpaid principal, interest and any other charges with respect to the 2015 Term Loan shall be due and payable on the 2015 Loan Maturity Date.
The full $16.0 million was drawn at closing and the 2015 Term Loan can be used to fund acquisitions, capital projects and other general corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2020, $12.6 million in principal was outstanding on the 2015 Term Loan, and unamortized loan fees were less than $0.1 million.
(ii) On June 29, 2017, Double Canyon Vineyards, LLC (the “DCV Borrower” and, individually and collectively with the PRW Borrower, “Borrower”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Crimson, entered into a senior secured term loan agreement (the “2017 Term Loan”) with the Lender for an aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million. Amounts outstanding under the 2017 Term Loan bear a fixed interest rate of 5.39% per annum.
The 2017 Term Loan will mature on July 1, 2037 (the "2017 Loan Maturity Date"). On the first day of each January, April, July and October, commencing October 1, 2017, DCV Borrower is required to make a principal payment in the amount of $125,000 and an interest payment equal to the amount of all interest accrued through the previous day. A final payment of all unpaid principal, interest and any other charges with respect to the 2017 Term Loan shall be due and payable on the 2017 Loan Maturity Date.
The full $10.0 million was drawn at closing and the 2017 Term Loan can be used to fund acquisitions, capital projects and other general corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2020, $8.3 million in principal was outstanding on the 2017 Term Loan, and unamortized loan fees were less than $0.1 million.
Borrower’s obligations under the 2015 Term Loan and 2017 Term Loan are guaranteed by the Company. All obligations of Borrower under the 2015 Term Loan and 2017 Term Loan are collateralized by certain real property of the Company. Borrower’s covenants include the maintenance of a specified debt service coverage ratio and certain customary affirmative and negative covenants, including limitations on the incurrence of additional indebtedness; limitations on distributions to shareholders; and restrictions on certain investments, sale of assets and merging or consolidating with other parties.
(iii) In March 2020, in light of the global outbreak of the COVID-19 virus, Congress passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act. The CARES Act included a small business stimulus program called the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), which is intended to provide loans to qualified businesses to, as originally implemented, support eight weeks of payroll and other identified costs. PPP loans are eligible for partial or full forgiveness. On June 3, 2020, Congress passed the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020 which, among other things, extended the loan forgiveness period for PPP loans from eight weeks to 24 weeks and increased the cap on usage of the loan on non-payroll costs from 25% to 40%.
In April 2020, the Company successfully secured a $3.8 million PPP loan. Under the CARES Act, the loan is eligible for forgiveness for the portion used to cover payroll costs and other specified non-payroll costs, including interest on mortgage obligations, rent and utilities (provided any non-payroll costs do not exceed 40% of the forgiven amount) over an eight-week or 24-week period after the loan is made if employee and compensation levels are maintained. The Company intends to apply for forgiveness of amounts received under the PPP in accordance with the requirements of the CARES Act, as amended. Any loan amounts forgiven will be removed from liabilities recorded. While the Company used the proceeds of the PPP Loan only for permissible purposes, there can be no assurance that it will be eligible for forgiveness of the PPP Loan, in full or in part.
On April 22, 2020, Crimson entered into an unsecured term loan agreement (the “2020 PPP Term Loan”) with the Lender for an aggregate principal amount of $3.8 million. Amounts outstanding under the 2020 PPP Term Loan bear a fixed interest rate of 1.00% per annum. If all or a portion of the 2020 PPP Term Loan is not forgiven, any accrued and unpaid interest shall be added to the outstanding balance (“Adjusted Loan Balance”).
The 2020 PPP Term Loan will mature on April 1, 2022 (the “2020 Loan Maturity Date”). Based on the current terms of the loan, there are two scenarios of payment. The first scenario calls for the payments on the loan to commence on the first day of the month following the date on which the Lender receives the applicable forgiveness amount, if any, from the Small Business Administration (“SBA”), if a balance on the loan remains after the forgiveness amount has been applied. If all obligations under the loan are forgiven by the SBA, no payments will be required. The second scenario applies if Crimson fails to timely apply for forgiveness of the 2020 PPP Term Loan. In this second scenario, the payments on the loan will commence on the first day of the month that is 10 months after the end of the eight-week period following the date of loan origination, April 22, 2020. Crimson is required to make payments of equal monthly principal and interest based on the Adjusted Loan Balance. A final payment of all unpaid principal, interest and any other charges with respect to the 2020 PPP Term Loan shall be due and payable on the 2020 Loan Maturity Date. The amortization period of equal monthly principal and interest will be adjusted based on which payment scenario is triggered. While the loan currently has a two-year maturity, the amended law permits the borrower to request a five-year maturity from its lender.
The full $3.8 million was drawn at closing and the 2020 PPP Term Loan can be used for the purposes authorized and approved in the CARES Act. As of December 31, 2020, $3.8 million in principal was outstanding on the 2020 PPP Term Loan.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flow activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Cash provided by operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $13.6 million in 2020, consisting primarily of $6.4 million of net loss adjusted for $15.3 million of non-cash items such as $8.3 million of depreciation and amortization, $6.4 million from the loss of inventory write-offs, $1.4 million of restructuring charges, and $1.4 million of impairment charges to adjust the carrying value of tasting room construction in progress renovation projects. Additionally, there were $4.7 million of net cash inflows related to changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily due to a decrease of $5.5 million in inventory and $2.0 million in accounts receivable, partially offset by a decrease of $2.2 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities and an increase of $0.4 million in other current assets.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $3.6 million in 2019, consisting primarily of $5.7 million of net loss adjusted for $11.8 million of non-cash items such as $8.9 million of depreciation and amortization, $2.2 million of impairment charges to adjust the cost of assets sold or held for sale, and $2.0 million from the loss of inventory write-offs, partially offset by an increase of $1.7 million benefit for income taxes. Additionally, there were $2.5 million of net cash outflows related to changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily due to an increase of $2.9 million in accounts receivable and a decrease of $2.4 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, partially offset by a reduction of $2.8 million in inventory.
Cash provided by investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $0.3 million in 2020, consisting primarily of proceeds from sale of land in Klickitat County, Washington totaling $1.9 million and the net redemptions of available for sale investments of $1.5 million, partially offset by capital expenditures of $3.1 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $4.7 million in 2019, consisting primarily of net redemptions of available for sale investments of $9.3 million, partially offset by capital expenditures of $5.4 million.
Cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $2.4 million in 2020, consisting primarily of proceeds of the 2020 PPP Term Loan totaling $3.8 million, partially offset by principal payments on our 2015 and 2017 Term Loans of $1.4 million.
Net cash used in financing activities was $4.7 million in 2019, which reflects the repurchase of shares of our common stock at a repurchase price of $3.5 million, principal payments on our 2015 and 2017 Term Loans of $1.1 million and contingent consideration payments of $0.1 million associated with the Seven Hills Winery acquisition.
Share Repurchases
In December 2018, the Company commenced a share repurchase program (the “2019 Winter Repurchase Program”) that provided for the repurchase of up to $2.0 million of outstanding common stock. Under the 2019 Winter Repurchase Program, any repurchased shares were constructively retired. On April 30, 2019, the 2019 Winter Repurchase Program was completed. Under the total 2019 Winter Repurchase Program, the Company repurchased 253,324 shares at a repurchase price of $2.0 million.
In September 2019, the Company commenced a share repurchase program (the "2019 Summer Repurchase Program") that provided for the repurchase of up to $2.0 million of outstanding common stock. Under the 2019 Summer Repurchase Program, any repurchased shares are constructively retired. On December 12, 2019, the 2019 Summer Repurchase Program was completed. Under the total 2019 Summer Repurchase Program, the Company repurchased 283,208 shares at a repurchase price of $2.0 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
None.