ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, or this Annual Report. In this Annual Report, we use the term, the "Company," "CoreCivic," "we," "us," and "our" to refer to CoreCivic, Inc. and its subsidiaries unless context indicates otherwise. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those described under Item 1A, "Risk Factors" and included in other portions of this report.
OVERVIEW
We are a diversified government solutions company with the scale and experience needed to solve tough government challenges in flexible, cost-effective ways. Through three segments, CoreCivic Safety, CoreCivic Community, and CoreCivic Properties, we provide a broad range of solutions to government partners that serve the public good through corrections and detention management, a network of residential reentry centers to help address America's recidivism crisis, and government real estate solutions. We have been a flexible and dependable partner for government for more than 35 years. Our employees are driven by a deep sense of service, high standards of professionalism and a responsibility to help government better the public good.
As of December 31, 2020, through our CoreCivic Safety segment, we operated 47 correctional and detention facilities, 42 of which we owned, with a total design capacity of approximately 70,000 beds. Through our CoreCivic Community segment, we owned and operated 27 residential reentry centers with a total design capacity of approximately 5,000 beds. In addition, through our CoreCivic Properties segment, we owned 15 properties for lease to third parties and used by government agencies, totaling 2.7 million square feet. We are the nation's largest owner of partnership correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities and one of the largest prison operators in the United States. We also believe we are the largest private owner of real estate used by U.S. government agencies. Our size and experience provide us with significant credibility with our current and prospective customers, and enable us to generate economies of scale in purchasing power for food services, health care and other supplies and services we offer to our government partners.
See Item 1, "Business - Overview" for a description of how we were organized as a real estate investment trust, or REIT, as of December 31, 2020, and our plans to revoke our REIT election and convert to a taxable C Corporation effective January 1, 2021.
Our Business
Through our CoreCivic Safety and CoreCivic Community segments, we are compensated for providing bed capacity and correctional, detention, and residential reentry services at a per diem rate based upon actual or minimum guaranteed occupancy levels. Federal, state, and local governments are constantly under budgetary constraints putting pressure on governments to control correctional budgets, including per diem rates our customers pay to us as well as pressure on appropriations for building new prison capacity.
The solutions we provide to our federal customers continue to be a significant component of our business. We believe our ability to provide flexible solutions and fulfill emergent needs of our federal customers would be very difficult and costly to replicate in the public sector.
In February 2021, President Biden announced plans to allow certain migrants to pursue asylum in the United States while awaiting their proceedings in immigration courts, reversing a policy of the prior administration, which required these asylum seekers to wait in Mexico during the pendency of their immigration court proceedings.
On January 26, 2021, President Biden issued the Executive Order on Reforming Our Incarceration System to Eliminate the Use of Privately Operated Criminal Detention Facilities, or the Private Prison EO. The Private Prison EO directs the Attorney General to not renew United States Department of Justice, or DOJ, contracts with privately operated criminal detention facilities. Two agencies of the DOJ, the Federal Bureau of Prisons, or the BOP, and the United States Marshals Service, or the USMS, utilize our services. The BOP houses inmates who have been convicted, and the USMS is generally responsible for detainees who are awaiting trial. The BOP has experienced a steady decline in inmate populations over the last seven years, a trend that has been accelerated by the novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, pandemic. We currently have one prison contract with the BOP, accounting for 2% ($39.2 million) of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was recently renewed through November 2022.
Unlike the BOP, the USMS does not own detention capacity and relies on the private sector, along with county jails, for its detainee population. We do not believe the USMS currently has sufficient capacity that satisfies their current needs without the private sector, and we are not currently aware of an alternative solution for the USMS. We currently have eight detention facilities that have separate contracts where the USMS is the primary customer that all expire at various times over the next several years, with the exception of two contracts that have indefinite terms. Non-renewal of these contracts would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, USMS accounted for 21% ($396.3 million) of our total revenue.
Additionally, at the beginning of 2020, we expected a reduction in Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE, populations throughout 2020 compared with 2019 because of a dramatic rise in such populations during 2019, when southern border apprehensions reached the highest levels in over a decade, as we did not believe these high levels would be sustained. However, the decision near the end of the first quarter of 2020, which continued throughout the duration of 2020, by the federal government to deny entry at the United States southern border to asylum-seekers and anyone crossing the southern border without proper documentation or authority in an effort to contain the spread of COVID-19, amplified the reduction in people being apprehended and detained by ICE during 2020. A protracted denial in United States southern border entries of asylum-seekers and undocumented immigrants, or continued disruptions in the criminal justice system could have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, several of our state partners had been experiencing improvements in their budgets, which helped us secure recent per diem increases at certain facilities. Further, several of our existing state partners, as well as prospective state partners, have been experiencing growth in offender populations and overcrowded conditions, are considering alternative correctional capacity for their aged and inefficient infrastructure, or are seeking cost savings by utilizing the private sector. Since the beginning of 2018, we have completed the intake of new inmate populations as a result of new contracts with Kansas, Kentucky, Mississippi, Ohio, Nevada, South Carolina, and Vermont, and during the third quarter of 2020, we entered into a new contract with Idaho.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and we currently expect that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to have, a negative impact on many of our state partners' budgets, though we cannot predict the ultimate impact COVID-19 will have on our revenue and per diem rates from our state partners.
We have implemented enhanced hygiene practices, suspended visitation in consultation with our government partners, separated vulnerable inmate populations for their additional protection, followed guidelines provided by the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or CDC, for Correctional and Detention Facilities, and have taken many other actions intended to limit the spread of COVID-19 among our staff and residents within our correctional, detention, and reentry facilities. However, we cannot predict government responses to an increase in staff or residents testing positive for COVID-19 within public and private correctional, detention and reentry facilities, nor can we predict COVID-19 related restrictions on individuals, businesses, and services that disrupt the criminal justice system. Certain government agencies have released, may be considering releasing, or may be experiencing pressure to release, certain inmates and detainees as a result of COVID-19, including those inmates and detainees considered vulnerable to serious illness or death in the event of COVID-19 infection, those with sentences ending in the next year, or those being held on a minor supervision violation. Further, we cannot predict government policies on prosecutions and newly ordered legal restrictions as a result of COVID-19 that affect the
number of people placed in correctional, detention, and reentry facilities. We currently expect the federal government’s policy of denying entry at the United States southern border to asylum-seekers and anyone crossing the southern border without proper documentation or authority, as well as the disruptions to the criminal justice system, to persist at least until a widely accepted treatment and/or vaccine for COVID-19 is widely disseminated, which could result in a further reduction in the number of offenders placed in our facilities. Such actions could, either alone or in combination, have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
COVID-19 notwithstanding, we believe the long-term growth opportunities of our business remain attractive as government agencies consider their emergent needs (including capacity to help mitigate the spread of infectious disease), as well as the efficiency and offender programming opportunities we provide, as flexible solutions to satisfy our partners' needs. Further, we expect our partners, and prospective partners, to continue to face challenges in maintaining old facilities, developing new facilities, and expanding current facilities for additional capacity, which could result in increased future demand for the solutions we provide.
Governments continue to experience many significant spending demands which have constrained correctional budgets limiting their ability to expand existing facilities or construct new facilities. We believe the outsourcing of corrections and detention management services to private operators allows governments to manage increasing inmate populations while simultaneously controlling costs. We believe our customers discover that partnering with private operators to provide residential services to their offenders introduces competition to their correctional system, resulting in improvements to the quality and cost of services throughout their correctional system. Further, the use of facilities owned and managed by private operators allows governments to expand correctional capacity without incurring large capital commitments and allows them to avoid long-term pension obligations for their employees.
We also believe that having beds immediately available to our partners provides us with a distinct competitive advantage when bidding on new contracts. We believe the most significant opportunities for growth are in providing our government partners with available beds within facilities we currently own or that we will develop. Over the long-term, we would like to see meaningful utilization of our available capacity and better visibility from our customers into their potential future needs before we develop new correctional or detention capacity on a speculative basis. We will, however, respond to customer demand and may develop or expand correctional and detention facilities when we believe potential long-term returns justify the capital deployment, like the 2019 expansion of our Otay Mesa Detention Center in San Diego, California. We expanded the Otay Mesa facility by 512 beds as a result of long-standing demand from the USMS and ICE and limited detention capacity in the Southwest region of the United States. Both the USMS and ICE currently utilize the Otay Mesa Detention Center under an existing contract that enables both agencies to utilize the additional capacity. We also believe that owning the facilities in which we provide management services enables us to more rapidly replace business lost compared with managed-only facilities, since we can offer the same beds to new and existing customers and, with customer consent, may have more flexibility in moving our existing populations to facilities with available capacity. Our management contracts generally provide our customers with the right to terminate our management contracts at any time without cause.
We are actively engaged in marketing our available capacity as solutions to meet the needs of potential customers. Historically, we have been successful in substantially filling our inventory of available beds and the beds that we have constructed. For example, in the second quarter of 2019, we announced that we entered into new contracts under inter-governmental service agreements, or IGSAs, with ICE at our previously idled 910-bed Torrance County Detention Facility in New Mexico and with the USMS at our previously idled 1,422-bed Eden Detention Center in Texas. More recently, in the third quarter of 2020, we entered into a new contract under an IGSA between the city of Cushing, Oklahoma and the USMS, to utilize our 1,600-bed Cimarron Correctional Facility in Oklahoma. We had previously announced our intention to idle the Cimarron facility during the third quarter of 2020, predominantly due to a lower number of inmate populations from the state of Oklahoma resulting from COVID-19, combined with the consequential impact of COVID-19 on the State's budget. The new management contract commenced on September 15, 2020. Filling these available beds could provide substantial growth in revenues, cash flow, and earnings per share. However, we can provide no assurance that we will be able to fill our available beds.
We also offer our customers an attractive portfolio of correctional, detention, and reentry facilities that can be leased for various needs as an alternative to providing "turn-key" correctional, detention, and residential reentry bed space and services to our government partners. In December 2019, we entered into a lease with the Kentucky Department of Corrections, or KYDOC, for our previously idled 656-bed Southeast Correctional Complex in Wheelwright, Kentucky. The lease commenced in mid-2020 and has an initial term of ten years and includes five two-year renewal options. The lease of this facility, along with the lease of our 2,400-bed North Fork Correctional Facility to the Oklahoma Department of Corrections, or ODOC, originating in 2016 and the lease of our 2,560-bed California City Correctional Center to the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation originating in 2013, exemplify our ability to react quickly to our partners' needs with innovative and flexible solutions that make the best use of taxpayer dollars. We previously operated these three correctional facilities for various state and federal partners. We intend to pursue additional opportunities to lease prison facilities to government and other third-party operators in need of correctional capacity.
On January 24, 2018, we entered into a 20-year lease agreement with the Kansas Department of Corrections, or KDOC, for a 2,432-bed correctional facility to be constructed in Lansing, Kansas. We commenced construction of the facility in the first quarter of 2018. In December 2019, the Lansing facility began accepting offenders into the 512-bed minimum security complex ahead of schedule, with the remaining 1,920-bed medium/maximum security complex completed in January 2020. The new facility replaces the Lansing Correctional Facility, Kansas' largest correctional complex for adult male inmates, originally constructed in 1863. This transaction represents the first development of a privately owned, build-to-suit correctional facility to be operated by a government agency through a long-term lease agreement. We are responsible for facility maintenance throughout the 20-year term of the lease, at which time ownership will revert to the state of Kansas.
In February 2021, we entered into two 30-year lease agreements with the Alabama Department of Corrections, or ADOC, for the development of two correctional facilities in Alabama. Final lease costs for both properties will become available when project financing is completed. Construction of both facilities, which will contain an aggregate of approximately 7,000 beds, is expected to commence later in 2021 or the beginning of 2022. The two facilities are expected to be ready for occupancy once construction is completed in approximately three years. Both facilities will be leased, operated, and staffed by the ADOC. We will retain ownership and be responsible for facility maintenance throughout the term of the leases. With the extensively aged criminal justice infrastructure in the U.S. today, and contract awards from the KDOC and the ADOC demonstrating our ability to bring important flexible solutions to government agencies, we believe we can bring solutions like these to other government agencies.
We also remain steadfast in our efforts to contain costs. Approximately 61% of our operating expenses consist of salaries and benefits. The turnover rate for correctional officers for our company, and for the corrections industry in general, remains high. We are making investments in systems and processes intended to help manage our workforce more efficiently and effectively, especially with respect to overtime and costs of turnover. We are also focused on workers' compensation and medical benefits costs for our employees due to continued rising healthcare costs throughout the country. Effectively managing these staffing costs requires a long-term strategy to control such costs, and we continue to dedicate resources to enhance our benefits, provide specialized training and career development opportunities to our staff in order to attract and retain quality personnel. Finally, we are evaluating cost savings opportunities in areas such as inmate medical, utilities, and maintenance, among others. Through ongoing company-wide initiatives, we continue to focus on efforts to manage costs and improve operating efficiencies.
Through the combination of our initiatives to (i) increase our revenues by increasing the utilization of our available beds, (ii) deliver new bed capacity through new facility construction and expansion opportunities, (iii) invest in real estate-only solutions, (iv) grow the utilization of our community corrections facilities, (v) acquire other businesses that expand the range of solutions we provide to government partners and diversify our cash flows, and (vi) contain our operating expenses, we believe we will be able to maintain our competitive advantage and continue to diversify the range of services we provide to our customers at an attractive price, thereby producing value for our stockholders.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The consolidated financial statements in this report are prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. As such, we are required to make certain estimates, judgments, and assumptions that we believe are reasonable based upon the information available. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. A summary of our significant accounting policies is described in Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in this Annual Report. The significant accounting policies and estimates which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results include the following:
Asset impairments. The primary risk we face for asset impairment charges, excluding goodwill, is associated with facilities we own. As of December 31, 2020, we had $2.6 billion in property and equipment, including $132.7 million in long-lived assets, excluding equipment, at five idled CoreCivic Safety correctional facilities. The carrying values of the five idled facilities as of December 31, 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, we also had one idled non-core facility in our Safety segment containing 240 beds with a total net book value of $3.1 million; three facilities in our Community segment, all of which became idle during 2020, containing an aggregate of 650 beds with an aggregate net book value of $9.2 million; and two previously leased properties in our Properties segment containing 55,000 square feet with an aggregate net book value of $9.5 million. We incurred operating expenses at these idled facilities of approximately $7.6 million, $7.1 million, and $7.7 million during the period they were idle for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Two of the three idled facilities in our Community segment are located in Oklahoma. As a result of the lower resident populations from the state of Oklahoma and the impact of COVID-19, we also transferred the remaining resident populations at our 390-bed Tulsa Transitional Center to Oklahoma's system, idling the Tulsa facility during the third quarter of 2020. Closure of the Tulsa facility followed the closure of the 200-bed Oklahoma City Transitional Center during the second quarter of 2020, and the 289-bed Turley Residential Center in Oklahoma in 2019. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the BOP awarded a new contract to us for residential reentry and home confinement services pursuant to a solicitation for capacity and services to be provided in the state of Oklahoma. As a result, we reactivated the Turley Residential Center during the first quarter of 2021, and provide the BOP additional reentry services at our owned and operated Oklahoma Reentry Opportunity Center (formerly known as the Carver Transitional Center), which supplements the existing utilization by the state of Oklahoma.
During the third quarter of 2020, Adams County, Colorado, notified us that, pursuant to a re-bid of the managed-only contract at the 184-bed Henderson Transitional Center, a facility in the Community segment we leased from Adams County, it awarded the contract to another operator. We transitioned operations to the other operator upon expiration of the contract in January 2021.
On April 15, 2020, we sold an idled facility in our Community segment, containing 92 beds, for a gross sales price of $1.6 million. In anticipation of the sale, we reported an impairment charge of $0.5 million in the first quarter of 2020 based on the realizable value resulting from the sale. On May 26, 2020, we sold an idled non-core facility in our Safety segment, containing 200 beds with a net book value of $0.5 million at the time of the sale, for net proceeds of $3.3 million. The gain on the sale of $2.8 million was recognized in the second quarter of 2020.
On September 15, 2020, we announced that we entered into a new contract under an IGSA between the city of Cushing, Oklahoma and the USMS to utilize our 1,600-bed Cimarron Correctional Facility in our CoreCivic Safety segment. We had previously announced our intention to idle the Cimarron facility during the third quarter of 2020, predominantly due to a lower number of inmate populations from the state of Oklahoma resulting from COVID-19,
combined with the consequential impact of COVID-19 on the State's budget. The new management contract commenced on September 15, 2020, and has an initial term of three years, with unlimited 24-month extension options thereafter upon mutual agreement. As of December 31, 2020, the net book value of the Cimarron facility was $72.7 million.
We evaluate the recoverability of the carrying values of our long-lived assets, other than goodwill, when events suggest that an impairment may have occurred. Such events primarily include, but are not limited to, the termination of a management contract, a significant decrease in populations within a facility we own in our Safety and Community segments that we believe will be longer than short-term, and the expiration and non-renewal of lease agreements in our Properties segment.
We perform the impairment analyses for each of the idle facilities as well as any other properties with indicators of impairment. Our estimates of recoverability are initially based on projected undiscounted cash flows that are comparable to historical cash flows from management contracts or lease agreements at facilities similar to the idled facilities, including historical operations for the idled facilities when such facilities were operating. Our impairment evaluations also take into consideration our historical experience in securing new management contracts to utilize correctional facilities that had been previously idled for substantial periods of time. Such previously idled correctional facilities are currently being operated under contracts that continue to generate cash flows resulting in the recoverability of the net book value of the previously idled facilities by material amounts. We also perform sensitivity analyses that consider reductions to such cash flows. Our sensitivity analyses include reductions in projected cash flows by as much as half of the historical cash flows generated by the respective facility as well as prolonged periods of vacancies. As a result of our analyses, we reported an impairment charge of $9.8 million on one of the residential reentry facilities in the Community segment in Oklahoma, based on its anticipated use as a commercial real estate property rather than a reentry facility. The fair value measurement for these assets was estimated using unobservable Level 3 inputs, as defined in Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 820, "Fair Value Measurement," using market comparable data for similar properties in the local markets.
We also evaluate on a quarterly basis market developments for the potential utilization of each of these facilities in order to identify events that may cause us to reconsider our most recent assumptions. Such events could include negotiations with a prospective customer for the utilization of an idle facility at terms significantly less favorable than those used in our most recent impairment analysis, or changes in legislation surrounding a particular facility that could impact our ability to care for certain types of populations at such facility, or a demolition or substantial renovation of a facility. Further, a substantial increase in the number of available beds at other facilities we own could lead to a deterioration in market conditions and cash flows that we might be able to obtain under a new contract at our idle facilities. Although they are not frequently received, an unsolicited offer to purchase any of our idle facilities at amounts that are less than the carrying value could also cause us to reconsider the assumptions used in our most recent impairment analysis.
We can provide no assurance that we will be able to secure agreements to utilize our idle properties, or that we will not incur impairment charges in the future. By their nature, these estimates contain uncertainties with respect to the extent and timing of the respective cash flows due to potential delays or material changes to historical terms and conditions in contracts with prospective customers that could impact the estimate of cash flows. With respect to idle correctional facilities, we believe the long-term trends favor an increase in the utilization of our correctional facilities and management services. This belief is based on our experience in working with governmental agencies faced with significant budgetary challenges, which is a primary contributing factor to the lack of appropriated funding over the past decade to build new bed capacity by the federal and state governments with which we partner. Due to a variety of factors, the lead time to negotiate contracts with our federal and state partners to utilize idle bed capacity at correctional facilities is generally lengthy.
Goodwill impairments. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $5.9 million and $50.5 million, respectively, of goodwill, established in connection with multiple business combination transactions. Under the provisions of Accounting Standards Update, or ASU, 2017-04, "Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test of Goodwill Impairment," we perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then we perform a quantitative impairment test. If a quantitative test is required, we perform an assessment to identify the existence of impairment and to measure the excess of a reporting unit's carrying amount over its fair value by using a combination of various common valuation techniques, including market multiples and discounted cash flows under valuation methodologies that include an income approach and a market approach. Goodwill impairment tests are required to be performed at least annually. We perform our impairment tests during the fourth quarter, in connection with our budgeting process, and whenever circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. By their nature, valuation techniques are subject to considerable judgment and require estimates of future cash flows as well as other factors, which are often difficult to predict. Estimated fair values could change if there are changes in assumptions related to our capital structure and cost of debt and equity and operating cash flows, as well as considerations related to our equity valuation.
In connection with our annual impairment test for the goodwill associated with the Community reporting unit, during the fourth quarter of 2020, we performed a quantitative goodwill impairment test and concluded to record an impairment charge of $42.6 million, representing the full value of goodwill allocated to this reporting unit. Our analysis considered numerous factors, with the impairment predominantly driven by our consideration of the broad-based declines in the market capitalization of publicly-traded companies in our industry, primarily during the second half of 2020, as well as the reduction in cash flows from the COVID-19 pandemic and the anticipated change in tax structure effective January 1, 2021. We believe the cash flows in this segment will improve once effects of the pandemic subside, and intend to continue to pursue investments in this segment, which focuses on helping those entrusted to our care successfully transition to local communities and become productive citizens. This segment serves a critical need to parolees, defendants, and offenders who are serving their full sentence, the last portion of their sentence, waiting to be sentenced, awaiting trial while supervised in a community environment, or as an alternative to incarceration. We could generate additional goodwill from business combinations transacted in this segment in the future, which could result in additional charges if the goodwill becomes impaired under the requirements of ASU 2017-04.
We also performed qualitative assessments of goodwill recorded in our Safety reporting units in the fourth quarter of 2020, concluding there was no impairment for such goodwill. We recorded certain interim event-driven impairment charges in 2020. During the third quarter of 2020, we provided notice to the local county customers at two managed-only facilities in our CoreCivic Safety segment of our intent to terminate the contracts. We transitioned operations of the 1,046-bed Silverdale Detention Center in December of 2020 and transitioned operations at the 1,348-bed Metro-Davidson County Detention Facility in October 2020. As a result of these expected contract terminations, during the second quarter of 2020, we recognized goodwill impairment charges of $2.0 million associated with these two managed-only facilities' reporting units.
Self-funded insurance reserves. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $46.3 million and $41.9 million, respectively, in accrued liabilities for employee health, workers' compensation, and automobile insurance claims. We are significantly self-insured for employee health, workers' compensation, and automobile liability insurance claims. As such, our insurance expense is largely dependent on claims experience and our ability to control our claims. We have consistently accrued the estimated liability for employee health insurance claims based on our history of claims experience and the estimated time lag between the incident date and the date we pay the claims. We have accrued the estimated liability for workers' compensation claims based on an actuarial valuation of the outstanding liabilities, discounted to the net present value of the outstanding liabilities, using a combination of actuarial methods used to project ultimate losses, and our automobile insurance claims based on estimated development factors on claims incurred. The liability for employee health, workers' compensation, and automobile insurance includes estimates for both claims incurred and for claims incurred but not reported. These estimates could change in the future. It is possible that future cash flows and results of operations could be materially affected by changes in our assumptions, new developments, or by the effectiveness of our strategies.
Legal reserves. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $5.9 million and $14.1 million, respectively, in accrued liabilities under the provisions of ASC Subtopic 450-20, "Loss Contingencies," related to certain claims and legal proceedings in which we are involved. We have accrued our best estimate of the probable costs for the resolution of these claims, if estimable. In addition, we are subject to current and potential future claims and legal proceedings for which little or no accrual has been reflected because our current assessment of the potential exposure is nominal. These estimates have been developed in consultation with our General Counsel's office and, as appropriate, outside counsel handling these matters, and are based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. It is possible that future cash flows and results of operations could be materially affected by changes in our assumptions, new developments, or by the effectiveness of our litigation and settlement strategies.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our results of operations are impacted by the number of correctional and detention facilities we operated, including 42 we owned and five owned by our government partners (CoreCivic Safety), the number of residential reentry centers we owned and operated (CoreCivic Community), the number of facilities we leased to other operators (CoreCivic Properties), and the facilities we owned that were not in operation. The following table sets forth the changes in the number of facilities operated for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net income attributable to common stockholders was $54.2 million, or $0.45 per diluted share, compared with net income attributable to common stockholders of $188.9 million, or $1.59 per diluted share, for the previous year. Financial results in 2020 included $13.8 million of incremental expenses directly associated with COVID-19 (reflected in operating expenses), and $5.2 million of expenses associated with changes in our corporate tax structure (reflected in general and administrative expenses). In addition, financial results in 2020 reflected several special items, including $60.6 million of asset impairments, a net loss of $13.0 million on sale of real estate assets, $7.1 million of expenses associated with debt repayments, and a charge of $0.6 million for contingent consideration associated with an acquisition of a business, each as more fully discussed herein. Financial results in 2020 also reflected non-recurring deferred tax expense of $3.1 million reported during the first quarter of 2020. Financial results in 2019 were impacted by several non-routine transactions, including a $4.1 million gain, net of taxes, for the settlement of a contractual dispute with respect to revenues that would have been recognized during the previous several years, $4.7 million of asset impairments, and $0.6 million of expenses associated with debt refinancing transactions. Financial results in 2019 also included $9.5 million of start-up expenses associated with the activation of two previously idled facilities, as further described hereafter.
Our Current Operations
Our ongoing operations are organized into three principal business segments:
•
CoreCivic Safety segment, consisting of the 47 correctional and detention facilities that are owned, or controlled via a long-term lease, and managed by CoreCivic, as well as those correctional and detention facilities owned by third parties but managed by CoreCivic. CoreCivic Safety also includes the operating results of our subsidiary that provides transportation services to governmental agencies, TransCor America, LLC, or TransCor.
•
CoreCivic Community segment, consisting of the 27 residential reentry centers that are owned, or controlled via a long-term lease, and managed by CoreCivic. CoreCivic Community also includes the operating results of our electronic monitoring and case management service.
•
CoreCivic Properties segment, consisting of the 15 real estate properties owned by CoreCivic for lease to third parties and used by government agencies.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our total segment net operating income, which we define as facility revenue (including interest income associated with finance leases) less operating expenses, was divided among our three business segments as follows:
Facility Operations
A key performance indicator we use to measure the revenue and expenses associated with the operation of the correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities we own or manage is expressed in terms of a compensated man-day, which represents the revenue we generate and expenses we incur for one offender for one calendar day. Revenue and expenses per compensated man-day are computed by dividing facility revenue and expenses by the total number of compensated man-days during the period. A compensated man-day represents a calendar day for which we are paid for the occupancy of an offender. We believe the measurement is useful because we are compensated for operating and managing facilities at an offender per diem rate based upon actual or minimum guaranteed occupancy levels. We also measure our costs on a per compensated man-day basis, which is largely dependent upon the number of offenders we accommodate. Further, per compensated man-day measurements are also used to estimate our potential profitability based on certain occupancy levels relative to design capacity. Revenue and expenses per compensated man-day for all of the correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities placed into service that we owned or managed, exclusive of those held for lease, and for TransCor were as follows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenue
Total revenue consists of management revenue we generate through CoreCivic Safety and CoreCivic Community in the operation of correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities, as well as the revenue we generate from TransCor and our electronic monitoring and case management services. Total revenue also consists of lease revenue we generate through CoreCivic Properties from facilities we lease to third-party operators. The following table reflects the components of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
The $91.0 million, or 4.8%, decrease in total management revenue was primarily a result of a decrease in revenue of approximately $190.8 million caused primarily by a decrease in the average daily compensated population from 2019 to 2020, net of the revenue generated by one additional day of operations due to a leap year in 2020. In addition, revenue generated from our electronic monitoring and case management services decreased $5.0 million in 2020 when compared to 2019, primarily as a result of fewer court hearings and referrals due to COVID-19. The decrease in total management revenue was partially offset by an increase in revenue of approximately $104.8 million driven primarily by an increase of 6.3% in average revenue per compensated man-day. The increase in average revenue per compensated man-day was primarily the result of the effect of per diem increases at several of our facilities as well as a higher mix of federal populations at higher per diem rates.
Average daily compensated population decreased 6,715, or 10.5%, to 57,392 in 2020 compared to 64,107 in 2019. Average daily compensated population decreased primarily as a result of COVID-19, as further described hereafter, and the expiration of the contract with the BOP at our Adams County Correctional Center in the third quarter of 2019, which had an average daily compensated population of 1,997 inmates during the first three quarters of 2019 compared with 1,101 detainees during the first three quarters of 2020 under a new contract with ICE, as further described hereafter. Further, the completion of the transfer of California inmates held in our out-of-state facilities back to the state of California during the second quarter of 2019, also contributed to the decline in average daily compensated population during 2020. The decrease in average daily compensated population was also a result of a reduction in ICE populations, as previously described herein, net of additional populations resulting from the new IGSAs with ICE at the Adams County Correctional Center, which promptly transitioned from the BOP contract to the new IGSA with ICE during the third quarter of 2019, and at our previously idled Torrance facility during the second quarter of 2019. The decrease in average daily compensated population was partially offset by population increases from the USMS, including at our previously idled Eden facility due to a new contract executed in the second quarter of 2019, and from the state of Mississippi due to a new contract executed in the first quarter of 2020.
Average daily compensated populations also decreased at our 1,600-bed Cimarron Correctional Facility due to an agreement with the state of Oklahoma to idle the facility as a result of lower inmate populations in the State, combined with the impact of COVID-19 on the State's budget. The Oklahoma populations were removed from this facility during the third quarter of 2020. However, on September 15, 2020, we announced that we entered into a new contract under an IGSA between the city of Cushing, Oklahoma and the USMS to utilize the facility. As of December 31, 2020, the USMS occupied approximately 1,000 beds at the Cimarron facility.
The solutions we provide to our federal customers, including primarily ICE, the USMS, and the BOP, continue to be a significant component of our business. The federal customers in our Safety and Community segments generated approximately 52% and 51% of our total revenue in 2020 and 2019, respectively, decreasing $14.6 million, or 1.4%. As previously described herein, the reduction in federal revenue in 2020 was primarily a result of a reduction in ICE populations throughout 2020 compared with 2019 due to a dramatic rise in such populations during 2019, when southern border apprehensions reached the highest levels in over a decade. The reduction of people being apprehended and detained by ICE during 2020 was amplified by the decision near the end of the first quarter of 2020 by the federal government to deny entry at the United States southern border to asylum-seekers and anyone crossing the southern border without proper documentation or authority in an effort to contain the spread of COVID-19.
State revenues from contracts at correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities that we operate decreased $37.1 million, or 5.5%, from 2019 to 2020. In addition to the effect of an overall decline in state inmate populations resulting from COVID-19 during 2020, as previously described herein, the decrease in state revenues was also a result of the completion of the transfer back to the state of California of all of the California inmates held in our out-of-state facilities during the second quarter of 2019. This decline in population from California inmates resulted in a decrease in revenue of $13.3 million from 2019 to 2020. The decrease in state revenues was partially offset by the revenue generated by new contracts with the state of Mississippi at our Tallahatchie County Correctional Facility, and the states of Kansas and Idaho at our Saguaro Correctional Facility in Arizona, each as further described hereafter, as well as per diem increases under numerous other state contracts. State revenues in 2020 also benefited from one additional day of operations due to a leap year in 2020.
During the third quarter of 2020, largely due to a lower number of inmate populations in the state of Oklahoma resulting from COVID-19, combined with the consequential impact of COVID-19 on the State's budget, we agreed
with the State to idle our 1,600-bed Cimarron Correctional Facility during the third quarter of 2020. We also transferred the remaining resident populations at our 390-bed Tulsa Transitional Center to Oklahoma's system, idling the Tulsa facility during the third quarter of 2020. As previously described herein, we did not idle the Cimarron facility because we subsequently entered into a new contract under an IGSA between the city of Cushing, Oklahoma and the USMS to quickly repurpose the facility to serve a federal need. From the end of the first quarter of 2020 to December 31, 2020, excluding the closure of our Cimarron facility to Oklahoma inmate populations, our state populations declined by approximately 4,700 inmates, or 14.5%, predominantly due to government actions to help prevent the spread of COVID-19.
The $18.1 million, or 16.0%, decrease in other management revenue from 2019 to 2020 included the gain for the settlement of a contractual dispute recognized in the third quarter of 2019, as previously discussed herein. The decrease in other management revenue was also a result of the reduction in revenue generated from our electronic monitoring and case management services, also as previously discussed herein.
The $15.8 million, or 20.4%, increase in lease revenue from 2019 to 2020 was primarily a result of acquisitions in 2019 and 2020 of multiple properties leased to third parties and the commencement of the leases of the 656-bed Southeast Correctional Complex in Wheelwright, Kentucky, and the 2,432-bed correctional facility we constructed in Lansing, Kansas, all as further described hereafter.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses totaled $1,406.4 million and $1,422.8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Operating expenses consist of those expenses incurred in the operation and management of correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities, as well as those expenses incurred in the operations of TransCor and our electronic monitoring and case management services. Operating expenses also consist of those expenses incurred in the operation of facilities we lease to third-party operators.
Expenses incurred by CoreCivic Safety and CoreCivic Community in connection with the operation and management of our correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities, as well as those incurred in the operations of TransCor and our electronic monitoring and case management services, decreased $21.4 million, or 1.5%, during 2020 compared with 2019. Similar to our management revenue, there were several factors that contributed to the decrease in operating expenses incurred in these segments. Operating expenses decreased primarily as a result of lower staffing and service levels that were consistent with the lower occupancy levels during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, consistent with the reduction in revenue from our electronic monitoring and case management services, operating expenses from these services also decreased due to fewer court hearings and referrals due to COVID-19. The decrease in operating expenses during 2020 when compared to 2019 was partially offset by expenses associated with COVID-19, by the aforementioned activations of our previously idled Torrance and Eden facilities in the second quarter of 2019, and as a result of the additional day of operations due to a leap year in 2020.
Total expenses per compensated man-day increased to $64.06 during 2020 from $58.31 during 2019. Fixed expenses per compensated man-day increased to $47.20 during 2020 from $42.20 during 2019. Recent increases in the unemployment rate caused by COVID-19 notwithstanding, as the economy improved and the nation's unemployment rate declined, we experienced wage pressures in certain markets across the country, and provided wage increases to remain competitive. Further, the COVID-19 pandemic presents unique employment circumstances, as the unemployment rate has recently increased dramatically as many businesses curtailed or even ceased operations. While a higher unemployment rate in the longer-term could provide a more robust talent acquisition pipeline than we have recently experienced, we have incurred, and expect to continue to incur, incremental expenses in the short-term to help ensure sufficient staffing levels under unique and challenging working conditions. Further, recruiting has been particularly challenging during the pandemic due to the front-line nature of the services we provide. Incremental expenses include, but may not be limited to, incentive payments to our line and field staff, additional paid time off, as well as expenses to procure personal protective equipment and other supplies. During April 2020, we announced that we would provide incentive payments to our line and field staff, known as "hero bonuses", through the end of the second quarter of 2020. During 2020, we incurred $13.8 million of incremental expenses associated with COVID-19, including $6.3 million of hero bonuses paid in the second quarter of 2020. These incremental expenses contributed to the increase in fixed expenses per compensated
man-day during 2020 compared to 2019. We also provided wage increases to most of our facility staff during the third quarter of 2020. We continually monitor compensation levels very closely along with overall economic conditions and will set wage levels necessary to help ensure the long-term success of our business. Further, we continually evaluate the structure of our employee benefits package and training programs to ensure we are better able to attract and retain our employees. Salaries and benefits represent the most significant component of our operating expenses, representing approximately 61% and 60% of our total operating expenses during 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Operating expenses incurred by CoreCivic Properties in connection with facilities we lease to third-party operators increased $5.3 million, or 23.4%, during 2020 when compared to 2019. The increase in expenses in this segment during 2020 was primarily the result of acquisitions in 2019 and 2020 of multiple properties leased to third parties and the commencement of the leases of the 656-bed Southeast Correctional Complex in Wheelwright, Kentucky, and the 2,432-bed correctional facility we constructed in Lansing, Kansas.
Facility Management Contracts
We enter into facility management contracts to provide bed capacity and management services to governmental entities in our CoreCivic Safety and CoreCivic Community segments for terms typically ranging from three to five years, with additional renewal periods at the option of the contracting governmental agency. Accordingly, a substantial portion of our facility contracts are scheduled to expire each year, notwithstanding contractual renewal options that a government agency may exercise. Although we generally expect these customers to exercise renewal options or negotiate new contracts with us, one or more of these contracts may not be renewed by the corresponding governmental agency. Further, our government partners can generally terminate our management contracts for non-appropriation of funds or for convenience.
Additionally, the Private Prison EO issued by President Biden on January 26, 2021, directs the Attorney General to not renew DOJ contracts with privately operated criminal detention facilities. Two agencies of the DOJ, the BOP and the USMS, utilize our services. The BOP houses inmates who have been convicted, and the USMS is generally responsible for detainees who are awaiting trial. The BOP has experienced a steady decline in inmate populations over the last seven years, a trend that has been accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. We currently have one prison contract with the BOP, accounting for 2% ($39.2 million) of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was recently renewed through November 2022.
Unlike the BOP, the USMS does not own detention capacity and relies on the private sector, along with county jails, for its detainee population. We do not believe the USMS currently has sufficient capacity that satisfies their current needs without the private sector, and we are not currently aware of an alternative solution for the USMS. We currently have eight detention facilities that have separate contracts where the USMS is the primary customer that all expire at various times over the next several years, with the exception of two contracts that have indefinite terms. Non-renewal of these contracts, or the expansion of such a similar order to ICE, an agency of the DHS, would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, USMS and ICE accounted for 21% ($396.3 million) and 28% ($541.9 million), respectively, of our total revenue
Based on information available as of the date of this Annual Report, we believe we will renew all contracts with our government partners that have expired or are scheduled to expire within the next twelve months that could have a material adverse impact on our financial statements. We believe our renewal rate on existing contracts remains high due to a variety of reasons including, but not limited to, the constrained supply of available beds within the U.S. correctional system, our ownership of the majority of the beds we operate, and the cost effectiveness of the services we provide. However, we cannot assure we will continue to achieve such renewal rates in the future.
CoreCivic Safety
CoreCivic Safety includes the operating results of the correctional and detention facilities that we operated during each period. Total revenue generated by CoreCivic Safety decreased $73.7 million, or 4.1%, from $1,780.0 million during 2019 to $1,706.2 million during 2020. CoreCivic Safety's facility net operating income, or facility revenues less operating expenses, decreased $58.5 million, or 12.3%, from $475.8 million during 2019 to $417.3 million during 2020. During 2020 and 2019, CoreCivic Safety generated 82.2% and 85.2%, respectively, of our total segment net operating income.
The following table displays the revenue and expenses per compensated man-day for CoreCivic Safety's correctional and detention facilities placed into service that we own and manage and for the facilities we manage but do not own, inclusive of the transportation services provided by TransCor:
Operating margins within the CoreCivic Safety facilities during 2020 were negatively impacted primarily by reduced populations and increased operating expenses, which was driven by increases in salaries and benefits expenses, as previously described herein. Also as previously mentioned, COVID-19 has had an adverse impact on operating margins, and was the primary factor in the reduction of average compensated populations and operating margins of the CoreCivic Safety segment. The expected return of all remaining inmate populations from the state of California from our La Palma Correctional Center during the first half of 2019 also contributed to the reduction in compensated populations during 2020.
California Assembly Bill 32, or AB32, became effective January 1, 2020. AB32 generally prohibits new contracts and renewals of existing contracts between private, for-profit entities and government agencies for the operation of detention facilities within the state of California, and prohibits the utilization of detention centers operated by private, for-profit entities by the state of California effective January 1, 2028. AB32 does not apply to facilities leased from private, for-profit entities, such as our California City Correctional Center. The U.S. Government and The GEO Group, Inc. both filed lawsuits against the state of California challenging the enforceability of AB32 under applicable law. On October 8, 2020, US District Judge Janis Sammartino allowed AB32 to block future BOP and ICE contracts and renewals, while determining that AB32 could not block future USMS contracts and renewals. Judge Sammartino also acknowledged that the State has agreed it will not use AB32 to block federal, state, or local residential reentry center contracts. Both the U.S. Government and The GEO Group, Inc. have appealed Judge Sammartino's ruling to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
In the event AB32 is implemented so as to prohibit ICE-contracted private detention facilities, the federal government could be prohibited from renewing its contract for us to operate our Otay Mesa Detention Center, which is currently scheduled to expire in December 2024. A potential non-renewal of our contract to operate the Otay Mesa Detention Center, which we recently expanded from 1,482 beds to 1,994 beds, could have a significant impact on our results of operations and cash flows at the time of non-renewal.
On May 16, 2019, we announced that we entered into a new contract under an IGSA between Torrance County, New Mexico and ICE to activate our 910-bed Torrance County Detention Facility in Estancia, New Mexico. The new agreement also permits the USMS to utilize capacity at the facility, which had previously been idle since 2017. The new management contract commenced on May 15, 2019, and has an initial term of 60 months, with unlimited extension options thereafter upon mutual agreement. Either party may terminate the contract with 120 days' written notice. We began accepting ICE detainee populations into the Torrance facility in the third quarter of 2019. Activation of the Torrance facility contributed to an increase in total revenue of $18.6 million during 2020 when compared to 2019.
On May 23, 2019, we announced that we entered into a new contract under an IGSA between the City of Eden, Texas and the USMS, to activate our 1,422-bed Eden Detention Center in Eden, Texas. The new agreement also permits ICE to utilize capacity at the facility, which had previously been idle since 2017. The new management contract commenced on June 1, 2019, and has an indefinite term. Either party may terminate the contract with 30 days' written notice. We began accepting populations into the Eden facility in the third quarter of 2019. Activation of the Eden facility contributed to an increase in total revenue of $17.6 million during 2020 when compared to 2019.
On January 9, 2020, we announced that we entered into a new emergency contract with the state of Mississippi to care for up to 375 of Mississippi's inmates at the Tallahatchie facility, to assist the State with significant challenges in its correctional system. The contract had a term of ninety days, which the State could extend for up to two additional ninety-day terms. The State subsequently expanded the contract to 1,000 inmates during the second quarter of 2020, and extended the contract through April 2021, but no longer needed the capacity and transferred the inmates back to the State during the first quarter of 2021. During 2020, management revenue from this new contract was $12.8 million.
On May 1, 2019, the BOP announced that it elected not to renew the contract at our Adams County Correctional Center in Adams County, Mississippi. On June 28, 2019, the BOP executed an amendment to the existing contract to allow ICE to use up to 660 beds to care for adult male detainees. On July 18, 2019, the BOP contract, which was originally scheduled to expire on July 31, 2019, was extended to August 30, 2019. On September 3, 2019, we announced that we had entered into a new contract under an IGSA between Adams County, Mississippi and ICE for up to 2,348 adult detainees at the Adams facility. The new management agreement commenced on August 31, 2019, and has an initial term of 60 months, with unlimited extension options thereafter upon mutual agreement. Either party may terminate the contract with 120 days' written notice. The average compensated occupancy of the Adams County facility was 80% during 2019 compared with 49% during 2020, when occupancy was also impacted by COVID-19. Facility net operating income declined by $1.6 million from the prior year, which included $2.0 million for a performance bonus earned under the contract with the BOP. More favorable contract terms under the new IGSA mitigated the impact of lower occupancy at this facility.
Effective August 1, 2019, we were awarded a new contract with the Kansas Department of Corrections, or KDOC, to care for offenders at our 1,896-bed Saguaro Correctional Facility in Arizona, where we also care for inmates from Hawaii and Nevada. We accepted 120 offenders from the KDOC in October 2019. During the second quarter of 2020, this contract was extended through July 2021. However, due to available capacity in the state of Kansas, partially as a result of the completion of construction of our Lansing Correctional Facility, these inmates were returned to the State in December 2020. During the third quarter of 2020, we were also awarded a new contract with the Idaho Department of Correction, or IDOC, to care for up to 1,200 adult male offenders at the Saguaro facility. Subject to available capacity, we may also care for IDOC offenders at our 4,128-bed Central Arizona Florence Correctional Complex under terms of the contract. The new management contract with the IDOC commenced on August 18, 2020, and has an initial term of five years, with unlimited extension options thereafter upon mutual agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we cared for 436 IDOC offenders at our Saguaro facility.
On September 15, 2020, we announced that we entered into a new contract under an IGSA between the city of Cushing, Oklahoma and the USMS to utilize our 1,600-bed Cimarron Correctional Facility. We had previously announced our intention to idle the Cimarron facility during the third quarter of 2020, predominantly due to a lower number of inmate populations from the state of Oklahoma resulting from COVID-19, combined with the consequential impact of COVID-19 on the State's budget. The new management contract commenced on September 15, 2020, and has an initial term of three years, with unlimited 24-month extension options thereafter upon mutual agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we cared for 1,036 USMS detainees at the Cimarron facility. During 2019
and 2020, this facility generated facility net operating income of $2.4 million and incurred an operating loss of $1.4 million, respectively. We expect an improvement in facility net operating income at this facility as a result of the new contract with annual revenues increasing to approximately $30.0 million at current utilization levels and an operating margin that approximates the average CoreCivic Safety operating margin percentage.
In September 2020, the term of the amended IGSA between the city of Dilley, Texas and ICE to care for up to 2,400 individuals at our South Texas Family Residential Center, a facility we lease in Dilley, Texas, was extended from September 2021 to September 2026. ICE's termination rights, which permit ICE to terminate the agreement for convenience or non-appropriation of funds, without penalty, by providing us with at least a 60-day notice, were unchanged under the extension. As a result of extending the amortization period for the deferred revenue associated with the amended IGSA over the extended term of the agreement, the non-cash revenue associated with the amended IGSA decreased by approximately $2.7 million per quarter, from $3.4 million to $0.7 million, effective beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020. Concurrent with the extension of the amended IGSA, the lease with the third-party lessor for the site was also extended through September 2026. Other terms of the extended lease agreement were unchanged and provide us with the ability to terminate the lease if ICE terminates the amended IGSA associated with the facility.
As previously described, during the third quarter of 2020, we provided notice to the local counties utilizing the Silverdale Detention Center and the Metro-Davidson County Detention Facility, both in Tennessee, of our intent to terminate the contracts at these managed-only facilities. We transitioned operations of the Metro facility in October 2020, and transitioned operations of the Silverdale facility in December 2020. During 2019, and during the time we operated these two facilities in 2020, they generated total facility net operating income of $0.8 million and incurred an operating loss of $4.7 million, respectively. As a result of these expected contract terminations, during the second quarter of 2020, we also recognized goodwill impairments of $2.0 million associated with these two managed-only facilities' reporting units.
CoreCivic Community
CoreCivic Community includes the operating results of the residential reentry centers that we operated during each period, along with the operating results of our electronic monitoring and case management services from the acquisition dates of the subsidiaries providing those services. Total revenue generated by CoreCivic Community decreased $17.3 million, or 14.0%, from $123.3 million during 2019 to $106.0 million during 2020. CoreCivic Community's facility net operating income decreased $11.0 million, or 39.2%, from $28.1 million during 2019 to $17.1 million during 2020. During 2020 and 2019, CoreCivic Community generated 3.4% and 5.0%, respectively, of our total segment net operating income.
The following table displays the revenue and expenses per compensated man-day for CoreCivic Community's residential reentry facilities placed into service that we own and manage, but exclusive of the electronic monitoring and case management services given that revenue is not generated on a per compensated man-day basis for these services:
Operating margins in the CoreCivic Community segment during 2020 were negatively impacted by the reduction in average compensated population. The average compensated population reduction was primarily driven by COVID-19, and a decline in utilization from the states of Oklahoma and Colorado, which led to the consolidation of residents located in the respective states, and the closure of several of our residential reentry facilities. The 289-bed Turley Residential Center in Oklahoma closed in the second quarter of 2019, the 200-bed Oklahoma City Transitional Center in Oklahoma and the 60-bed Columbine Facility in Colorado closed in the second quarter of 2020, and the 390-bed Tulsa Transitional Center in Oklahoma closed in the third quarter of 2020. Operating margins were also negatively impacted during 2020 by an increase in operating expenses, which was driven primarily by increases in salaries and benefits expenses across the portfolio, as previously described herein.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the BOP awarded a new contract to us for residential reentry and home confinement services pursuant to a solicitation for capacity and services to be provided in the state of Oklahoma. As a result, we reactivated the Turley Residential Center during the first quarter of 2021 and provide the BOP additional reentry services at our owned and operated Oklahoma Reentry Opportunity Center (formerly known as the Carver Transitional Center), which supplements the existing utilization by the state of Oklahoma.
During the third quarter of 2020, Adams County, Colorado, notified us that, pursuant to a re-bid of the contract at the 184-bed Henderson Transitional Center, a facility we lease from the County, it awarded the contract to another operator. We transitioned operations to the other operator upon expiration of the contract in January 2021. During 2020, this facility generated net operating income of $0.7 million.
On December 7, 2019, we completed the acquisition of certain assets of Rehabilitation Services, Inc., or RSI. The acquisition resulted in the addition of two residential reentry centers in Virginia. The Ghent Residential Reentry Center, a 36-bed residential reentry center in Norfolk, Virginia and the James River Residential Reentry Center, an 84-bed residential reentry center in Newport News, Virginia provide reentry services for residents under custody of the BOP. The residential reentry facilities can also serve an additional 34 home confinement clients on behalf of the BOP. During 2020, these facilities generated net operating income of $1.2 million.
Like the CoreCivic Safety segment, our CoreCivic Community segment has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Some of our government partners have transferred certain residents assigned to our reentry facilities to non-residential status, home confinement or early releases, to create additional space for enhanced social distancing within our reentry facilities. Additionally, similar to our CoreCivic Safety segment, the CoreCivic Community segment has been adversely impacted by the disruption in court hearings, resulting in a reduction in the number of referrals to our community facilities. The impact of COVID-19 on our cash flows, in part, contributed to a goodwill impairment charge of $42.6 million, as further described herein. Additionally, at some locations, residents are responsible for a portion of the subsistence payments, which could be impacted by a curtailment in work programs available to them, negatively impacting our revenue to the extent that the government agency does not supplement such payments. However, it is possible that in the future, government agencies will increase the utilization of our community facilities or home confinement services, as an alternative to incarceration.
CoreCivic Properties
CoreCivic Properties includes the operating results of the properties we leased to third parties and that were used by government agencies during each period. Total revenue generated by CoreCivic Properties increased $15.8 million, or 20.4%, from $77.3 million during 2019 to $93.1 million during 2020. CoreCivic Properties' facility net operating income increased $10.5 million, or 19.2%, from $54.5 million during 2019 to $65.0 million during 2020. During 2020 and 2019, CoreCivic Properties generated 14.4% and 9.8%, respectively, of our total segment net operating income.
On January 24, 2018, we entered into a 20-year lease agreement with the KDOC for a 2,432-bed correctional facility to be constructed by the Company in Lansing, Kansas. The new facility replaces the Lansing Correctional Facility, Kansas' largest correctional complex for adult male inmates, originally constructed in 1863. CoreCivic is responsible for facility maintenance throughout the 20-year term of the lease, at which time ownership will revert to the state of Kansas. Construction of the facility commenced in the first quarter of 2018, and construction was completed in January 2020, at which time the lease commenced. During 2020, the Lansing Correctional Facility generated $2.6 million of revenue associated with the non-lease services components of the arrangement, and $8.4 million of interest income, as further described hereafter.
On December 9, 2019, we entered into a lease with the Commonwealth of Kentucky Department of Corrections, or KYDOC, for our previously idled 656-bed Southeast Correctional Complex in Wheelwright, Kentucky, formerly known as the Southeast Kentucky Correctional Facility. The lease commenced July 1, 2020, has an initial term of ten years and includes five two-year renewal options. The KYDOC has the option to purchase the facility at its fair market value at any time during the term of the lease. During 2020, this facility generated $2.1 million of lease revenue. The Southeast Correctional facility had previously been idle since 2012.
On May 6, 2019, we completed the acquisition of a 37,000 square-foot office building in Detroit, Michigan, for $7.2 million, excluding transaction related expenses, that was built-to-suit for the state of Michigan's Department of Health and Human Services, or MDHHS, in 2002. This property was acquired through our wholly-owned subsidiary, Government Real Estate Solutions, LLC, or GRES. The property was 100% leased to the Michigan Department of Technology, Management and Budget, or MDTMB, on behalf of MDHHS through June 2028 and included one six-year renewal option at the sole discretion of the MDTMB. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the MDTMB provided notice of its intent to exercise its executive cancellation provision to terminate the lease effective December 31, 2020, which was subsequently extended through February 5, 2021.
On January 2, 2020, we completed the acquisition of a portfolio of 28 properties, all of which were built-to-suit and leased to the federal government through the General Services Administration, or GSA, 24 of which the counter-party contributed to GRES. The 445,000 square foot portfolio serves numerous federal agencies, including primarily the Social Security Administration, or SSA, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Office of Hearings Operations. During 2020, the portfolio of 28 properties generated $10.6 million of lease revenue. On December 23, 2020, we completed the sale of 42 non-core government-leased properties, including this portfolio of 28 properties, in a single transaction to a third party for an aggregate price of $106.5 million, generating net proceeds of $27.8 million after the repayment of non-recourse mortgage notes associated with some of the properties and other transaction-related costs. After considering tax protection payments required to be paid to the contributing partners of GRES in connection with the sale, we reported a net loss on this sale of $17.9 million. We intend to dissolve GRES in 2021, and extinguish the operating partnership units for no consideration, which will result in a gain upon dissolution of the partnership of $15.0 million to $20.0 million, assuming we take no further actions that impact the partnership, that would be reflected as an increase to stockholders' equity.
We intend to pursue the sale of additional non-core assets in the Properties segment, reinvesting the net proceeds into new opportunities in the Properties segment and to repay debt. As of December 31, 2020, we had three additional non-core real estate assets held for sale with a net book value of $279.4 million. Although we can provide no assurance, based on interest expressed to-date, we are hopeful to consummate the sale of these assets during the first half of 2021. If we are successful in consummating the sale of these assets, combined with the sale completed in the fourth quarter of 2020, we expect the net proceeds from our sale of non-core assets will be consistent with our original estimate of up to $150 million. These three properties performed well through the COVID-19 pandemic and are leased to federal and state government agencies with strong credit profiles, creating an opportune time to redeploy this capital into projects generating higher returns like those we plan to develop in Alabama, as previously described herein, or to pay-down debt.
During the third quarter of 2019, leases at three residential reentry centers located in Pennsylvania leased to the same tenant expired and were not renewed. The three properties, which total approximately 54,000 square feet and contain an aggregate of 430 beds, were subsequently idled. We executed new leases at two of these facilities to the city of Philadelphia effective July 1, 2020, which are scheduled to expire in June 2021.
General and administrative expense
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, general and administrative expenses totaled $124.3 million and $127.1 million, respectively. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of corporate management salaries and benefits, professional fees, including those associated with mergers and acquisitions, or M&A, and expenses associated with changes in our corporate tax structure, as well as other administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased from the prior year primarily as a result of a decrease in incentive compensation by $8.9 million, partially offset by professional fees associated with changes in our corporate tax structure amounting to $5.2 million during 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, depreciation and amortization expense totaled $150.9 million and $144.6 million, respectively. The increase in depreciation and amortization expense from the prior year is primarily due to the additional depreciation and amortization resulting from our M&A activities during 2019 and 2020.
Contingent consideration for acquisition of businesses
As a result of better than estimated financial performance of two residential reentry centers acquired in 2019, during the third quarter of 2020, we recognized a charge of $0.6 million for the maximum contingent consideration estimated as owed to the seller associated with the acquisition. The contingent consideration is expected to be paid during the first quarter of 2021.
Asset impairments
As further described under "critical accounting policies", asset impairment charges in 2020 include the impairment of $44.6 million of goodwill related to our Community segment and two managed-only facilities in our Safety segment, $11.1 million for the impairment of real estate and other intangible assets for three facilities in our Community segment, $4.2 million of impairment charges for the abandonment of certain development costs and $0.7 million of other intangible assets associated with the cancellation of a lease in our Properties segment. During the second quarter of 2019, we incurred real estate asset impairment charges of $4.7 million primarily related to a residential reentry center in Arizona that became idle in the third quarter of 2019 and was ultimately sold in 2020.
Expenses associated with debt repayments and refinancing transactions
As previously described herein, on December 23, 2020, we completed the sale of 42 non-core government-leased properties in a single transaction to a third party for an aggregate price of $106.5 million, generating net proceeds of $27.8 million after the repayment of non-recourse mortgage notes associated with some of the properties and other transaction-related costs. In connection with the sale, we incurred a debt defeasance cost of $10.5 million associated with the prepayment of the non-recourse mortgage notes. This defeasance charge was partially offset by the reversal of a corresponding intangible debt liability, which was recorded upon acquiring the debt in January 2020, and was derecognized upon the repayment of the debt in December 2020 upon sale of the properties.
Expenses associated with debt repayments and refinancing transactions during 2019 included $0.6 million associated with the early redemption in December 2019 of our $325.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.125% senior notes originally due in April 2020.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense was reported net of interest income and capitalized interest for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Gross interest expense, net of capitalized interest, was $93.5 million and $86.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Gross interest expense is based on outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility, our outstanding Incremental Term Loan A, or Term Loan A, our outstanding $250.00 million Senior Secured Term Loan B, or Term Loan B, as further described hereafter, our outstanding senior notes, and our outstanding non-recourse mortgage notes, as well as the amortization of loan costs and unused facility fees. The increase in gross interest expense primarily resulted from an increase in the average outstanding balance on our revolving credit facility, and the interest expense associated with the Term Loan B and the new non-recourse mortgage note assumed during 2020, as further described hereafter, net of lower capitalized interest in 2020.
We have benefited from relatively low interest rates on our revolving credit facility, which is largely based on the London Interbank Offered Rate, or LIBOR. Based on our total leverage ratio, borrowings under our revolving credit facility during 2019 and 2020 were at the base rate plus a margin of 0.50% or at LIBOR plus a margin of 1.50%, and a commitment fee equal to 0.35% of the unfunded balance. Interest rates under the Term Loan A are the same as the interest rates under our revolving credit facility.
On April 20, 2018, CoreCivic of Kansas, LLC, a wholly-owned unrestricted subsidiary of ours, priced $159.5 million in aggregate principal amount of non-recourse senior secured notes, or the Kansas Notes, in a private placement pursuant to Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act. The private placement closed on June 1, 2018. We used the proceeds of the private placement, which were drawn on quarterly funding dates beginning in the second quarter of 2018, to fund construction of the Lansing Correctional Facility, along with costs and expenses of the project. The Kansas Notes have a yield to maturity of 4.43% and are scheduled to mature in January 2040, 20 years following completion of the project, which occurred in January 2020. We capitalized $5.1 million of interest during 2019 and $0.5 million in 2020 through the date construction was complete in January 2020, associated with this construction project. During 2020, we incurred $6.5 million of interest expense on the Kansas Notes, net of capitalized interest.
On December 18, 2019, we entered into a new Term Loan B which bears interest at a rate of LIBOR plus 4.50%, with a 1.00% LIBOR floor (or, at our option, a base rate plus 3.50%), and has a five-year maturity with scheduled quarterly principal payments through December 2024. The Term Loan B is secured by a first lien on certain specified real property assets, representing a loan-to-value of no greater than 80%. We can prepay the Term Loan B at any time and from time to time, without premium or penalty. Proceeds from the issuance of the Term Loan B were used to partially fund the early redemption of our $325.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.125% senior notes originally due in April 2020.
On January 2, 2020, we completed the acquisition of a portfolio of 28 properties, 24 of which the counter-party contributed to GRES, for total consideration of $83.2 million. In connection with the acquisition, a wholly-owned subsidiary of GRES, an unrestricted subsidiary we control, assumed $52.2 million of in-place financing. The assumed non-recourse mortgage notes, or collectively, the GRES Note, carried a fixed interest rate of 4.91% and required monthly principal and interest payments, with a balloon payment of $46.2 million due at maturity in November 2025. The GRES Note was fully-secured by the same 24 properties originally pledged as collateral at the time the debt was issued. The GRES Note was fully repaid as part of the sale of 42 non-core government-leased properties, including this portfolio of 28 properties, in December 2020, as previously described herein.
Gross interest income was $10.2 million and $2.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Gross interest income is earned on notes receivable, investments, cash and cash equivalents, and restricted cash. Interest income also includes interest income associated with the 20-year finance receivable associated with the Lansing Correctional Facility lease to the KDOC, which commenced in January 2020, and amounted to $8.4 million in 2020. Total capitalized interest was $0.5 million and $6.0 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively, and was primarily associated with the construction of the Lansing Correctional Facility.
Income tax expense
During the years we elected REIT status, we were entitled to a deduction for dividends paid, resulting in a substantial reduction in the amount of federal income tax expense we recognize. Substantially all of our income tax expense during the years we elected REIT status was incurred based on the earnings generated by our TRSs. Our overall effective tax rate was based on the taxable income primarily generated by our TRSs.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our financial statements reflected an income tax expense of $4.4 million and $7.8 million, respectively. Our effective tax rate was 7.3% and 4.0% during 2020 and 2019, respectively. Income tax expense during 2020 included $3.1 million, recorded in the first quarter of 2020, that had been deferred during the construction period of our Lansing Correctional Facility, which was owned by a TRS of ours until it converted to a qualified REIT subsidiary, or QRS, upon completion of construction in the first quarter of 2020. Because ownership of this facility reverts to the state of Kansas upon expiration of the twenty-year lease, the construction and subsequent lease of the facility to the State was a deemed sale for federal and state income tax purposes. The gain on sale was reported as a deferred tax asset based on the percentage of completion method over the construction period. This deferred tax asset was revalued to zero upon conversion of the TRS to a QRS. Aside from this charge, income tax expense during 2020 decreased due to lower occupancy levels at several facilities resulting from COVID-19, and as a result of certain tax benefits that became available under provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act.
On August 5, 2020, we announced that our Board of Directors, or BOD, unanimously approved a plan to revoke our REIT election and become a taxable C Corporation, effective January 1, 2021. As a result, we will no longer be required to operate under REIT rules, including the requirement to distribute at least 90% of our taxable income to our stockholders, which will provide us with greater flexibility to use our free cash flow. Beginning January 1, 2021, we will be subject to federal and state income taxes on our taxable income at applicable tax rates, and will no longer be entitled to a tax deduction for dividends paid. The revocation of our REIT election will also result in a revaluation of our net deferred tax liabilities, resulting in a material income tax charge in the period we complete all significant actions necessary to revoke our REIT election, currently anticipated to occur in the first quarter of 2021. We currently estimate such charge to be $100.0 million to $135.0 million. We continued to operate as a REIT for the remainder of the 2020 tax year, and existing REIT requirements and limitations, including those established by our organizational documents, remained in place until January 1, 2021.
Our consolidated effective tax rate could fluctuate in the future based on changes in estimates of taxable income, the implementation of additional tax planning strategies, changes in federal or state tax rates or laws affecting tax credits available to us, changes in other tax laws, changes in estimates related to uncertain tax positions, or changes in state apportionment factors, as well as changes in the valuation allowance applied to our deferred tax assets that are based primarily on the amount of state net operating losses and tax credits that could expire unused.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Pursuant to Regulation S-K item 303, a detailed review of our performance for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to our performance for the year ended December 31, 2018 is set forth in "Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, on February 20, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our principal capital requirements are for working capital, capital expenditures, and debt service payments, as well as outstanding commitments and contingencies, as further discussed in the notes to our financial statements.
On June 17, 2020, we announced that our BOD was evaluating corporate structure and capital allocation alternatives. Concurrently, our BOD suspended our quarterly dividend while we assessed how best to use our free cash flow to build shareholder value, maintain service excellence, and offer and implement unique solutions for our government partners and the communities in which we serve. On August 5, 2020, we announced that our BOD concluded its analysis and unanimously approved a plan to revoke our REIT election and become a taxable C Corporation, effective January 1, 2021. Additionally, our BOD voted unanimously to discontinue the quarterly dividend and prioritize allocating our free cash flow to reduce debt levels. As a result, we will no longer be required to operate under REIT rules, including the requirement to distribute at least 90% of our taxable income to our stockholders, which will provide us with greater flexibility to use our free cash flow.
Beginning January 1, 2021, we will be subject to federal and state income taxes on our taxable income at applicable tax rates, and will no longer be entitled to a tax deduction for dividends paid. However, we believe this conversion will improve our overall credit profile and lower our overall cost of capital, as we will be able to allocate our free cash flow toward the repayment of debt, which may include the purchase of our outstanding debt in open market transactions, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Any such debt repurchases will depend upon prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual requirements, applicable securities laws requirements, and other factors. Following our first priority of reducing debt, we expect to allocate a substantial portion of our free cash flow to returning capital to our shareholders, which could include share repurchases and future dividends. We have not been able to implement a meaningful share repurchase program under the REIT structure without increasing our debt because a substantial portion of our free cash flow was required to satisfy the distribution requirements under the REIT structure. We will also pursue attractive growth opportunities, including new development opportunities in our Properties segment to meet the need to modernize outdated correctional infrastructure across the country, and evaluate additional opportunities to provide services in our Community segment that have not been available under the REIT structure. As a REIT we depended on the capital markets to
provide resources we could deploy toward acquisition and development opportunities. This capital was not always available to us and came at an increasing cost. The revocation of our REIT election provides us with significantly more liquidity and financial flexibility, which will enable us to reduce our reliance on the capital markets and reduce the size of our Bank Credit Facility in the future.
Beyond the operating cash flow we generate from our business, we intend to pursue the sale of additional non-core assets in the Properties segment, reinvesting the net proceeds into new opportunities in the Properties segment and to repay debt. As of December 31, 2020, we had three additional non-core real estate assets held for sale with a net book value of $279.4 million. Although we can provide no assurance, based on interest expressed to-date, we are hopeful to consummate the sale of these assets during the first half of 2021. If we are successful in consummating the sale of these assets, combined with the sale of the portfolio of 42 properties completed in the fourth quarter of 2020, we expect the net proceeds from our sale of non-core assets will be consistent with our original estimate of up to $150 million. These three properties performed well through the COVID-19 pandemic and are leased to federal and state government agencies with strong credit profiles, creating an opportune time to redeploy this capital into projects generating higher returns like those we plan to develop in Alabama, as previously described herein, or to pay-down debt.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a pandemic, which continues to spread throughout the United States. As a result, in the first quarter of 2020, the federal government decided to deny entry at the United States southern border to asylum-seekers and anyone crossing the southern border without proper documentation or authority in an effort to contain the spread of COVID-19. This action has resulted in the reduction in the number of people being apprehended and detained by ICE. Further, disruptions to the criminal justice system have also contributed to a reduction in the number of USMS detainee populations, as the number of courts in session and prosecutions have declined. We currently expect the federal government’s policy of denying entry at the United States southern border to asylum-seekers and anyone crossing the southern border without proper documentation or authority, as well as the disruptions in the criminal justice system, to persist until a widely accepted treatment and/or vaccine for COVID-19 is widely disseminated. In addition, many state and local government agencies have released, may be considering releasing, or may be experiencing pressure to release, certain inmates and detainees to help ensure social distancing within their facilities and prevent excessive interactions among inmate populations. A protracted denial in southern border entries of asylum-seekers and undocumented immigrants, or continued disruptions in the criminal justice system could have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows. As a result of uncertainties in the near-term outlook for the business caused by COVID-19, we are monitoring and reducing discretionary spending (except to help ensure the safety of our employees and residents entrusted to our care), reviewing capital projects to ensure we are only spending on projects that are deemed essential in the current environment, and limiting travel and other operating expenses.
As of December 31, 2020, our liquidity was provided by cash on hand of $113.2 million, and $566.2 million available under our revolving credit facility. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we generated $355.5 million and $354.4 million, respectively, in cash through operating activities. We currently expect to be able to meet our cash expenditure requirements for the next year utilizing cash on hand and availability under our revolving credit facility. Some banks that are party to our Bank Credit Facility have announced that they do not expect to continue to provide credit or financial services to private entities that operate correctional and detention facilities, including CoreCivic. The banks that are currently parties to the Bank Credit Facility are obligated to honor their commitments under our Bank Credit Facility, which expires in April 2023. These decisions have currently affected the capital markets for our securities, and we can provide no assurance that additional banks that are party to our Bank Credit Facility will not make similar decisions, or that new banks will be willing to become party to our Bank Credit Facility, or that the capital markets for our securities will improve. As previously mentioned, upon our planned revocation of our REIT election, we believe we will not be as reliant on the revolving credit facility under the Bank Credit Facility, as we will be able to retain our cash flows to use at our general discretion and, therefore, believe we can operate with a smaller revolving credit facility. We have no debt maturities until October 2022, and do not currently anticipate a need to access the capital markets in the short-term.
Our cash flow is subject to the receipt of sufficient funding of and timely payment by contracting governmental entities. If the appropriate governmental agency does not receive sufficient appropriations to cover its contractual obligations, it may terminate our contract or delay or reduce payment to us. Delays in payment from our major customers or the termination of contracts from our major customers could have an adverse effect on our cash flow and financial condition. Although our revenue has been negatively impacted by COVID-19, we have not experienced any unusual delays in payments from our major customers.
Debt and equity
As of December 31, 2020, we had $350.0 million principal amount of unsecured notes outstanding with a fixed stated interest rate of 4.625%, $250.0 million principal amount of unsecured notes outstanding with a fixed stated interest rate of 5.0%, and $250.0 million principal amount of unsecured notes outstanding with a fixed stated interest rate of 4.75%. In addition, we had $20.9 million outstanding under the Capital Commerce Note with a fixed stated interest rate of 4.5%, $157.6 million outstanding under the Kansas Notes with a fixed stated interest rate of 4.43%, and $144.5 million outstanding under the SSA-Baltimore Note with a fixed stated interest rate of 4.5%. We also had $180.0 million outstanding under our Term Loan A with a variable interest rate of 1.6%, $237.5 million outstanding under our new Term Loan B with a variable interest rate of 5.5%, and $219.0 million outstanding under our revolving credit facility with a variable weighted average interest rate of 1.7%. As of December 31, 2020, our total weighted average effective interest rate was 4.5%, while our total weighted average maturity was 5.6 years. We may also seek to issue debt or equity securities from time to time when we determine that market conditions and the opportunity to utilize the proceeds from the issuance of such securities are favorable.
On August 28, 2018, we entered into an Amended and Restated ATM Equity Offering Sales Agreement, or ATM Agreement, with multiple sales agents, pursuant to which we may offer and sell to or through the agents, from time to time, shares of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share, having an aggregate gross sales price of up to $200.0 million. Sales, if any, of our shares of common stock will be made primarily in "at-the-market" offerings, as defined in Rule 415 under the Securities Act. The shares of common stock will be offered and sold pursuant to our registration statement on Form S-3 and a related prospectus supplement, both filed with the SEC on August 28, 2018. We intend to use substantially all of the net proceeds from any sale of shares of our common stock to repay outstanding borrowings or for working capital and other general corporate purposes, which may include investments. There were no shares of our common stock sold under the ATM Agreement during 2019 and 2020.
Facility transactions, development, and capital expenditures
On January 2, 2020, we completed the acquisition of a portfolio of 28 properties, 24 of which the counter-party contributed to GRES, for total consideration of $83.2 million, excluding transaction-related expenses. All of the properties are leased to the federal government through the GSA. We financed the acquisition with $7.7 million of cash, assumed debt of $52.2 million and the balance with the issuance of 1.3 million shares of Class A Common Interests in GRES that are convertible into cash or, at our option, shares of our common stock following a two-year holding period on a one-for-one basis, or Operating Partnership Units, using a partnership structure. The assumed debt carried a fixed interest rate of 4.91%, with fixed monthly payments extending through November 2025, and a balloon payment of $46.2 million due at maturity.
On December 23, 2020, we completed the sale of 42 non-core government-leased properties, including the portfolio of 28 properties discussed above, in a single transaction to a third party for an aggregate price of $106.5 million, generating net proceeds of $27.8 million after the repayment of the GRES Note, which was associated with some of the properties, and other transaction-related costs. Net cash proceeds were used to pay-down our revolving credit facility and are available to recycle into projects generating higher returns, such as the Alabama transaction previously described herein.
On January 24, 2018, we entered into a 20-year lease agreement with the KDOC for a 2,432-bed correctional facility to be constructed in Lansing, Kansas. We commenced construction of the facility in the first quarter of 2018 and, as of December 31, 2019, we had capitalized $137.7 million associated with the construction project. In December 2019, the Lansing facility began accepting offenders into the 512-bed minimum security complex ahead of schedule, with the remaining 1,920-bed medium/maximum security complex completed in January 2020, for a total project cost of approximately $155.0 million. Construction of the facility was 100% funded with proceeds from the private
placement of the Kansas Notes, as previously described herein. This transaction represents the first development of a privately owned, build-to-suit correctional facility operated by a government agency through a long-term lease agreement. We are responsible for facility maintenance throughout the 20-year term of the lease, at which time ownership will revert to the state of Kansas. With the extensively aged criminal justice infrastructure in the United States today, we believe we can bring our flexible solutions like this to other government agencies.
Although disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, several of our existing federal and state partners, as well as prospective state partners, had been experiencing growth in offender populations and overcrowded conditions. Governments are now assessing their need for correctional space in light of COVID-19, and several are considering alternative correctional capacity for their aged or inefficient infrastructure, or are seeking cost savings by utilizing the private sector. Competing budget priorities, which will likely become more challenging because of COVID-19, often impede our customers' ability to construct new prison beds of their own or update older facilities, which we believe could result in further need for private sector prison capacity solutions in the long-term. Over the long-term, we would like to see meaningful utilization of our available capacity and better visibility from our customers into their potential future needs before we develop new prison capacity on a speculative basis. We will, however, respond to customer demand and may develop or expand correctional and detention facilities when we believe potential long-term returns justify the capital deployment.
Operating Activities
Our net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $355.5 million compared with $354.4 million in 2019. Our net cash provided by operating activities was $74.0 million during the fourth quarter of 2020 compared with $75.4 million during the first quarter of 2020, before our operations were impacted by COVID-19, and compared with $50.3 million during the fourth quarter of 2019. Cash provided by operating activities represents our net income plus depreciation and amortization, changes in various components of working capital, and various non-cash charges.
Investing Activities
Our cash flow provided by investing activities was $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was primarily attributable to $113.6 million in net proceeds from the sale of assets, partially offset by capital expenditures for facility development and expansions of $27.6 million and $56.2 million for facility maintenance and information technology capital expenditures. Our cash flow provided by investing activities was also net of $8.8 million primarily attributable to the acquisition of the aforementioned portfolio of 28 properties in January 2020.
Our cash flow used in investing activities was $244.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and was attributable to payments totaling $48.4 million, including payments of $34.1 million to the state of Montana in connection with an agreement with the state of Montana to extend our ownership of the Crossroads Correctional Center for the estimated duration of its useful life, and acquisitions completed in 2019, net of cash acquired. Our cash flow used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 also included capital expenditures of $193.3 million, including expenditures for facility development and expansions of $136.1 million and $57.2 million for facility maintenance and information technology capital expenditures.
Financing Activities
Cash flow used in financing activities was $350.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was primarily attributable to net repayments under our revolving credit facility of $146.0 million, dividend payments of $106.0 million and $3.6 million for the purchase and retirement of common stock that was issued in connection with equity-based compensation. In addition, cash flow used in financing activities included $32.3 million of scheduled principal repayments under our Term Loan A, Term Loan B, and non-recourse mortgage notes, as well as $51.3 million for the defeasance of non-recourse mortgage notes in connection with the aforementioned sale of assets and other refinancing related costs.
Cash flow used in financing activities was $64.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and was primarily attributable to dividend payments of $209.5 million and $3.5 million for the purchase and retirement of common stock that was issued in connection with equity-based compensation. In addition, cash flow used in financing activities included $325.0 million related to the aforementioned satisfaction and discharge of our 4.125% Senior Notes. Cash flow used in financing activities also included $7.4 million of contingent consideration associated with the acquisition of a business and $14.1 million of scheduled principal repayments under our Term Loan A and non-recourse mortgage notes. These payments were partially offset by $164.0 million of net borrowings under our revolving credit facility, $237.5 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the Term Loan B, and $97.2 million of proceeds from the quarterly borrowings under the Kansas Notes during the construction period of the Lansing Correctional Facility.
Supplemental Guarantor Information
On March 2, 2020, the SEC adopted final rules that amend and simplify the financial disclosure requirements for subsidiary issuers and guarantors of registered debt securities under Rules 3-10 and 3-16 of SEC Regulation S-X. The new rules permit registrants to provide certain alternative financial disclosures and non-financial disclosures in lieu of separate consolidating financial statements for subsidiary issuers and guarantors of registered debt securities (which we previously included within the notes to our financial statements included in our Annual Reports on Form 10-K and Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q) if certain conditions are met. Although the disclosures required by the amendments do not become mandatory until January 4, 2021, voluntary early compliance is permitted. We elected to voluntarily comply beginning with the quarterly period ended June 30, 2020.
All of the domestic subsidiaries of CoreCivic (as the parent corporation) that guarantee the Credit Agreements have provided full and unconditional guarantees of the Senior Notes. All of CoreCivic's subsidiaries guaranteeing the Senior Notes are 100% owned direct or indirect subsidiaries of CoreCivic; and the subsidiary guarantees are full and unconditional and are joint and several obligations of the guarantors.
As of December 31, 2020, neither CoreCivic nor any of its subsidiary guarantors had any material or significant restrictions on CoreCivic's ability to obtain funds from its subsidiaries by dividend or loan or to transfer assets from such subsidiaries.
The indentures governing our Senior Notes contain certain customary covenants that, subject to certain exceptions and qualifications, restrict CoreCivic's ability to, among other things, create or permit to exist certain liens and consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of CoreCivic's assets. In addition, if CoreCivic experiences specific kinds of changes in control, CoreCivic must offer to repurchase all or a portion of the Senior Notes. The offer price for the Senior Notes in connection with a change in control would be 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes repurchased plus accrued and unpaid interest and liquidated damages, if any, on the notes repurchased to the date of purchase.
The following tables present summarized information for CoreCivic and the subsidiary guarantors, on a combined basis after elimination of (i) intercompany transactions and balances among CoreCivic and the subsidiary guarantors and (ii) equity in earnings from, and any investments in, any subsidiary that is a non-guarantor (in thousands).
Funds from Operations
Funds From Operations, or FFO, is a widely accepted supplemental non-GAAP measure utilized to evaluate the operating performance of real estate companies. The National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts, or NAREIT, defines FFO as net income computed in accordance with GAAP, excluding gains or losses from sales of property and extraordinary items, plus depreciation and amortization of real estate and impairment of depreciable real estate and after adjustments for unconsolidated partnerships and joint ventures calculated to reflect funds from operations on the same basis. We believe FFO is an important supplemental measure of our operating performance and believe it is frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of REITs and other real estate companies, many of which present FFO when reporting results.
We also present Normalized FFO as an additional supplemental measure as we believe it is more reflective of our core operating performance. We may make adjustments to FFO from time to time for certain other income and expenses that we consider non-recurring, infrequent or unusual, even though such items may require cash settlement, because such items do not reflect a necessary or ordinary component of our ongoing operations. Even though expenses associated with M&A may be recurring, the magnitude and timing fluctuate based on the timing and scope of M&A activity, and therefore, such expenses, which are not a necessary component of our ongoing operations, may not be comparable from period to period. Start-up expenses represent the incremental operating losses incurred during the period we were activating idle correctional facilities. Normalized FFO excludes the effects of such items.
FFO and Normalized FFO are supplemental non-GAAP financial measures of real estate companies' operating performance, which do not represent cash generated from operating activities in accordance with GAAP and therefore should not be considered an alternative for net income or as a measure of liquidity. Our method of calculating FFO and Normalized FFO may be different from methods used by other REITs and, accordingly, may not be comparable to such other REITs.
Our reconciliation of net income to FFO and Normalized FFO for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 is as follows (in thousands):
Contractual Obligations
The following schedule summarizes our contractual obligations by the indicated period as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
The cash obligations in the table above do not include future cash obligations for variable interest expense associated with our Term Loan A, Term Loan B or the balance on our outstanding revolving credit facility as projections would be based on future outstanding balances as well as future variable interest rates, and we are unable to make reliable estimates of either. The contractual facility developments included in the table above represent development projects for which we have already entered into a contract with a customer that obligates us to complete the development project. The table excludes two renovation projects, totaling approximately $23.0 million, with $21.8 million remaining to be incurred as of December 31, 2020, that the federal government has agreed to reimburse over a twelve-month period. Certain of our other ongoing construction projects are not currently under contract and thus are not included as a contractual obligation above as we may generally suspend or terminate such projects without substantial penalty. With respect to the South Texas Family Residential Center, the cash obligations included in the table above reflect the full contractual obligations of the lease of the site, excluding contingent payments, even though the lease agreement provides us with the ability to terminate if ICE terminates the amended IGSA associated with the facility.
We had $14.8 million of letters of credit outstanding at December 31, 2020 primarily to support our requirement to repay fees and claims under our self-insured workers' compensation plan in the event we do not repay the fees and claims due in accordance with the terms of the plan. The letters of credit are renewable annually. We did not have any draws under any outstanding letters of credit during 2020, 2019, or 2018.
INFLATION
Many of our contracts include provisions for inflationary indexing, which mitigates an adverse impact of inflation on net income. However, a substantial increase in personnel costs, workers' compensation or food and medical expenses could have an adverse impact on our results of operations in the future to the extent that these expenses increase at a faster pace than the per diem or fixed rates we receive for our management services. We outsource our food service operations to a third party. The contract with our outsourced food service vendor contains certain protections against increases in food costs.
SEASONALITY AND QUARTERLY RESULTS
Certain aspects of our business are subject to seasonal fluctuations. Because we are generally compensated for operating and managing correctional, detention, and reentry facilities at a per diem rate, our financial results are impacted by the number of calendar days in a fiscal quarter. Our fiscal year follows the calendar year and therefore, our daily profits for the third and fourth quarters include two more days than the first quarter (except in leap years) and one more day than the second quarter. Further, salaries and benefits represent the most significant component of operating expenses. Significant portions of our unemployment taxes are recognized during the first quarter, when base wage rates reset for unemployment tax purposes. Quarterly results are also affected by government funding initiatives, acquisitions, the timing of the opening of new facilities, or the commencement of new management contracts and related start-up expenses which may mitigate or exacerbate the impact of other seasonal influences. Because of seasonality factors, and other factors described herein, results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be achieved for the full fiscal year.