Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains certain statements that may be deemed ‘forward-looking statements’ within the meaning of United States securities laws. All statements, other than statements of historical fact, that address activities, events or developments that we intend, expect, project, believe or anticipate will or may occur in the future are forward-looking statements. Such statements are based upon certain assumptions and assessments made by our management in light of their experience and their perception of historical trends, current conditions, expected future developments and other factors they believe to be appropriate. Certain factors that could cause results to differ materially from those projected or implied in the forward looking statements are set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 under the caption “Item 1A - Risk factors”.
We encourage you to read those descriptions carefully. We caution you not to place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements contained in this report. These statements, like all statements in this report, speak only as of the date of this report (unless an earlier date is indicated) and we undertake no obligation to update or revise the statements except as required by law. Such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and actual results will likely differ, perhaps materially, from those suggested by such forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company developing innovative cancer medicines based on cell cycle, transcriptional regulation and mitosis control biology. We are a pioneer company in the field of cancer cell cycle biology with a vision to improve patient healthcare by translating insights in cancer biology into medicines that can overcome resistance and ultimately increase a patient’s overall survival. Our strategy is to build a diversified biopharmaceutical business based on a pipeline of novel drug candidates addressing oncology and hematology indications.
During 2020, our primary focus has been on our transcriptional regulation program which is evaluating fadraciclib as a single agent in solid tumors and in combination with venetoclax in patients with relapsed or refractory AML/MDS and CLL. The anti-mitotic program is evaluating CYC140, a PLK1 inhibitor, in advanced leukemia/MDS patients. The DNA damage response program is evaluating an oral combination of sapacitabine and venetoclax in patients with relapsed or refractory AML/MDS and an investigator sponsored trial is evaluating an oral combination of sapacitabine and olaparib in patients with BRCA mutant breast cancer.
Cyclacel currently retains virtually all marketing rights worldwide to the compounds associated with the Company’s drug programs.
Agreements to sell Securities
On December 18, 2020 we entered into a definitive securities purchase agreement with Acorn Bioventures, LP, a biotech-focused fundamental investor. Under the agreement, Acorn Bioventures has agreed to purchase in a registered direct offering 485,912 shares of common stock and 237,745 shares of newly designated Series B Preferred Stock (convertible into shares of common stock at a ratio of 1:5), and in a concurrent private placement, warrants to purchase 669,854 shares of common stock, for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $6.9 million. The offering is priced at-the-market pursuant to the rules of the Nasdaq Stock Market. The warrants will be exercisable beginning twelve months following the date of issuance, will expire on the five-year anniversary of the date of issuance, and have an exercise price of $4.13 per share.
On April 24, 2020 we announced the public offering of (i) 4,000,000 shares of its common stock (or pre-funded warrants to purchase common stock in lieu thereof) and (ii) common warrants to purchase up to 4,000,000 shares of common stock. Each share of common stock and, as applicable, each pre-funded warrant, was sold together with a common warrant to purchase one share of common stock at a combined effective price to the public of $5.00 per share and accompanying common warrant, and/or $4.999 per pre-funded warrant and accompanying common warrant. For each pre-funded warrant the Company sold, the number of shares of common stock the Company offered was decreased on a one-for-one basis. The common warrants are immediately exercisable at a price of $5.00 per share of common stock and will expire five years from the date of issuance. The shares of common stock and/or the pre-funded warrants, and the accompanying common warrants, were purchased together in the offering, but were issued separately and became immediately separable upon issuance. After deducting placement agent fees and other offering expenses payable by the Company, total net proceeds of the public offering are approximately $18.3 million.
Dividend on Preferred Stock
On December 11, 2020, the Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend in the amount of $0.15 per share on the Company’s Preferred Stock. The cash dividend was paid on February 1, 2021 to the holders of record of the Preferred Stock as of the close of business on January 15, 2021.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2020
Results of Continuing Operations
Revenues
There were no revenues for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020.
The future
We do not anticipate any revenues for the foreseeable future.
Research and development
We expense all research and development costs as they are incurred. Research and development expenses primarily include:
● Clinical trial and regulatory-related costs;
● Payroll and personnel-related expenses, including consultants and contract research organizations;
● Preclinical studies and laboratory supplies and materials;
● Technology license costs;
● Stock-based compensation; and
● Rent and facility expenses for our office and laboratories.
The following table provides information with respect to our research and development expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 (in thousands except percentages):
Research and development expenses represented 48% and 45% of our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively.
Research and development expenses remained relatively flat at $4.7 million and $4.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Research and development expenses relating to transcriptional regulation increased by $0.6 million from $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as the clinical evaluation of fadraciclib progressed. Research and development expenses relating to CYC140 decreased by $0.1 million from $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of a reduction in expenditures associated with drug supply manufacturing which were not required in 2020. Research and development expenses relating to DNA Damage Response decreased by $0.3 million from $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of expenditures associated with drug supply manufacturing not being required in 2020. Research and development expenses relating to other research and development decreased by $0.1 million from approximately $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to a reduction in consultancy costs.
The future
We anticipate that overall research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 will increase compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as we progress our clinical development programs.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses include costs for administrative personnel, legal and other professional expenses and general corporate expenses. The following table summarizes the total general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 (in thousands except percentages):
Total general and administrative expenses represented 52% and 55% of our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively.
Our general and administrative expenditures increased by $0.9 million from $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to an increase in legal, professional and recruitment costs relating to expansion of clinical team.
The future
We expect general and administrative expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021 to reduce slightly compared to our expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to lower recruitment and professional costs.
Other income (expense), net
The following table summarizes the other income (expense) for years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 (in thousands except percentages):
Total other income, net, increased by approximately $0.4 million from approximately $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to approximately $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in other income is primarily related to higher royalties receivable under a December 2005 Asset Purchase Agreement, or APA, whereby Xcyte Therapies, Inc., or Xcyte (a business acquired by the Company in March 2006) sold certain assets and intellectual property to ThermoFisher Scientific Company, or TSC (formerly Life Technologies Corporation) through an APA and other related agreements. The assets and technology were not part of the Company’s product development plan following the transaction between Xcyte and Cyclacel in March 2006. Accordingly, the company recognized $231,000 and $891,000 of other income arising from sales related to this transaction during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively. We have no knowledge of TSC’s activities and cannot predict when we may receive income under the APA, if any. Increases in other income was offset by a $0.2 million reduction in interest income due to lower yields during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Foreign exchange gains (losses)
Foreign exchange gains decreased by $79,000 to a gain of $22,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a gain of approximately $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We have a number of intercompany loans in place between our parent company based in New Jersey and our subsidiary based in Scotland. The intercompany loans outstanding are not expected to be repaid in the foreseeable future and the nature of the funding advanced is of a long-term investment nature. Therefore, all unrealized foreign exchange gains or losses arising on the intercompany loans are recognized in other comprehensive income until repayment of the intercompany loan becomes foreseeable. Favorable unrealized foreign exchange movements related to intercompany loans resulted in a gain of $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and a gain of $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The future
Other income (expense), net will continue to be impacted by changes in foreign exchange rates and the receipt of income under the APA. As we are not in control of sales made by TSC, we are unable to estimate the level and timing of income under the APA, if any.
As the funding advanced through intercompany loans is that of a long-term investment in nature, unrealized foreign exchange gains and losses on such funding will be recognized in other comprehensive income (loss) until repayment of the intercompany loan becomes foreseeable.
Income tax benefit
Credit is taken for research and development tax credits, which are claimed from the United Kingdom’s taxation and customs authority (HMRC), in respect of qualifying research and development costs incurred.
The following table summarizes total income tax benefit for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 (in thousands except percentages):
The income tax benefit remained relatively flat at approximately $1.3 million and $1.2 million the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The level of tax credits recoverable is linked directly to qualifying research and development expenditure incurred in any one year.
The future
We expect to continue to be eligible to receive United Kingdom research and development tax credits for the foreseeable future and will continue to elect to receive payment of the tax credit. The amount of tax credits we will receive is entirely dependent on the amount of eligible expenses we incur and could be restricted by any future cap introduced by HMRC. As we expect our eligible expenses to be higher in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, the level of tax credits recoverable is anticipated to be higher in 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following is a summary of our key liquidity measures as of December 31, 2019 and 2020 (in thousands):
Since our inception, we have relied primarily on the proceeds from sales of common and preferred equity securities to finance our operations and internal growth. Additional funding has come through research and development tax credits, government grants, the sale of product rights, interest on investments, licensing revenue, royalty income, and a limited amount of product revenue from operations discontinued in September 2012. We have incurred significant loses since our inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $366.1 million.
Cash Flows
Cash provided by (used in operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 is summarized as follows (in thousands):
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities decreased by $1.5 million, from $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash used by operating activities was primarily the result of a decrease in working capital of $2.1 million, offset by an increase in net loss of $0.6 million. The change in working capital was due to settlement of large, end of clinical trial trade payables during the prior year.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $124,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to an increase in capital expenditures on IT software and no proceeds from sale of property and equipment during the current year.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $29.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of approximately $18.3 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock and accompanying common stock warrants under a co-placement agency agreement with Roth Capital Partners, LLC, Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc., and Brookline Capital Markets, a division of Arcadia Securities, LLC, approximately $4.5 million from warrant exercises associated with this agreement and approximately $6.9 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock and accompanying common stock warrants in a securities purchase agreement with Acorn Bioventures, LP. This was offset by dividend payments of approximately $0.2 million to the holders of our 6% Preferred Stock.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of approximately $4.1 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the Sales Agreement with Wainwright, offset by dividend payments of approximately $0.2 million to the holders of our 6% Preferred Stock.
Operating Capital and Capital Expenditure Requirements
We expect to continue to incur substantial operating losses in the future and cannot guarantee that we will generate any significant product revenues until a product candidate has been approved by the FDA or EMA in other countries and successfully commercialized.
We believe that existing funds together with cash generated from operations, including the R&D tax credit, and recent financing activities, are sufficient to satisfy our planned working capital, capital expenditures and other financial commitments through 2022. However, we do not currently have sufficient funds to complete development and commercialization of any of our drug candidates. Current business and capital market risks could have a detrimental effect on the availability of sources of funding and our ability to access them in the future, which may delay or impede our progress of advancing our drugs currently in the clinical pipeline to approval by the FDA or EMA for commercialization. Additionally, we plan to continue to evaluate in-licensing and acquisition opportunities to gain access to new drugs or drug targets that would fit with our strategy. Any such transaction would likely increase our funding needs in the future.
Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including but not limited to:
● the rate of progress and cost of our clinical trials, preclinical studies and other discovery and research and development activities;
● the costs associated with establishing manufacturing and commercialization capabilities;
● the costs of acquiring or investing in businesses, product candidates and technologies;
● the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● the costs and timing of seeking and obtaining FDA and EMA approvals;
● the effect of competing technological and market developments; and
● the economic and other terms and timing of any collaboration, licensing or other arrangements into which we may enter.
Until we can generate a sufficient amount of product revenue to finance our cash requirements, which we may never do, we expect to finance future cash needs primarily through public or private equity offerings, debt financings or strategic collaborations. Although we are not reliant on institutional credit finance and therefore not subject to debt covenant compliance requirements or potential withdrawal of credit by banks, we are reliant on the availability of funds and activity in equity markets. We do not know whether additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are not able to secure additional funding when needed, we may have to delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate one or more of our clinical trials or research and development programs or make changes to our operating plan. In addition, we may have to partner one or more of our product candidate programs at an earlier stage of development, which would lower the economic value of those programs to us.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our long-term contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1) Operating lease obligations relate primarily to leasing of office and laboratory space at our Dundee, UK and Berkeley Heights, New Jersey locations. The lease for our Dundee location, which was entered into in October 2000, expires in October 2025 and the lease for our Berkeley Heights location, which was entered into in August 2020, expires in July 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not had any off-balance sheet arrangements or relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or variable interest entities, which are typically established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We review our estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates. We believe the judgments and estimates required by the following accounting policies to be critical in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report. We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect our more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Clinical Trial Accounting
Data management and monitoring of our clinical trials are performed with the assistance of contract research organizations, or CROs, or clinical research associates, or CRAs, in accordance with our standard operating procedures. Typically, CROs and CRAs bill monthly for services performed, and others bill based upon milestones achieved. For outstanding amounts, we accrue unbilled clinical trial expenses based on estimates of the level of services performed each period. Costs of setting up clinical trial sites for participation in the trials are expensed immediately as research and development expenses. Clinical trial costs related to patient enrollment are accrued as patients are entered into and progress through the trial. Any initial payment made to the clinical trial site is recognized upon execution of the clinical trial agreements and expensed as research and development expenses.
Stock-based Compensation
We grant stock options, restricted stock units and restricted stock to officers, employees, directors and consultants under the Company’s 2018 Equity Incentive Plan (the 2018 Plan) and the 2020 Inducement Equity Incentive Plan.. We measure compensation cost for all stock-based awards at fair value on date of grant and recognize compensation over the requisite service period. The fair value of restricted stock and restricted stock units is determined based on the number of shares granted and the quoted price of our common stock on the date of grant. The determination of grant-date fair value for stock option awards is estimated using an option-pricing model, which includes variables such as the expected volatility of our share price, the anticipated exercise behavior of our employees, interest rates, and dividend yields. These variables are projected based on our historical data, experience, and other factors. Changes in any of these variables could result in significant adjustments to the expense recognized for share-based payments.
We grant certain stock compensation awards that vest only upon achievement of certain performance conditions. If, in our judgment, achievement of those performance conditions is not probable, we do not recognize any compensation cost for those awards. As of December 31, 2020, we have outstanding 16,524 restricted stock unit awards that contain one or more performance conditions. None of these awards have satisfied their performance criteria and have not yet vested pursuant to their terms. At this time, management does not believe that the performance conditions are probable of being met. Accordingly, we have not recorded any compensation cost associated with these grants. If our judgment as to the likelihood of the awards vesting changes, we could recognize up to approximately $187,000 of compensation cost in future periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Effective
The FASB has issued ASU 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity”. This standard simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments, such as convertible debt or convertible preferred stock, by eliminating two potential methods in accounting for the embedded conversion feature. The standard also removes certain conditions previously used to evaluate whether a freestanding financial instrument, or certain types of embedded features, are considered to be settled in the issuer’s own equity. Finally, ASU 2020-06 requires that an entity use the if-converted method in calculating the effects of convertible instruments on diluted earnings per share, with one limited exception. As a smaller reporting company, the amendments in this ASU are effective for the Company for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company is currently evaluating the effects of this guidance.