Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes and the related Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward-Looking Information
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated and combined financial statements and the corresponding notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve significant risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those referenced or set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company on a mission to develop treatments for serious CNS diseases through the discovery, development and commercialization of innovative medicines. Our lead asset, CY6463 (previously known as IW-6463), is a pioneering, CNS-penetrant, soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) stimulator that is currently in clinical development for Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathy, Lactic Acidosis and Stroke-like episodes (MELAS) and Alzheimer's disease with vascular pathology (ADv). sGC stimulators are small molecules that act synergistically with nitric oxide (NO) as positive allosteric modulators on sGC to boost production of cyclic guanosine monophosphate, or cGMP. cGMP is a key second messenger that, when produced by sGC, regulates diverse and critical biological functions in the CNS including neuronal function, neuroinflammation, cellular bioenergetics, and blood flow and vascular dynamics.
We operate in one reportable business segment-human therapeutics.
Separation from Ironwood Pharmaceuticals
On April 1, 2019, Ironwood Pharmaceuticals Inc., or Ironwood, completed the separation of its sGC business, and certain other assets and liabilities, into us as a separate, independent publicly traded company by way of a pro-rata distribution of our common stock through a dividend distribution of one share of our common stock, with no par value per share, for every 10 shares of Ironwood common stock held by Ironwood stockholders as of the close of business on March 19, 2019, the record date for the distribution, which we refer to herein as the Separation. As a result of the Separation, we became an independent public company and commenced trading under the symbol “CYCN” on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on April 2, 2019.
In connection with the Separation, on March 30, 2019, we entered into certain agreements with Ironwood to provide a framework for our relationship with Ironwood following the Separation, including, among others, a Separation Agreement, a Tax Matters Agreement, and an Employee Matters Agreement.
In addition, in connection with the Separation, on April 1, 2019, we entered into a Development Agreement, an Ironwood Transition Services Agreement, a Cyclerion Transition Services Agreement and an Intellectual Property License Agreement with Ironwood. All services provided to and from the Company under the Transition Services Agreements were completed as of March 31, 2020 and the agreements were terminated. Ironwood and the Company have agreed that the Development Agreement will not be renewed beyond its initial term which ends on March 31, 2021.
On April 2, 2019, we issued 11,817,165 shares of our common stock, in the 2019 Equity Private Placement, to accredited investors for gross proceeds of $175 million (net proceeds of approximately $165 million).
Our historical consolidated and combined financial statements for the periods prior to the Separation have been derived from Ironwood’s combined financial statements and accounting records and are presented in conformity with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or U.S. GAAP.
Our historical financial statements may not be indicative of our future performance and do not necessarily reflect what our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows would have been had we operated as a separate, publicly traded company for the periods presented prior to the Separation. The consolidated and combined financial statements prior to the Separation included herein do not reflect any changes that occurred in our financing or operations as a result of the Separation from Ironwood.
Financial Overview
Research and Development Expense. Research and development expenses are incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates. These expenses consist primarily of the following costs: compensation, benefits and other employee-related expenses, research and development related facilities, third-party contracts relating to nonclinical study and clinical trial activities. All research and development expenses are charged to operations as incurred.
CNS programs. The core of our portfolio is CY6463, an orally administered CNS-penetrant sGC stimulator that is being developed as a symptomatic and potentially disease-modifying therapy for serious CNS diseases. Nitric oxide-sGC-cGMP is a fundamental CNS signaling network, but it has not yet been leveraged for its full therapeutic potential. CY6463 enhances the brain’s natural ability to produce cGMP, an important second messenger in the CNS, by stimulating sGC, a key node in the NO-sGC-cGMP pathway. This pathway is critical to basic CNS functions, and deficient NO-sGC-cGMP signaling is believed to play an important role in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. Agents that stimulate sGC to produce cGMP may compensate for deficient NO signaling.
In January 2020, we announced positive Phase 1 study results that provided the foundation for continued development of CY6463. The Phase 1 healthy participant study results indicate that CY6463 was well tolerated. Pharmacokinetic (PK) data, obtained from both blood and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF), support once-daily dosing with or without food and demonstrated CY6463 penetration of the blood-brain-barrier with CSF concentrations expected to be pharmacologically active.
In October 2020, we announced positive topline results from our CY6463 Phase 1 translational pharmacology study in healthy elderly participants. Treatment with CY6463 for 15 days in this 24-subject study confirmed and extended results seen in the earlier first-in-human Phase 1 study: once-daily oral treatment demonstrated blood-brain-barrier penetration with expected CNS exposure and target engagement. Results also showed significant improvements in neurophysiological and objective performance measures as well as in inflammatory biomarkers associated with aging and neurodegenerative diseases. CY6463 was safe and generally well tolerated in this study. Significant effects on cerebral blood flow and markers of bioenergetics were not observed in this study of healthy elderly participants. We believe that these results, together with nonclinical data, support continued development of CY6463 as a potential new medicine for serious CNS diseases.
We have initiated our CY6463 Phase 2 clinical trial in adult participants with MELAS. In the coming months, we will use the findings of the translational pharmacology study, in addition to observations from the first-in-human Phase 1 study, to inform further clinical development activities, including the initiation of a planned Phase 2 clinical trial in ADv in mid-2021, as well as explore other potential indications. The ADv study will be supported in part by a grant from the Alzheimer's Association’s Part the Cloud-Gates Partnership Grant Program, which provides Cyclerion with $2 million of funding over two years.
Our next-generation CNS program is focused on discovery of new sGC stimulators with, for example, greater CSF-to-plasma exposure and/or potentially differentiated patterns of CNS engagement relative to CY6463. Differentiated sGC stimulators will expand the potential of sGC stimulation for the treatment of disorders of the CNS.
Non-CNS assets. We have other assets that are outside of our current strategic focus. These non-core assets are not being internally developed at this time and are available for licensing to a third-party partner. Praliciguat is an orally administered, once-daily systemic sGC stimulator that was evaluated in two Phase 2 proof-of-concept studies for adult participants with diabetic nephropathy (DN) and heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF). We released topline results from these studies in October 2019. Olinciguat is an orally administered, once-
daily, vascular sGC stimulator that was evaluated in a Phase 2 study of participants with sickle cell disease. We released topline results from this study in October 2020. We also have discovery and pre-clinical phase compounds with targeted sGC stimulators.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses and employee and facility related costs allocated to research and development expense, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The product pipeline expenses relate primarily to external costs associated with nonclinical studies and clinical trial costs, which are presented by development candidate.
Securing regulatory approvals for new drugs is a lengthy and costly process. Any failure by us to obtain, or any delay in obtaining, regulatory approvals would materially adversely affect our product development efforts and our business overall.
Given the inherent uncertainties of pharmaceutical product development, we cannot estimate with any degree of certainty how our programs will evolve, and therefore the amount of time or money that would be required to obtain regulatory approval to market them. As a result of these uncertainties surrounding the timing and outcome of any approvals, we are currently unable to estimate precisely when, if ever, our discovery and development candidates will be approved. We invest carefully in our pipeline, and the commitment of funding for each subsequent stage of our development programs is dependent upon the receipt of clear, supportive data.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain and subject to a number of risks including, but not limited to:
•
The COVID-19 pandemic could affect our programs and operations in ways that are difficult to judge at this time, including our operations, clinical trials, corporate development activities and other activities. Cyclerion is working closely with its clinical trial sites and investigators to deliver its ongoing and planned trials in a manner consistent with the safety of study participants and healthcare professionals.
•
The duration of clinical trials may vary substantially according to the type and complexity of the product candidate and may take longer than expected.
•
The United States FDA and comparable agencies outside the United States impose substantial and varying requirements on the introduction of therapeutic pharmaceutical products, which typically require lengthy and detailed laboratory and clinical testing procedures, sampling activities and other costly and time-consuming procedures.
•
Data obtained from nonclinical and clinical activities at any step in the testing process may be adverse and lead to discontinuation or redirection of development activity. Data obtained from these activities also are susceptible to varying interpretations, which could delay, limit or prevent regulatory approval.
•
The duration and cost of discovery, nonclinical studies and clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a product candidate and are difficult to predict.
•
The costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of a product candidate may not be favorable, and, even if approved, a product may face post-approval development and regulatory requirements.
•
The emergence of competing technologies and products and other adverse market developments may reduce or eliminate the potential value of our pipeline.
As a result of the factors listed above, including the factors discussed under the “Risk Factors” section in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are unable to determine the duration and costs to complete current or future nonclinical and clinical stages of our product candidates or when, or to what extent, we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. Development timelines, probability of success and development costs vary widely. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which additional programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program on an ongoing basis in response to the data from the studies of each product candidate, the competitive landscape and ongoing assessments of such product candidate’s commercial potential.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense consists primarily of compensation, benefits and other employee-related expenses for personnel in our administrative, finance, legal, information technology, business development, and human resource functions. Other costs include the legal costs of pursuing patent protection of our intellectual property, general and administrative related facility costs, insurance costs and professional fees for accounting and legal services. Certain costs associated with our separation from Ironwood are included in these expenses. We record all general and administrative expenses as incurred.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated and combined financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions that may affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated and combined financial statements, and the amounts of expenses during the reported periods. Significant estimates and assumptions in our consolidated and combined financial statements include those related to allocation of expenses, assets and liabilities from Ironwood’s historical financial statements for the periods prior to the Separation, impairment of long-lived assets; income taxes, including the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets; research and development expenses; contingencies and share-based compensation. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ materially from our estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results in the period in which they become known.
We believe that our application of accounting policies requires significant judgments and estimates on the part of management and is the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the consolidated and combined financial statements elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
All research and development expenses are expensed as incurred. We defer and capitalize nonrefundable advance payments we make for research and development activities until the related goods are received or the related services are performed. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the consolidated and combined financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
For the period prior to the Separation, our consolidated and combined financial statements include an allocation of expenses related to certain Ironwood corporate functions, including senior management, legal, human resources, finance, information technology and quality assurance. These expenses were allocated to Cyclerion based on direct usage or benefit where identifiable, with the remainder allocated pro-rata based on project related costs, headcount or other measures. We considered the allocation methodologies used to be a reasonable and appropriate reflection of the historical Ironwood expenses attributable to us. The expenses reflected in the consolidated and
combined financial statements may not be indicative of expenses that will be incurred by us in the future. After the Separation, we began performing these corporate functions using internal resources or purchased services, certain of which were provided by Ironwood under the Transition Services Agreement. The following discussion summarizes the key factors we believe are necessary for an understanding of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue from related party. The decrease in revenue from related party for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is due to a decrease in services provided in the current year as compared to the prior year, partially offset by the Company providing services to Ironwood for the full year 2020 compared to only three quarters post-Separation in 2019. Ironwood and the Company have agreed that the Development Agreement will not be renewed beyond its initial term which ends on March 31, 2021.
Research and development expenses. The decrease in research and development expenses of approximately $38.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a net decrease in personnel and related costs of approximately $12.5 million, a net decrease in facilities and other costs of approximately $8.2 million, and a net decrease in product pipeline external costs of approximately $18.0 million. The net decrease in personnel and related costs of $12.5 million was driven by lower salaries and related costs of $13.4 million, including $1.9 million in stock-based compensation, primarily due to lower average headcount, partially offset by $0.9 million in costs associated with the 2020 workforce reduction as compared to the 2019 workforce reduction. The net decrease in facilities and other costs allocated to research and development of approximately $8.2 million was primarily due to reductions in the Company’s total leased premises. The net decrease in product pipeline external costs was primarily due to decreases over the periods of approximately $13.0 million in praliciguat studies, approximately $6.2 million in olinciguat studies and approximately $0.1 million in discovery research, partially offset by an increase of approximately $1.3 million in CY6463 studies.
General and administrative expenses. The decrease in general and administrative expenses of approximately $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by approximately $5.9 million in salaries and other employee-related costs, including $2.1 million in stock-based compensation, primarily due to lower average headcount and the pre-Separation allocation from Ironwood recorded in the prior period, and approximately $3.5 million of non-recurring outsourced professional services and other costs associated with the Separation recorded in the prior period partially offset by an increase of approximately $1.7 million in professional fees supporting the Company’s financing activities in the current year, including the Shelf, the 2020 Equity Private Placement and the ATM Offering, an increase of approximately $1.4 million in other outside professional and corporate expenses, an increase of approximately $0.4 million in other operating and administrative expenses, and an increase of approximately $0.3 million in costs associated with the 2020 workforce reduction as compared to the 2019 workforce reduction.
Gain on lease modification, net. The gain on lease modification, net of $1.7 million recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020 is driven by a $2.1 million gain related to the Lease Amendment to the Head Lease at 301 Binney Street in Cambridge, Massachusetts that was executed on February 28, 2020 in which the Company returned approximately 40,000 rentable square feet to the landlord, partially offset by a $0.4 million loss related to the Second Lease Amendment to the Head Lease at 301 Binney Street in Cambridge, Massachusetts that was executed
on September 15, 2020 in which the Company returned approximately 17,000 rentable square feet to the landlord.
Sublease termination income, net. The sublease termination income, net of $2.9 million recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the difference between the consideration received and the consideration given up related to the Sublease Termination Agreement that was executed on September 15, 2020.
Interest and other income, net. Interest and other income, net decreased by approximately $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a decrease of approximately $1.6 million in interest income driven by lower cash balances and lower interest rates in the current year as compared to the prior year, partially offset by an increase of approximately $0.2 million in net sublease income from the sublease agreement which was in effect for more months in the current year than the prior year before its termination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the Separation, the primary source of liquidity for our business was cash flow allocated to Cyclerion from Ironwood. Post Separation, transfers of cash to and from Ironwood related to the Transition Service Agreements, Development Agreement and provisions of the Separation Agreement, have been reflected in the consolidated and combined statement of cash flows.
After the Separation on April 1, 2019, we raised approximately $165 million net of direct financing expenses with the closing of the 2019 Equity Private Placement on April 2, 2019.
On July 29, 2020, we closed on a private placement of 6,062,500 shares of our common stock, pursuant to a Common Stock Purchase Agreement, for total gross proceeds of approximately $24.3 million. There were no material fees or commissions related to the transaction.
On September 3, 2020, the Company entered into the Sales Agreement with Jefferies with respect to an at-the-market offering, or ATM Offering, under the shelf registration statement. Under the ATM Offering, the Company may offer and sell, from time to time at its sole discretion, shares of its common stock, having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million through Jefferies as its sales agent. The Company will pay to Jefferies cash commissions of 3.0 percent of the gross proceeds of sales of common stock under the Sales Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, no shares have been issued or sold under the ATM Offering.
Our ability to continue to fund our operations and meet capital needs will depend on our ability to generate cash from operations and access to capital markets and other sources of capital, as further described below. We anticipate that our principal uses of cash in the future will be primarily to fund our operations, working capital needs, capital expenditures and other general corporate purposes.
On December 31, 2020, we had approximately $54.4 million of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents. Our cash equivalents include amounts held in U.S. government money market funds. We invest cash in excess of immediate requirements in accordance with our investment policy, which requires all investments held by us to be at least “AAA” rated or equivalent, with a remaining final maturity when purchased of less than twelve months, so as to primarily achieve liquidity and capital preservation.
Going Concern
Based on the timing expectations of our research and development plans, including our clinical trials, we expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020, will be sufficient to fund our planned operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through the next 12 months following the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, particularly as the process of testing drug candidates in clinical trials is costly and the timing of progress in these trials is uncertain.
Cash Flows
The following is a summary of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities totaled approximately $72.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary uses for cash were our net loss of $77.8 million, the payment of a $6.3 million termination fee related to the Head Lease modification, and the net changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.3 million. The uses of cash were partially offset by non-cash adjustments of $12.9 million, primarily from share-based compensation.
Net cash used in operating activities totaled approximately $102.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary uses of cash were our net loss of $123.0 million and the net changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $2.3 million from our working capital accounts, partially offset by non-cash adjustments of $23.1 million, primarily from share-based compensation.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was de minimis and related to the purchases and sales of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled approximately $6.7 million, primarily from the purchase of leasehold improvements and other property and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $28.1 million, primarily from $24.3 million in proceeds from the 2020 private placement, $3.5 million of proceeds from the PPP loan, and $0.3 million from proceeds from employee stock award plan.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was approximately $211.6 million, primarily from $164.6 million in net proceeds from the 2019 private placement, $46.4 million of cash transferred to us from Ironwood prior to Separation when Ironwood managed our cash and financing arrangements, and $0.5 million from proceeds from employee stock award plans.
Debt - Paycheck Protection Program
On April 21, 2020, we received loan proceeds in the amount of approximately $3.5 million pursuant to a promissory note agreement (the “Promissory Note”) with a bank under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), of which certain key terms were adjusted by the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act (“PPPFA”). The Promissory Note has an initial loan maturity of April 20, 2022, a stated interest rate of 1.0% per annum, and has payments of principal and interest that are due monthly after an initial deferral period where interest accrues, but no payments are due. Under the PPPFA, the initial deferral may be extended from six up to ten months and the loan maturity may be extended from two to five years. The Promissory Note provides for customary events of default, including, among others, those relating to failure to make payment when due and breaches of representations. We may prepay the principal of the Promissory Note at any time without incurring any prepayment charges. The loan is
subject to all the terms and conditions applicable under the PPPFA and is subject to review by the Small Business Association for compliance with program requirements.
The loan’s principal and accrued interest are forgivable to the extent that the proceeds are used for eligible purposes, subject to certain limitations, and that we maintain our payroll levels over a twenty-four-week period following the loan date. The loan forgiveness amount may be reduced if we terminate employees or reduce salaries during the twenty-four-week period. We believe that we have used the proceeds for eligible purposes consistent with the provisions of the PPPFA. However, the Company cannot assure at this time that the loan under the Promissory Note will be forgiven partially, or in full.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to fluctuate as we advance the preclinical activities and clinical trials of our product candidates.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 will enable us to fund our planned operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements at least through the next 12 months following the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, excluding net cash flows from potential business development activities. We based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Because of the many risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our working capital requirements. Our expenses will fluctuate, and our future funding requirements will depend on, and could increase or decrease significantly as a result of, many factors, including the:
•
scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•
costs of future activities, including medical affairs, manufacturing and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•
cost and timing of necessary actions to support our strategic objectives;
•
costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims; and
•
timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or milestone payments related to or royalties on, our current or future product candidates, if any.
A change in any of these or other variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing of the development of that product candidate. Further, our operating plans may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties. As discussed under the “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, to preserve the tax-free treatment of the Separation, we may be barred, in certain circumstances, for a two-year period following the Separation, from engaging in certain capital raising transactions. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, outstanding equity ownership may be materially diluted, and the terms of securities sold in transactions could include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of holders of common stock. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specified actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. In addition, debt financing would result in increased fixed payment obligations.
If we raise funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce or eliminate our product development or future commercialization efforts, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Commitments and Obligations
Tax-related Obligations
We exclude assets, liabilities or obligations pertaining to uncertain tax positions from our summary of contractual commitments and obligations as we cannot make a reliable estimate of the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities. As of December 31, 2020, we had no uncertain tax positions.
Other Funding Commitments
As of December 31, 2020, we had, and continue to have, several ongoing studies in various clinical trial stages. Our most significant clinical trial spending is with clinical research organizations, or CROs. The contracts with CROs generally are cancellable, with notice, at our option and do not have any significant cancellation penalties.
Transition from Ironwood and Costs to Operate as an Independent Company
Our consolidated and combined financial statements for the period prior to the Separation reflect our operating results and financial position as it was operated by Ironwood, rather than as an independent company. As a result of the Separation, we have incurred additional ongoing operating expenses to operate as an independent, publicly traded, company. These costs include the cost of various corporate functions, incremental information technology-related costs and incremental costs to operate stand-alone accounting, legal, human resources and other administrative functions. We also incurred non-recurring expenses and non-recurring capital expenditures.
The Ironwood Transition Services Agreement provided us with certain services and resources related to corporate functions for an initial term of up to two years from the date of the Separation (as applicable). All services provided by Ironwood to the Company under the Ironwood Transition Services Agreement were completed as of March 31, 2020, and it has been terminated.
It is not practicable to estimate the costs that would have been incurred in each of the periods presented in the historical financial statements for the functions described above. Actual costs that would have been incurred if we operated as a stand-alone company for the periods prior to the Separation would have depended on various factors, including organizational design, outsourcing and other strategic decisions related to corporate functions, information technology and back office infrastructure.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements (as that term is defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K) or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As such, we are not exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in those types of relationships. We enter into guarantees in the ordinary course of business related to the guarantee of our own performance.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting pronouncements see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the consolidated and combined financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.