Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Annual Report, including our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes set forth in Item 8. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements, including information about possible or assumed results of our financial condition, operations, plans, objectives and performance that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The actual results may differ materially from those anticipated and set forth in such forward-looking statements. See “Forward-Looking Statements” preceding Part I and Item 1A. Risk Factors in Part I of this Form 10-K.
Overview of Our Business
The Company is a late-stage biotechnology company focused on the clinical development and potential commercialization of leronlimab (PRO 140), a CCR5 antagonist to treat HIV infection, as well as multiple other potential therapeutic indications. Our current business strategy is to resubmit our Biologics License Application (“BLA”) for leronlimab as a combination therapy for highly treatment experienced HIV patients as soon as possible, as well as to seek approval for other HIV-related indications, to seek approval for leronlimab as a potential therapeutic benefit for COVID-19 patients with mild-to-moderate, severe-to-critical, and long-haulers indications in the U.S. and Brazil, to advance our clinical trials with leronlimab for various forms of cancer, and to concurrently explore other cancer and immunologic indications for leronlimab.
The target of leronlimab is the immunologic receptor CCR5. The CCR5 receptor is a protein located on the surface of white blood cells that serves as a receptor for chemical attractants called chemokines. Chemokines are the key orchestrators of leukocyte trafficking by attracting immune cells to the sites of inflammation. At the site of an inflammatory reaction, chemokines are released. These chemokines are specific for CCR5 and cause the migration of T-cells to these sites promoting further inflammation. The mechanism of action of leronlimab has the potential to block the movement of T-cells to inflammatory sites, which could be instrumental in diminishing or eliminating inflammatory responses. Some disease processes that could benefit from CCR5 blockade include transplantation rejection, autoimmunity, and chronic inflammation such as rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis.
Due to leronlimab’s mechanism of action (“MOA”), we believe leronlimab may have significant advantages in reducing side effects over other CCR5 antagonists. Prior studies have demonstrated that leronlimab does not cause direct activation of T-cells.
We continue to evaluate strategic licensing opportunities and supply and distribution partnerships, as well as conducting exploratory discussions with third parties with respect to other potential strategies to monetize our assets. As recently completed license and supply and distribution agreements demonstrate, such agreements are country or region specific and generally are limited to a specific clinical indication for leronlimab.
Business Highlights in Fiscal 2021
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, we commenced several initiatives to advance our lead product candidate, leronlimab. The following is a brief summary of key accomplishments during the most recent fiscal year:
• We raised approximately $140 million in gross proceeds through offerings of convertible debt securities, combined with proceeds from the exercise of warrants and stock options;
• We entered into additional supply and distribution agreements for the distribution and sale of leronlimab in the Philippines, Brazil and India subject to regulatory approvals;
• We successfully manufactured 11 batches of commercial grade leronlimab pre-launch inventories;
• Our drug candidate, leronlimab, received over 60 Emergency Investigational New Drug (EIND) authorizations from the FDA to treat COVID-19 patients;
• We initiated and completed two double-blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trials for COVID-19, a Phase 2 trial for patients with mild-to-moderate symptoms and a Phase 3 trial for patients with severe-to-critical symptoms;
• We initiated a Phase 2 investigative trial for COVID-19 long-haulers, which was completed shortly after fiscal year end;
• We advanced our clinical trials to evaluate the safety and efficacy of leronlimab for several cancer indications by treating the first patients in metastatic triple-negative breast cancer and, metastatic breast cancer, as well as a basket trial for 22 solid tumor cancers:
• An animal study was published in Nature Communications regarding the use of leronlimab for HIV PrEP; and
• We initiated a Phase 2 clinical trial with leronlimab for the treatment of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).
For additional information regarding our business, our clinical trials and our progress toward the resubmission of our BLA, see Item 1. Business in this Form 10-K. We will require a significant amount of additional capital to complete the resubmission of our BLA to the FDA, as well as completing or advancing additional clinical trials in the COVID-19, oncology and immunology spaces. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Results of operations for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
For the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we had no activities that produced revenues from operations. The following schedule sets forth the results of operations for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands except per share amounts):
Net loss
Net loss incurred during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $154.7 million and $124.4 million, respectively. The increase in net loss of approximately $30.3 million, or 24%, was primarily attributable to increased general and administrative (“G&A”) expenses, an intangible asset impairment charge, increased research and development (“R&D”) expenses, and increased loss from extinguishment of convertible notes, partially offset by decreased change in fair value of derivative liabilities and decreased legal settlement charges.
Loss per share
Net loss per share for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 was $0.27 compared to the net loss per share of $0.30 in the prior fiscal year. The decrease in loss per share of $0.03, or 9%, compared to the prior year was due to the significant increase in the number of weighted average common shares outstanding over the comparable period in 2020, partially offset by the increase in net loss. The increase in common stock was due to common stock issuances associated with the exercise of warrants and stock options, negotiated exchange settlements of certain convertible note obligations with common stock, and a private placement of equity.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses totaled approximately $104.6 million and $74.6 million during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021 and May 31, 2020, respectively. The increase in operating expenses of approximately $29.9 million, or 40%, over the prior fiscal year was primarily attributable to an increased G&A expenses, increased R&D expenses, and an intangible asset impairment charge.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 consisted of the following (in thousands):
G&A expenses totaled approximately $34.3 million and $20.0 million during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021 and May 31, 2020 respectively, representing an increase of approximately $14.3 million, or 72% over the previous fiscal year. G&A expenses consisted of salaries and benefits, non-cash stock-based compensation expense, professional fees, insurance and various other expenses. The increase in G&A expenses over the 2020 fiscal year was primarily due to employee compensation and related expenses, increased non-cash stock-based compensation, and along with higher professional services fees.
Research and development expenses
R&D expenses were recorded where directly identifiable, consisting of the following during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands):
R&D expenses totaled approximately $58.4 million during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, an increase of approximately $5.8 million, or 11%, over the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020. R&D expenses consisted of clinical trials, non-clinical, Chemistry, Manufacturing and Controls (“CMC”), and license and patent fees. The 2021 increase over 2020 was primarily attributable to higher clinical trial expenses, partially offset by decreases in non-clinical and CMC expenses. The increase in clinical trial costs were attributable to COVID-19 clinical trial costs and clinical trial costs related to oncology and immunology indications. The future trend of R&D expenses will be dependent on the timing of resubmission of and FDA approval, if any, of our BLA, the timing of FDA clearance, if any, of our pivotal trial protocol for leronlimab as a monotherapy for HIV patients, the clinical progression of our COVID-19, metastatic triple-negative breast cancer and NASH trials, and the outcome of pre-clinical studies for several other cancer indications.
Amortization and depreciation expenses
Amortization and depreciation expense totaled approximately $1.8 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, a decrease of approximately $0.2 million, or 12% from the prior year. The decrease was attributable to the intangible write-off of a proprietary algorithm intangible asset, resulting in decreased amortization of intangibles.
Intangible asset impairment
For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, the Company recorded an intangible asset impairment charge of approximately $10.0 million, which represents an increase of 100% over the same period in 2020. This charge was
attributable to the full impairment of the net carrying value of the proprietary algorithm intangible asset the Company acquired in connection with the acquisition of the assets of ProstaGene, LLC in November 2018.
Other income
For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, other income decreased approximately $0.5 million, or 100%, compared to the prior year. Other income for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020, of $0.5 million resulted from the execution of an agreement in which the Company granted an exclusive royalty-bearing license to a third-party to commercialize, use, and sell leronlimab for HIV in the U.S. upon BLA approval.
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities
For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, we did not realize a change in fair value of derivative liabilities as compared to the prior year change of approximately $9.5 million, as the originating instruments were all exercised and settled during the 2020 fiscal year. The originating underlying instruments were certain warrants that originated in September 2016 and two convertible note instruments originated in June 2018 and January 2019 containing contingent cash settlement provisions, which gave rise to a derivative liability. For each reporting period, the Company determined the fair value of the derivative liability and recorded a corresponding non-cash benefit or non-cash charge, due to a decrease or increase, respectively, in the calculated derivative liability.
Loss on extinguishment of convertible notes
For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, we recognized non-cash losses on the extinguishment of convertible notes of approximately $19.9 million. We did not recognize any losses on the extinguishment of debt during the prior year. The losses resulted from separately and independently negotiated exchange agreements to satisfy certain note payment obligations in which certain debt was agreed to be settled in exchange for shares issued at a price less than the closing price for the effective date of the respective transactions. The original underlying convertible notes were entered into on March 31, 2020, July 29, 2020, and November 10, 2020.
Legal settlements
Legal settlements for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 of $10.6 million were related to cash damages awarded to plaintiffs in legal proceedings against the Company. Legal settlements (non-cash) for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020 of $22.5 million were related to the issuance of shares of common stock in settlement of a claim filed by the holder of the January 2019 Note alleging that the note holder was owed additional shares upon conversion of the note.
Interest expense
Interest expense totaled approximately $19.6 million for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, an increase of approximately $1.3 million, or 7%, from the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020. This increase was due primarily to increased amortization of discount on convertible notes resulting from increased repayment of our convertible notes payable, increase in inducement interest expense offset by decrease in interest on convertible notes payable.
The future trends of all expenses will be driven, in large part, by future outcomes of current and new clinical trials and the corresponding effect on research and development expenses, timing of the anticipated BLA approval, as well as G&A expenses and outcomes of any current or future legal proceedings, in addition to the manufacturing of new commercial leronlimab upon any regulatory approval, and other (income) expense, including interest expense, related to debt and equity transactions. We require a significant amount of additional capital, and our ability to continue to fund operations will continue to depend on our ability to raise such capital. See in particular, “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below and Item 1A “Risk Factors” above.
Please refer to Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020, filed on August 14, 2020, for additional information comparing our results of operations for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2020 and May 31, 2019.
Fluctuations in Operating Results
The Company’s operating results may fluctuate due to a number of factors, such as the timing of product manufacturing activities, patient enrollment or completion rates in various trials, coupled with potential amendments to clinical trial protocols. As a non-revenue generating company, we are regularly conducting offerings to raise capital, which can create various forms of non-cash interest expense or amortization of issuance costs. Further, we regularly negotiate the settlement of debt payment obligations in exchange for equity securities of the Company, which can create a non-cash loss or gain on extinguishment of debt. In addition, in prior years a portion of the aforementioned derivative liabilities is tied to certain securities that included a contingent cash settlement provision, which can vary substantially from year to year, thereby creating a non-cash charge or benefit.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of May 31, 2021, we had a total of approximately $33.9 million in cash and approximately $152.5 million in short-term liabilities consisting primarily of approximately $62.7 million representing the current portion of long-term convertible notes payable and approximately $85.0 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities and compensation. We will continue to incur operating losses and the Company will require a significant amount of additional capital in the future in anticipation of a fully commercialized leronlimab product. Despite the Company’s negative working capital position, vendor relations remain accommodative and we do not currently anticipate delays in our business initiatives schedule due to liquidity constraints.
We cannot be certain, however, that future funding will be available to us when needed on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all. We sell securities and incur debt when the terms of such agreements are deemed favorable to both parties under then current circumstances and as necessary to fund our current and projected cash needs. In addition, as of May 31, 2021 we had approximately 40.9 million authorized shares of common stock available for future issuance in addition to those already issued or reserved for issuance.
Cash
The Company’s cash position of approximately $33.9 million at May 31, 2021 increased approximately $19.6 million compared to the balance of approximately $14.3 million at May 31, 2020. During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, we provided funds for our operations by obtaining a total of approximately $139.3 million of net cash proceeds primarily through convertible debt issuances, private warrant exchange transactions, warrant and stock option exercises, and a private equity offering.
Inventories
Inventories as of May 31, 2021 and May 31, 2020 are presented below (in thousands):
The Company’s pre-launch inventories position of approximately $93.5 million at May 31, 2021 increased approximately $74.3 million as compared to a balance of approximately $19.1 million at May 31, 2020 as the Company increased inventory in preparation for commercialization. This inventory increase is related to raw materials purchased for commercial production and work-in-progress inventory related to the substantially completed commercial production of pre-launch inventories of leronlimab, in anticipation of regulatory approval of the product as a combination therapy for HIV patients by the FDA in the United States. During the quarter ended February 28, 2021, the Company was notified by a third-party contract manufacturing partner that due to an operational error committed by the contract manufacturer, one of the batches of a multiple-batch manufacturing campaign failed to meet quality standards, and thus would not be saleable upon regulatory approval. In accordance with the agreement, the contract manufacturer assumed liability for the failure, all costs to manufacture the batch, and committed to remanufacture the batch at a future date. As a result, the Company reduced work-in-progress inventory and the related amounts due to the contract manufacturer by $6.1 million. No other inventory was affected by this manufacturing issue, and all other inventory has successfully passed quality standards. As of May 31, 2021, the raw materials balance was $28.1 million and the total work-in-progress was $65.4 million. Work-in-progress consists of bulk drug substance, which is the manufactured drug stored in bulk storage, and drug product, which is the manufactured drug in unlabeled vials. Bulk drug substance and drug product comprised approximately $35.8 million and $29.6 million, respectively, of work-in-progress inventory. See “Capital Requirements-Contract Manufacturing” below for a further discussion of commitments with third-party contract manufacturing partners. See also “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” below.
Cash Flows
For the year ended May 31, 2021, the net change in cash was an increase of approximately $19.7 million, which was attributable to increased net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $57.7 million, offset in part by increased net cash used in operating activities of approximately $48.8 million, and increased cash used in investing activities of approximately $0.1 million.
Cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities totaled approximately $117.6 million during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, which reflects an increase of approximately $48.8 million over the approximately $68.8 million in fiscal 2020. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was due to increased pre-launch inventories, and net loss, offset in part by the intangible asset impairment charge, increased accounts payables and accrued liabilities, and increased non-cash loss on extinguishment of debt, when compared to the changes in the prior year.
Cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $0.1 million during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, which reflects an insignificant increase over a year ago attributable to the purchase of office equipment and furniture.
Cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled approximately $137.3 million during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 representing an approximate $57.7 million increase in net cash provided by financing activities when compared to the previous fiscal year. The increase in net cash provided from financing activities was primarily attributable to an increase in proceeds from convertible debt issuances and an increase in proceeds from private warrant
exchange transactions, offset by a decrease in ordinary warrant and stock option exercise proceeds, and the absence of proceeds from the sale of preferred stock, when compared to the same period in the prior year.
Convertible debt
The following schedule sets forth the outstanding balance of convertible notes as of May 31, 2021 and May 31, 2020. A detailed discussion of our various convertible debt arrangements is included in Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K (in thousands):
April 23, 2021 Note
On April 23, 2021, we issued a convertible note with a principal amount of $28.5 million resulting in net cash proceeds of $25.0 million, after $3.4 million of debt discount and $0.1 million of offering costs. The note accrues interest daily at a rate of 10% per annum, contains a stated conversion price of $10.00 per share, and matures in April 2023. After six months past the issuance date, the noteholder can request monthly redemptions of up to $7.0 million. The outstanding balance of the April 23, 2021 Note, including accrued interest, was approximately $25.5 million as of May 31, 2021.
April 2, 2021 Note
On April 2, 2021, we issued a convertible note with a principal amount of $28.5 million resulting in net cash proceeds of $25.0 million, after $3.4 million of debt discount and $0.1 million of offering costs. The note accrues interest daily at a rate of 10% per annum, contains a stated conversion price of $10.00 per share, and matures in April 2023. The April 2, 2021 Note requires monthly debt reduction payments of $7.5 million for the six months beginning in May 2021 which can also be satisfied by payments on the November 2020, and/or April 23, 2021 Note. After six months past the issuance date, the noteholder can request monthly redemptions of up to $3.5 million. The outstanding balance of the April 23, 2021 Note, including accrued interest, was approximately $25.7 million as of May 31, 2021.
November 2020 Note
During November 2020, we issued a convertible note with a principal amount of $28.5 million resulting in net cash proceeds of $25.0 million, after $3.4 million of debt discount and $0.1 million of offering costs. The note accrues interest daily at a rate of 10% per annum, contains a stated conversion price of $10.00 per share, and matures in November 2022. The November 2020 Note requires monthly debt reduction payments of $7.5 million for the six months beginning in November 2020 which can also be satisfied by payments on the July 2020 Note and/or March 2020 Note, both of which have been paid in full, as discussed below. After six months past the issuance date, the noteholder can request monthly redemptions of up to $3.5 million. The outstanding balance of the November 2020 Note, including accrued interest, was approximately $13.6 million as of May 31, 2021.
July 2020 Note
During July 2020, we issued a convertible note with a principal amount of $28.5 million resulting in net cash proceeds of $25.0 million, after $3.4 million of debt discount and $0.1 million of offering costs. The note accrued interest daily at a rate of 10% per annum, contains a stated conversion price of $10.00 per share and matures in July 2022. Beginning six months after the issuance date, the noteholder could request monthly redemptions up to $3.5 million. During the quarter ended May 31, 2021, this note was fully retired as a result of the noteholder exercising the monthly redemption provision and the Company satisfying the monthly Debt Reduction Amount required under the November 2020 Note by making payments on the July 2020 Note. There was no balance outstanding under this note as of May 31, 2021.
March 2020 Note
During the quarter ended November 30, 2020, this note was fully retired as a result of the noteholder exercising the monthly redemption provision and the Company satisfying the monthly Debt Reduction Amount required under the November 2020 Note by making payments on the March 2020 Note. There was no balance outstanding under this note as of May 31, 2021.
Common stock
We have 800.0 million authorized shares of common stock. As of May 31, 2021, we had approximately 625.7 million shares of common stock outstanding, approximately 42.9 million shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of warrants, approximately 33.0 million shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of convertible preferred stock and undeclared dividends, approximately 24.1 million shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of outstanding stock options or the vesting of outstanding restricted stock, approximately 15.3 million shares of common stock reserved for future issuance under our equity compensation plans, and approximately 18.0 million shares of common stock reserved and issuable upon conversion of outstanding convertible notes. As a result, as of May 31, 2021, we had approximately 40.9 million authorized shares of common stock available for issuance.
Commitments and Contingencies
Contract Manufacturing with Samsung Biologics Co., Ltd (“Samsung”)
In April 2019, the Company entered into an agreement with Samsung, pursuant to which Samsung will perform technology transfer, process validation, manufacturing and supply services for the commercial supply of leronlimab effective through calendar year 2027. In 2020, the Company entered into an additional agreement, pursuant to which Samsung will perform technology transfer, process validation, vial filling and storage services for clinical, pre-approval inspection, and commercial supply of leronlimab. Samsung is obligated to procure necessary raw materials for the Company and manufacture a specified minimum number of batches, and the Company is required to provide a rolling three-year forecast of future estimated manufacturing requirements to Samsung that are binding. The future commitments pursuant to these agreements are estimated as follows (in thousands):
Management maintains relationships with two contract manufacturers that it believes best serve our strategic objectives for the anticipated resubmission of our BLA filing and, if approved, the long-term commercial manufacturing capabilities for leronlimab. Management will continue to assess manufacturing capacity requirements as new market information becomes available regarding anticipated demand, subject to FDA approval.
Commitments with Contract Research Organization (“CRO”)
The Company has entered into project work orders for each of our clinical trials with our CRO and related laboratory vendors. Under the terms of these agreements, the Company has prepaid certain execution fees for direct services costs. In connection with our clinical trials, the Company has entered into separate project work orders for each trial with our CRO. In the event that the Company terminates any trial, certain financial penalties may be incurred which would become payable to the CRO. Based on the form of termination of any one trial, the financial penalties may range up to approximately $2.0 million. In the remote circumstance that all clinical trials are terminated, the collective financial penalties may range from a low of approximately $2.1 million to a high of approximately $3.3 million.
Operating Leases
We lease our principal office location in Vancouver, Washington and a office location in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. Under the terms of each lease, the Vancouver and Fort Lauderdale leases expire April 30, 2026 and March 31, 2022, respectively. The Fort Lauderdale office is currently being sublet to a tenant. Consistent with the guidance in ASC 842, we have recorded these leases in our consolidated balance sheet as operating leases. For the purpose of determining the right-of-use asset and associated lease liability, we determined that the renewal of the Vancouver lease was reasonably probable. The leases of both our Vancouver and Fort Lauderdale offices do not include any restrictions or covenants requiring special treatment under ASC 842. During the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized $0.3 million and $0.2 million of operating lease costs.
The following table summarizes the presentation of the operating leases in our consolidated balance sheet at May 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The minimum (base rental) lease payments reconciled to the carrying value of the operating lease liabilities as of May 31, 2021 are expected to be as follows (in thousands):
Legal Proceedings
The Company is a party to various legal proceedings. As of the year ended May 31, 2021, we were not party to any material pending legal proceedings, except those described in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8. of this Form 10-K. The Company recognizes accruals for such proceedings to the extent a loss is determined to be both probable and reasonably estimable. The best estimate of a loss within a possible range is accrued; however, if
no estimate in the range is more probable than another, then the minimum amount in the range is accrued. If it is determined that a material loss is not probable but reasonably possible and the loss or range of loss can be estimated, the possible loss is disclosed. It is not possible to determine the outcome of these proceedings, including the defense and other litigation-related costs and expenses that may be incurred by the Company, as the outcomes of legal proceedings are inherently uncertain, and the outcomes could differ significantly from recognized accruals. Therefore, it is possible that the ultimate outcome of any proceeding, if in excess of a recognized accrual, or if an accrual had not been made, could be material to the Company’s consolidated financial statements. As of May 31, 2021 the Company recorded legal accruals of approximately $10.6 million related to the outcomes of the matters described in Note 10. “Legal Proceedings”. The Company did not record any material accruals as of May 31, 2020. See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of legal proceedings.
Distribution
In December 2019, the Company entered into a supply agreement with Vyera Pharmaceuticals, LLC (“Vyera”) for the sale of leronlimab for HIV in the United States in conjunction with a commercialization and license agreement entered into with Vyera. See ”Licensing” below for further discussion of the agreement. On July 2, 2020, the Company entered into an exclusive distribution and supply agreement with American Regent Inc. with respect to the distribution of leronlimab for the treatment of COVID-19 in the United States. The parties mutually agreed to terminate the agreement effective June 9, 2021. On April 6, 2021, the Company entered into an exclusive supply and distribution agreement with Biomm S.A., a Brazilian pharmaceutical company, granting the exclusive right to distribute and sell leronlimab in Brazil upon Brazilian regulatory approval. On April 15, 2021, the Company entered into an exclusive supply and distribution agreement with Chiral Pharma Corporation, a Philippine pharmaceutical company, granting the exclusive right to distribute and sell up to 200,000 vials of leronlimab during the 12 months ending April 15, 2022, to treat critically ill COVID-19 patients in the Philippines under Compassionate Special Permit (“CSP”) or Emergency Use Authorization (“EUA”) from the Food and Drug Administration of the Philippines. On May 11, 2021, the Company entered into an exclusive supply and distribution agreement with Macleods Pharmaceuticals Ltd., an Indian pharmaceutical company, granting the exclusive right to distribute and sell up to 200,000 vials of leronlimab in calendar year 2021 in India to treat COVID-19 patients under a CSP or EUA from the India Central Drugs Standard Control Organization.
Licensing
Under the Progenics Purchase Agreement, we are required to pay Progenics the following ongoing milestone payments and royalties: (i) $5.0 million at the time of the first U.S. new drug application approval by the FDA or other non-U.S. approval for the sale of leronlimab (PRO 140); and (ii) royalty payments of up to five percent (5%) on net sales during the period beginning on the date of the first commercial sale of leronlimab (PRO 140) until the later of (a) the expiration of the last to expire patent included in the acquired assets, and (b) 10 years, in each case determined on a country-by country basis. In addition, under a Development and License Agreement, dated April 30, 1999 (the “PDL License”), between Protein Design Labs (now AbbVie Inc.) and Progenics, which was previously assigned to us, we are required to pay AbbVie Inc. additional milestone payments and royalties as follows: (i) $0.5 million upon filing a BLA with the FDA or non-U.S. equivalent regulatory body; (ii) $0.5 million upon FDA approval or approval by another non-U.S. equivalent regulatory body; and (iii) royalties of up to 3.5% of net sales for the longer of 10 years and the date of expiration of the last to expire licensed patent. Additionally, the PDL License provides for an annual maintenance fee of $150,000 until royalties paid exceed that amount. As discussed elsewhere in this Form 10-K, the Company received a Refusal to File letter from the FDA in July 2020 with respect to its BLA as a combination therapy with HAART for highly treatment experienced HIV patients. In response to this letter, the Company commenced the resubmission of its BLA in July 2021 and is expected to be completed in October 2021. As such, until the BLA is accepted by the FDA, it is management’s conclusion that the probability of achieving the subsequent future clinical development and regulatory milestones is not reasonably determinable, such that the future milestone payments payable to Progenics and its sub-licensors have been deemed contingent consideration and, therefore, not currently accruable.
In December 2019, the Company entered into a Commercialization and License Agreement and a Supply Agreement with Vyera Pharmaceuticals, LLC (the “License Agreement”). Pursuant to the License Agreement, the Company granted Vyera an exclusive royalty-bearing license to commercialize pharmaceutical preparations containing leronlimab for treatment of HIV in humans in the United States. Pursuant to the terms of the License Agreement, and
subject to the conditions set forth therein, Vyera will incur the cost of, and be responsible for, among other things, commercializing the product in the territory and will use commercially reasonable efforts to commercialize the product in the field in the territory. Under the terms of the License Agreement, CytoDyn is permitted to license the product outside of the territory for uses in the field or outside the field or for uses inside the territory outside of the field. In consideration of the license and other rights granted by the Company, Vyera agreed to pay the Company, within three business days of the effective date of the License Agreement, a $0.5 million license issue fee, with additional payments totaling up to approximately $87.0 million to be made upon the achievement of certain sales and regulatory milestones. Certain milestones are subject to reduction if not achieved within an agreed-upon timeframe. Vyera may also pay the Company additional potential milestone payments upon the regulatory approval of leronlimab for certain subsequent indications in the field. Whether a particular subsequent indication qualifies for an additional milestone payment will be determined in good faith by the parties. In addition, during the Royalty Term, as defined in the License Agreement, but, in any event, a period of not less than 10 years following the first commercial sale under the License Agreement, Vyera is obligated to pay the Company a royalty equal to 50% of Vyera’s gross profit margin from product sales (defined in the License Agreement as “Net Sales”) in the territory. The royalty is subject to reduction during the Royalty Term after patent expiry and expiry of regulatory exclusivity. Following expiration of the Royalty Term, Vyera will continue to maintain non-exclusive rights to commercialize the product.
Regulatory Matters
In July 2020, the Company received a Refusal to File letter from the FDA regarding its BLA submission for leronlimab as a combination therapy with HAART for highly treatment experienced HIV patients. The FDA informed the Company its BLA did not contain certain information needed to complete a substantive review and therefore, the FDA would not file the BLA. In particular, the FDA informed the Company that the receptor occupancy analysis performed by its third-party laboratory was not properly performed, and would be required to be resubmitted, and the Company would need to correct certain administrative submission deficiencies. The FDA’s request does not require any additional clinical trials to be conducted. Subsequent to the Refusal to File letter, the Company received further clarification on the BLA’s deficiencies. The Company has engaged a leading global healthcare diagnostic company, along with an expanded team of subject matter expert consultants, to conduct the receptor occupancy analysis necessary in order to resubmit the BLA. The Company began to resubmit the BLA in July 2021 and is expected to be completed in October 2021.
Going Concern
As reported in the accompanying financial statements, during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021, May 31, 2020 and May 31, 2019, the Company incurred net losses of approximately $154.7 million, $124.4 million and $56.2 million, respectively. The Company has no activities that produced revenue in the periods presented and has sustained operating losses since inception.
We currently require and will continue to require a significant amount of additional capital to fund operations and pay our accounts payables, and our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on our ability to raise such additional capital, commercialize our product and achieve profitability. If the Company is not able to raise such additional capital on a timely basis or on favorable terms, it may need to scale back operations or slow CMC-related activities, which could materially delay commercialization initiatives and its ability to achieve profitability. The Company’s failure to raise additional capital could also affect its relationships with key vendors, disrupting its ability to timely execute its business plan. In extreme cases, the Company could be forced to file for bankruptcy protection, discontinue operations or liquidate assets.
Since inception, the Company has financed its activities principally from the sale of public and private equity securities and proceeds from convertible notes payable and related party notes payable. The Company intends to finance its future operating activities and its working capital needs largely from the sale of equity and debt securities, combined with additional potential funding from other traditional and non-traditional financing sources. As of the date of this filing, the Company has approximately 35.0 million shares of common stock authorized and available for issuance under its certificate of incorporation, as amended.
The sale of equity and convertible debt securities to raise additional capital may result in dilution to stockholders and those securities may have rights senior to those of common shares. If the Company raises funds through the issuance of additional preferred stock, convertible debt securities or other debt financing the related transaction documents could contain covenants restricting its operations. On November 10, 2020, April 2, 2021, and April 23, 2021, the Company entered into long-term convertible notes that are secured by all of our assets, except for our intellectual property, and also include certain restrictive provisions, including limitations on incurring additional indebtedness and future dilutive issuances of securities, any of which could impair our ability to raise additional capital on acceptable terms and conditions. Any other third-party funding arrangements could require the Company to relinquish valuable rights. The Company expects to require additional capital beyond currently anticipated needs. Additional capital, if available, may not be available on reasonable or non-dilutive terms. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors above for additional information.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has incurred losses for all periods presented and has a substantial accumulated deficit. As of May 31, 2021, these factors, among several others, may raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of assets and liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern. The Company’s continuation as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to obtain a significant amount of additional operating capital, to continue its research into multiple indications for and development of its product candidate, to obtain FDA approval of its product candidate for use in treating one or more indications, to outsource manufacturing of its product, and ultimately to attain profitability. We intend to seek additional funding through equity or debt offerings, licensing agreements, supply and distribution agreements, and strategic alliances to implement our business plan. There are no assurances, however, that we will be successful in these endeavors.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expense and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, management bases and evaluates estimates on historical experience and on various other market specific and other relevant assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ significantly from those estimates.
We believe the following critical policies reflect the more significant judgments and estimates used in preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Derivative Liabilities
We follow the provisions of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815 Derivatives and Hedging, ASC 480 Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, and ASC 470 Debt. We have historically issued instruments that meet the criteria of derivative liabilities. Derivative financial instruments consist of financial instruments that contain a notional amount and one or more underlying variable (e.g., contingent cash settlement provision), require no initial net investment and permit net settlement. Derivative financial instruments may be free-standing or embedded in other financial instruments. We have induced conversion of certain instruments with bifurcated conversion options. To record certain conversion and the extinguishment of derivative liabilities, we have followed the general extinguishment model. As described in Notes 2 and 5, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, we utilized a Binomial Lattice Model to value the conversion
options, which utilizes assumptions that market participants would likely consider in negotiating the transfer of the conversion options, including early conversions. These assumptions used in the model are based on unobservable market inputs and are subject to variability.
Inventories
We capitalize inventories procured or produced in preparation for product launches sufficient to support estimated initial market demand. Typically, capitalization of such inventory begins when the results of clinical trials have reached a status sufficient to support regulatory approval, uncertainties regarding ultimate regulatory approval have been significantly reduced and we have determined that it is probable that these capitalized costs will provide some future economic benefit in excess of capitalized costs. The material factors considered by the Company in evaluating these uncertainties include the receipt and analysis of positive Phase 3 clinical trial results for the underlying product candidate, results from meetings with the relevant regulatory authorities prior to the filing of regulatory applications, and the compilation of the regulatory application. We closely monitor the status of the product within the regulatory review and approval process, including all relevant communication with regulatory authorities. If we are aware of any specific material risks or contingencies other than the normal regulatory review and approval process or if there are any specific issues identified relating to safety, efficacy, manufacturing, marketing or labeling, the related inventory may no longer qualify for capitalization.
We value inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the average cost method. Inventories currently consist of raw materials, bulk drug substance, and drug product in unlabeled vials to be used for commercialization of the Company’s biologic, leronlimab, which is in the regulatory approval process. Inventory purchased in preparation for product launches is evaluated for recoverability by considering the likelihood that revenue will be obtained from the future sale of the related inventory, in light of the status of the product within the regulatory approval process. The Company evaluates its inventory levels on a quarterly basis and writes down inventory that has become obsolete, or has a cost in excess of its expected net realizable value, and inventory quantities in excess of expected requirements. In assessing the lower of cost or net realizable value to pre-launch inventory, the Company relies on independent analysis provided by third parties knowledgeable of the range of likely commercial prices comparable to current comparable commercial product.
For inventories capitalized prior to FDA marketing approval in preparation of product launch, anticipated future sales, shelf-lives, and expected approval date are considered when evaluating realizability of pre-launch inventories. The shelf-life of a product is determined as part of the regulatory approval process; however, in assessing whether to capitalize pre-launch inventory the Company considers the stability data of all inventories. As inventories approach their shelf-life expiration, the Company may perform additional stability testing to determine if the inventory is still viable, which can result in an extension of its shelf-life. Further, in addition to performing additional stability testing, certain raw materials inventory may be sold in its then current condition prior to reaching expiration. We also consider potential delays associated with regulatory approval in determining whether pre-approval inventory remains salable. See Note 4 - Inventories in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. of this Form 10-K for information regarding the remaining shelf-lives of our pre-launch inventory, by each category of inventory. Although we believe our product will receive market acceptance, the introduction of a competing product could negatively impact the demand for our product and affect the realizability of our inventories. In addition, if physicians are unwilling or unable to prescribe leronlimab to their patients, or the target patient population is reluctant to try leronlimab as a new therapy, the salability of our pre-launch inventory would be adversely affected.
Stock-based compensation
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock-based awards on the date of grant utilizing certain assumptions that require judgments and estimates. These assumptions include estimates for stock price volatility, expected term and risk-free interest rates in determining the fair value of the stock-based awards. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based on observed interest rates appropriate for the expected term of the stock-based award. The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of the Company’s common stock at monthly intervals. The computation of the expected option term is based on the “simplified method,” as the options issued by the Company are considered “plain vanilla” options. We estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and revise, if necessary, in subsequent
periods, if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. Based on limited historical experience of forfeitures, we estimated future unvested forfeitures at 0% for all periods presented. Quarterly expense is reduced during the period when grants are forfeited, such that the full expense is recorded at the time of grant and only reduced when the grant is truly forfeited.
We periodically issue restricted common stock or restricted stock units to executives or third parties as compensation for services rendered. Such awards are valued at fair market value on the effective date of the Company’s obligation. We also issue stock options and warrants to consultants as compensation for various services from time to time. Costs for these transactions are measured at the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more readily measurable.
Contingent liabilities
As discussed in Notes 8 and 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8. of this Form 10-K, we have significant license and contingent milestone and royalty liabilities. We must estimate the likelihood of paying these contingent liabilities periodically based on the progress of our clinical trials, BLA approval status, and status of commercialization.
We are party to various legal proceedings as described in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8. of this Form 10-K. The Company recognizes accruals for such proceedings to the extent a loss is determined to be both probable and reasonably estimable. The best estimate of a loss within a possible range is accrued; however, if no estimate in the range is more probable than another, then the minimum amount in the range is accrued. If it is determined that a material loss is not probable but reasonably possible it is disclosed and if the loss or range of loss can be estimated, the possible loss is also disclosed. It is not possible to determine the ultimate outcome of these proceedings, including the defense and other litigation-related costs and expenses that may be incurred by the Company, as the outcomes of legal proceedings are inherently uncertain, and the outcomes could differ significantly from recognized accruals. Therefore, it is possible that the ultimate outcome of any proceeding, if in excess of a recognized accrual, or if an accrual had not been made, could be material to the Company’s consolidated financial statements. We periodically reassess these matters when additional information becomes available and adjust our estimates and assumptions when facts and circumstances indicate the need for any changes.