ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ materially from those contained in forward-looking statements due to a number of factors. See “Forward-Looking Statements” in this Form 10-K.
General Overview
We are redefining the temperature-controlled supply chain for the life sciences industry by providing a unique and evolving platform of critical products and solutions including advanced packaging, informatics, specialty logistics services, biostorage services, and cryogenic life sciences equipment. With over 600 employees in 30 locations worldwide, we are engaged in providing global solutions to the biopharma/pharma, animal health, and human reproductive medicine markets. Our primary focus is on addressing the critical temperature-controlled supply chain needs within the biopharmaceutical space with an emphasis on serving the rapidly growing cell and gene therapy, or C&GT, market.
See the “Business” section in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Impact of COVID-19
In late 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus that causes coronavirus disease (COVID-19) was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China, which has since spread globally. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. Further, the COVID-19 outbreak has resulted in government authorities around the world implementing numerous measures to try to reduce the impact of COVID-19, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter in place or total lock-down orders. Many countries around the world have also implemented the temporary closure of non-essential businesses and other material limitations on the conduct of business. As a provider of life saving therapies, Cryoport is deemed to be an essential business and has remained fully open and operational. However, the full extent and duration of this pandemic is still unknown at this point and the related governmental, business and travel restrictions in order to contain this virus are continuing to evolve globally. Accordingly, there is significant uncertainty related to the ultimate impact that this global pandemic will have on the results of our operations.
For example, several life sciences companies, including some of our clients, announced during 2020 the temporary suspension of clinical studies and trials as well as other COVID-19 related risks that may impact their preclinical and clinical trials, including delays in patient enrollment or difficulties in initiating or expanding clinical trials, interruption of clinical trial activity, and diversion of healthcare resources to focus on COVID-19 activities. While these temporary suspensions and restrictions have been lifted, these may be reinstated, and other measures may be implemented. In addition, with respect to the impact of the pandemic on the human reproductive medicine market, the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) and European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) both issued recommendations in March of 2020 to temporarily defer fertility treatments and related activities. Both organizations have since updated and recently reaffirmed their recommendation to gradually and judiciously resume activities. While these actions have negatively impacted our revenue in the markets we serve temporarily, we cannot determine the longer-term impact at this point. A number of public announcements by government and clients indicate a regional or partially reinstating of COVID-19 related restrictions and while we have experienced revenue ramping back up gradually over time, this may be curtailed by new restrictions. Further, virus containment efforts as a result of governmental actions or policies or other initiatives could lead to further disruption in the supply chain and as a result, we may have difficulties sourcing raw materials and equipment or may incur additional direct costs to provide our solutions.
While longer-term client demand for our services overall remains strong, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the measures above taken by some of our clients have adversely impacted our revenue growth. We continue to monitor the evolving situation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and we may take further actions required by governmental authorities or that we determine are prudent to support the well-being of our employees, customers, suppliers, business partners and others. The degree to which COVID-19 impacts our business operations, financial performance and results of operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain, continuously evolving and cannot be predicted, including, but not limited to, the duration and spread of the COVID-19 outbreak, its severity, the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. See “Risk Factors-Risk Related to Our Business-The recent global pandemic caused by COVID-19 has already and may continue to adversely affect our business operations, financial performance and results of operations, the extent of which is uncertain and difficult to predict.”
Segment Reporting
Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise about which separate financial information is available that is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing operating performance. The chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) is our Chief Executive Officer. We previously reported results based on two reportable operating segments: Global Logistics Solutions and Global Bioservices. During the fourth quarter of 2020, our CODM changed how he makes operating decisions, assesses the performance of the business and allocates resources in a manner that caused our operating segments to change as a result of the MVE and CRYOPDP acquisitions. In consideration of the FASB ASC 280, Segment Reporting, we determined that we are not organized around specific products and services, geographic regions or regulatory environments. Accordingly, beginning with the fourth quarter of 2020, we operate in one reportable operating segment.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., or U.S. GAAP. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we have identified the policies and estimates below as being critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. These policies require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgements, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The impact of and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations are discussed throughout “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition,” including in the “Results of Operations” section, where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results. Although we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgements are reasonable, they are based upon information presently available. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments, or conditions.
The SEC defines critical accounting policies as those that are, in management’s view, most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and most demanding of our judgment. We consider the following policies to be critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements and the uncertainties associated with the complex judgments made by us that could impact our results of operations, financial position and cash flows: Revenue Recognition, Business Combinations, Intangible Assets and Goodwill, Series C Preferred Stock, Stock-based Compensation, Convertible Senior Notes and Income Taxes. See Note 2: “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of our accompanying consolidated financial statements for a description of our critical accounting policies and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when control is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods and services. Revenue recognition is evaluated through the following five steps: (i) identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer; (ii) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determination of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognition of revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied.
Performance Obligations
At contract inception, an assessment of the goods and services promised in the contracts with customers is performed and a performance obligation is identified for each distinct promise to transfer to the customer a good or service (or bundle of goods or services). To identify the performance obligations, the Company considers all of the goods or services promised in the contract regardless of whether they are explicitly stated or are implied by customary business practices. Revenue is recognized when our performance obligation has been met. The Company considers control to have transferred upon delivery because the Company has a present right to payment at that time, the Company has transferred use of the asset, and the customer is able to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from, the asset.
For arrangements under which the Company provides biological specimen storage services and logistics support and management to the customer, the Company satisfies its performance obligations as those services are performed whereby the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of such services under the agreement.
Revenue generated from short-term logistics and engineering consulting services provided to customers is recognized when the Company satisfies the contractually defined performance obligations. When a contract includes multiple performance obligations, the contract price is allocated among the performance obligations based upon the stand-alone selling prices. Approved contract modifications are accounted for as either a separate contract or as part of the existing contract depending on the nature of the modification.
Our performance obligations on our orders and under the terms of agreements with customers are generally satisfied within one year from a given reporting date.
Shipping and handling activities related to contracts with customers are accounted for as costs to fulfill our promise to transfer the associated products pursuant to the accounting policy election allowed under Topic 606 and are not considered a separate performance obligation to our customers. Accordingly, the Company records amounts billed for shipping and handling as a component of revenue. Shipping and handling fees and costs are included in cost of revenues in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Revenues are recognized net of any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental agencies.
Business Combinations
Amounts paid for acquisitions are allocated to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, if any, based on their fair values at the dates of acquisition. This purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions with respect to intangible assets. The fair value of identifiable intangible assets is based on detailed valuations that use information and assumptions determined by management. Any excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired is allocated to goodwill. While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as any contingent consideration, where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations.
We use the income approach to determine the fair value of certain identifiable intangible assets such as customer relationships. This approach determines fair value by estimating after-tax cash flows attributable to these assets over their respective useful lives and then discounting these after-tax cash flows back to a present value. We base our assumptions on estimates of future cash flows, expected growth rates, expected trends in technology, etc. We base the discount rates used to arrive at a present value as of the date of acquisition on the time value of money and certain industry-specific risk factors. We believe the estimated purchased customer relationships, agent networks, software, developed technologies, and trademarks/tradenames so determined represent the fair value at the date of acquisition and do not exceed the amount a third party would pay for the assets.
Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Intangible assets
Intangible assets with a definite life are amortized over their useful lives using the straight-line method, which is the best estimate of the value we are receiving over the useful life of the intangible asset and another systematic method was not deemed more appropriate. The amortization expense is recorded within selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of operations. Intangible assets and their related useful lives are reviewed at least annually to determine if any adverse conditions exist that would indicate the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable. More frequent impairment assessments are conducted if certain conditions exist, including a change in the competitive landscape, any internal decisions to pursue new or different technology strategies, a loss of a significant customer, or a significant change in the marketplace, including changes in the prices paid for the Company’s products or changes in the size of the market for the Company’s products. If impairment indicators are present, the Company determines whether the underlying intangible asset is recoverable through estimated future undiscounted cash flows. If the asset is not found to be recoverable, it is written down to the estimated fair value of the asset based on the sum of the future discounted cash flows expected to result from the use and disposition of the asset. If the estimate of an intangible asset’s remaining useful life is changed, the remaining carrying amount of the intangible asset is amortized prospectively over the revised remaining useful life. The Company continues to believe that its definite-lived intangible assets are recoverable at December 31, 2020. There has been no impairment of our intangible assets for the periods presented.
Goodwill
We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis in the fourth quarter or more frequently if management believes indicators of impairment exist. Events that would indicate impairment and trigger an interim impairment assessment include, but are not limited to, current economic and market conditions, including a decline in market capitalization, a significant adverse change in legal factors, business climate or operational performance of the business, and an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. Accounting guidance also permits an optional qualitative assessment for goodwill to determine whether it is more likely than not that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value. If, after this qualitative assessment, we determine that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then no further quantitative testing would be necessary. A quantitative assessment is performed if the qualitative assessment results in a more likely than not determination or if a qualitative assessment is not performed. The quantitative assessment considers whether the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, in which case an impairment charge is recorded to the extent the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value. As a result of our 2020 quantitative assessment, we concluded that goodwill is not impaired as of December 31, 2020.
Series C Preferred Stock
On the October 1, 2020 issuance date, the effective conversion price per share was less than the fair value of the underlying Common Stock and, as a result, the Company determined that there was a beneficial conversion feature on that date. Accordingly, the Company recognized the resulting beneficial conversion feature amount of approximately $39.5 million as a deemed dividend, equal to the number of common shares into which the Series C Preferred Stock is convertible multiplied by the difference between the fair value of the Common Stock and the effective conversion price per share on that date. Because the Series C Preferred Stock does not have a stated conversion date and was immediately convertible at the issuance date, the dividend is reflected as a one-time, non-cash, deemed dividend to the Holders of the Series C Preferred Stock on the date of issuance.
Additionally, the Company determined that the nature of the Series C Preferred Stock is more akin to an equity instrument and that the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded conversion options are clearly and closely related to the Series C Preferred Stock. As such, the conversion options were not required to be bifurcated from the host under ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging.
Since the paid-in-kind dividends are nondiscretionary, the Company measured the beneficial conversion feature in the paid-in-kind dividend on the issuance date of the preferred stock and recorded such amount when the paid-in-kind dividend was accrued. Accordingly, the associated paid-in-kind dividends for the year ended December 31, 2020 generated a beneficial conversion feature amount of $344,000. On February 5, 2021, the Company received a waiver and conversion notice from Blackstone Freeze Parent L.P. and Blackstone Tactical Opportunities Fund - FD L.P. and converted an aggregate of 50,000 shares of the Company’s 4.0% Series C Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share (See Note 18).
The Company evaluated the Series C Preferred Stock for liability or equity classification under the applicable accounting guidance including ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, and determined that equity treatment was appropriate because the Series C Preferred Stock did not meet the definition of the liability instruments defined thereunder for convertible instruments. Specifically, the convertible preferred shares are not mandatorily redeemable and do not embody an obligation to buy back the shares outside of the Company’s control in a manner that could require the transfer of assets. Additionally, the Company determined that the Series C Preferred Stock would be recorded as permanent equity given that they are not redeemable for cash or other assets (i) on a fixed or determinable date, (ii) at the option of the holder, or (iii) upon the occurrence of an event that is not solely within control of the Company.
The Company also evaluated the embedded put and call options within the Series C Preferred Stock in accordance with the accounting guidance for derivatives to determine if bifurcation is required. The Company determined that the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded put and call options are not clearly and closely related to the Series C Preferred Stock. Therefore, the Company assessed the put and call options further and determined they did not meet the definition of a derivative under ASC 815.
Under the same analysis, the Company determined that the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded participating dividend feature are considered clearly and closely related to the equity host. Accordingly, the participating dividend feature is not required to be bifurcated under ASC 815. Also, the Company determined that the value of the contingent dividend feature is minimal and insignificant relative to the other components of the Series C Preferred Stock due to the circumstances surrounding the scenarios under which the provision would be triggered.
Convertible Senior Notes
The Senior Notes are accounted for in accordance with ASC 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options (“ASC 470-20”) and ASC 815-40, Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815-40”). Under ASC 815-40, to qualify for equity classification (or nonbifurcation, if embedded) the instrument (or embedded feature) must be both (1) indexed to the issuer’s stock and (2) meet the requirements of the equity classification guidance. Based upon the Company’s analysis, it was determined the Notes do contain embedded features indexed to its own stock, but do not meet the requirements for bifurcation, and therefore do not need to be separately accounted for as an equity component. Since the embedded conversion feature meets the equity scope exception from derivative accounting, and also since the embedded conversion option does not need to be separately accounted for as an equity component under ASC 470-20, the proceeds received from the issuance of the convertible debt was recorded as a liability on the consolidated balance sheet.
Stock-based Compensation
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to calculate the fair value of stock option awards on the grant date. The expected option life assumption is estimated based on the simplified method. Accordingly, the Company has utilized the average of the contractual term of the options and the weighted average vesting period for all options to calculate the expected option term. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the expected term of our employee stock options. The expected volatility is based on the average of the historical volatility and the implied volatility of our stock commensurate with the expected life of the stock-based award. We do not anticipate paying dividends on the common stock in the foreseeable future.
We recognize stock-based compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized only for those awards that ultimately vest. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded stock-based compensation expense of $8.9 million and $16.5 million, respectively, for share-based awards granted under all of the Company’s stock plans.
As of December 31, 2020, there was $21.1 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to unvested share-based awards. This cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted average remaining requisite service period of 3.1 years. We expect 1,692,183 unvested options to vest over the next four years.
Income Taxes
Deferred taxes are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect in the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided, if, based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We account for uncertain tax positions using a “more-likely-than-not” threshold for recognizing and resolving uncertain tax positions. The evaluation of uncertain tax positions is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in tax law, the measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns, the effective settlement of matters subject to audit, new audit activity and changes in facts or circumstances related to a tax position. We evaluate our tax position on a quarterly basis. We also accrue for potential interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
Results of Operations
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table summarizes certain information derived from our consolidated statements of operations (in thousands):
Total revenues by market
Revenues. Revenues increased $44.8 million, or 132%, to $78.7 million for year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $33.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily driven by revenue from the acquisition of MVE and CRYOPDP on October 1, 2020, which contributed $23.0 million and $12.9 million, respectively, and the increase in revenue by $8.9 million, primarily driven by our biopharmaceutical customers. This includes an increase in revenue of $2.2 million resulting from the acquisition of Cryogene in May 2019. During 2020 we experienced an increase in the number of customers utilizing our services, the number of clinical trials we support and an increase in revenue related to commercialized cell therapies.
Service revenues increased by $21.4 million, or 62.9%, to $55.3 million for year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $33.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven by the acquisition of CRYOPDP on October 1, 2020, which contributed $12.9 million in revenue from temperature-controlled specialty courier services and supply chain services, including packaging, pick-pack kit preparation, the continuing ramp of revenue from our Cryoport Express® solutions, which increased by $6.7 million, or 22%, and revenue from our biostorage services, which increased by $2.2 million, or 74%.
Product revenues were $23.4 million and $0 for 2020 and 2019, respectively, and are primarily a result of the acquisition of MVE on October 1, 2020, representing revenue from the product line of cryonic stainless-steel freezers, aluminum dewars and related ancillary equipment used in the storage and transport of life sciences commodities, which includes the rapidly growing Cell and Gene Therapy market through a global network of distributors and direct client relationships,
Revenues by market
Revenue from the biopharma/pharma market increased $36.4 million, or 121%, to $66.4 million, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven by revenue from the acquisition of MVE and CRYOPDP on October 1, 2020, which contributed $15.4 million and $12.9 million, respectively, and the increase in revenue by $5.9 million from clinical trial and commercial revenue. This includes an increase in revenue of $2.2 million resulting from the acquisition of Cryogene in May 2019. We now support 528 clinical trials, of which 419 are in the Americas, 84 are in EMEA and 25 are in APAC, compared to 436 clinical trials supported as of December 31, 2019 (361 in the Americas, 61 in EMEA and 14 APAC). The number of Phase III clinical trials supported increased to 69 trials as of December 31, 2020, of which 49 are in the Americas, 19 are in EMEA, and 1 is in APAC. This compares to 56 Phase III trials (40 in the Americas, 15 in EMEA and 1 APAC) supported as of December 31, 2019. The activity in the clinical trial space, particularly in the Cell and Gene Therapy market is expected to drive future revenue growth as these clinical trials advance and resulting therapies are commercialized on a global basis.
Our revenue from the animal health market increased $6.9 million, or 687%, to $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. This increase is driven by the acquisition of MVE on October 1, 2020.
Revenues in the human reproductive medicine market increased $1.5 million, or 53%, to 4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. This increase was driven by a 31.3% increase in revenues in the U.S. market through continued success of our CryoStork®-branded offering and a 43.5% increase in revenues in the international markets, which was primarily a result of our marketing initiatives and growing brand recognition.
Gross margin and cost of revenues. Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 46.2% of total revenues, as compared to 51.1% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in gross margin is primarily a result of the lower margin contributions from the acquisitions of MVE and CRYOPDP . Cost of total revenues increased $25.7 million to $42.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $16.6 million in the same period in 2019. The increase in cost of total revenues is commensurate with the increase in business volume and the addition of cost of revenue from the acquisitions of MVE and CRYOPDP for the fourth quarter of 2020.
Gross margin for our service revenues was 46.7% of service revenues, as compared to 51.1% of service revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is a result of the lower margin contribution from the acquisition of CRYOPDP during the fourth quarter of 2020. Our cost of revenues is primarily comprised of freight charges, payroll and associated expenses related to our global logistics and supply chain centers, depreciation expenses of our Cryoport Express® Shippers and supplies and consumables used for our solutions.
Gross margin for our product revenues was 45.1% of product revenues. Product revenues, related cost of revenues and resulting gross margins are primarily a result of the acquisition of MVE during the fourth quarter of 2020. Our cost of product revenues is primarily comprised of materials, direct and indirect labor, inbound freight charges, purchasing and receiving, inspection, and distribution and warehousing of inventory. In addition, shop supplies, facility maintenance costs and depreciation expense for assets used in the manufacturing process are included in cost of product revenues.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses include the costs associated with selling our products and services and costs required to support our marketing efforts including legal, accounting, patent, shareholder services, amortization of intangible assets and other administrative functions.
For 2020, SG&A expenses increased by $25.6 million, or 81.7% as compared to 2019. The increase is primarily due to the addition of $11.5 million of SG&A expenses from the acquisition of MVE and CRYOPDP effective October 1, 2020, as well as the continued expansion of our infrastructure to support the acquisitions and expected future growth. Intangible asset amortization expense is included in SG&A and consists of charges related to the amortization of intangible assets associated with the acquisitions of CRYOPDP and MVE in 2020 and Cryogene in 2019, in which we acquired definite-lived intangible assets. Intangible asset amortization expense increased by $6.3 million, from $0.3 million in 2019, to $6.6 million in 2020. SG&A also includes acquisition and integration costs related to MVE and CRYOPDP acquisitions in 2020 of $11.1 million, compared to $0.4 million related to the acquisition of Cryogene in 2019. Stock compensation expense decreased by $6.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily resulting from accelerated vesting of certain stock option awards as a result of meeting defined financial targets in the amount of $8.4 million in 2019, which did not occur in 2020.
Engineering and development expenses. Engineering and development expenses increased $5.7 million, or 153.6%, for year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase is primarily due to an increase of $4.2 million in consulting costs directed at further enhancing our logistics and supply chain solutions and $1.6 million in wages and associated employee costs to add software development and engineering resources. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense of $0.5 million which was driven by $0.9 million in accelerated vesting for certain stock option awards during 2019 as a result of meeting defined financial targets. We continually strive to improve and expand the features of our Cryoport Express® Solutions and portfolio of services and products. Our primary developments are directed towards facilitating the safe, reliable and efficient transport and storage of life science commodities through innovative and technology-based solutions. This includes significantly enhancing our Cryoportal® Logistics Management Platform and related technology solutions as well as developments to expand our Cryoport Express® Shipper fleet, such as the CryosphereTM shipper, a cryogenic dry-vapor shipper utilizing patent pending technology that passively stabilizes the payload through an internal gravitational sphere, thereby further mitigating transport risks. In addition, engineering and development efforts are also focused on MVE’s portfolio of advanced cryogenic stainless-steel freezers, aluminum dewars and related ancillary equipment used in the storage and transport of life sciences commodities. We supplement our internal engineering and development resources with subject matter experts and consultants to enhance our capabilities and shorten development cycles.
Investment Income. Investment income increased by $0.2 million, from $0.6 million to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year as a result of higher average invested cash balances offset by lower interest rates on such invested cash balances.
Interest expense. Interest expense increased by $1.2 million, from $1.4 million to $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year primarily as a result of the issuance of $115.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.00% convertible senior notes in May 2020 and amortization of the related debt discount.
Other income, net. The increase in other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due to realized and unrealized gains and losses on short-term investments and foreign currency fluctuations.
Dividends on Series C preferred convertible stock. The dividends in the aggregate amount of $42.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 represent a non-cash deemed dividend in the amount of $39.5 million resulting from a beneficial conversion feature and a paid-in-kind dividend of $2.8 million, both from the private placement of Series C Preferred Stock with Blackstone.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We provide adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure to GAAP measures regarding our operating performance. This financial measure excludes the impact of certain acquisition related items and other expenses and, therefore, has not been calculated in accordance with GAAP. A detailed explanation and a reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure to its most comparable GAAP financial measure is described below.
We include this financial information because we believe this measure provides a more accurate comparison of our financial results between periods and more accurately reflects how management reviews its financial results. We excluded the impact of certain acquisition related items because we believe that the resulting charges do not accurately reflect the performance of our ongoing operations for the period in which such charges are incurred.
Cryoport, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Adjusted EBITDA Reconciliation
(Unaudited, in thousands)
Adjusted EBITDA is measured by taking net income/loss as reported in accordance with GAAP, excluding depreciation and intangible amortization expenses, acquisition and integration costs, inventory step-up charges, other non-recurring charges, stock-based compensation expense, investment income, interest expense and taxes included in the consolidated statements of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $36.9 million, short-term investments of $56.4 million and working capital of $112.1 million. Historically, we have financed our operations primarily through sales of equity securities and debt instruments. We believe that our pre-existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, together with the net proceeds of approximately $265.4 million raised through an underwritten public offering in January 2021 will be sufficient to fund our operations, including capital expenditures and absent any acquisitions, for at least the next three years.
Cash flows
Operating activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $14.9 million of cash for operations primarily as a result of the net loss of $32.7 million adjusted for non-cash expenses of $20.1 million comprised of $8.9 million of stock-based compensation, as well as $10.3 million of amortization of debt discounts, depreciation and amortization. Also contributing to the cash impact of our net operating loss, excluding non-cash items, was an increase in accounts receivable of $2.6 million, an increase in prepaids and other current assets of $7.5 million and an increase in net deferred tax assets of $0.5 million, which was partially offset by a decrease of $1.3 million in inventory and an increase in accounts payable and other accrued expenses of $4.2 million and an increase in accrued compensation and related expenses of $3.1 million.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $382.3 million was primarily due to the $314.5 million and $48.6 million acquisitions of the MVE and CRYOPDP businesses, respectively, on October 1, 2020, $158.7 million purchases of short-term investments, and $8.9 million for the capitalization of software development costs for our CryoportalTM Logistics Management Platform, and additional purchases of Cryoport Express® Shippers, Smartpak IITM Condition Monitoring Systems, freezers and computer equipment, partially offset by the maturity of short-term investments of $149.2 million.
In 2019, net cash used in investing activities of $62.9 million was primarily due to the $20.3 million acquisition of the Cryogene business on May 14, 2019, $43.2 million purchases of short-term investments, and $5.3 million for the capitalization of software development costs for our CryoportalTM Logistics Management Platform, and additional purchases of Cryoport Express® Shippers, SmartPakTM Condition Monitoring Systems, freezers and computer equipment, partially offset by the maturity of short-term investments of $6.0 million.
Financing Activity
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $385.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of net proceeds of $111.3 million from the issuance of 3% convertible senior notes issued in May 2020 and $265.4 million as a result of the net proceeds from the private placement of common stock and issuance of the Series C Preferred Stock. Proceeds from stock option and warrant exercises during 2020 were $9.4 million. Offsetting these activities were the payment of deferred financing costs and finance lease obligations of $4.2 million.
In 2019, net cash provided by financing activities of $74.2 million was primarily as a result of $68.8 million in net proceeds from our June 2019 public offering of common stock and $5.4 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and warrants.
January 2021 Public Offering
On January 25, 2021, the Company completed an underwritten public offering of 4,356,059 shares of its common stock. The shares were issued and sold pursuant to an underwriting agreement, dated January 20, 2021, by and among the Company, on the one hand, and Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, Jefferies LLC, SVB Leerink LLC and UBS Securities LLC, as representatives of certain underwriters at a public offering price per share of $66.00, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions. The shares include 568,181 shares issued and sold pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise in full of their option to purchase additional shares of common stock pursuant to the underwriting agreement. The Company received net proceeds of approximately $269.7 million from the offering after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company. See Note 18: “Subsequent Events” of our accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Blackstone Private Placement
In connection with the MVE Acquisition, on October 1, 2020, the Company completed a private placement with an investment vehicle of funds affiliated with The Blackstone Group Inc., consisting of (i) 250,000 shares of a newly designated 4.0% Series C Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Series C Preferred Stock”), at a price of $1,000 per share, for $250.0 million, and (ii) 675,536 shares of common stock of the Company, par value $0.001 per share for $25.0 million, for an aggregate purchase price of $275.0 million. The net proceeds of this transaction were $263.6 million. The Series C Preferred Stock ranks senior to the shares of the Company’s common stock, with respect to dividend rights and rights upon the voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution, or winding up of the affairs of the Company. On February 5, 2021, the Company received a waiver and conversion notice from Blackstone Freeze Parent L.P. and Blackstone Tactical Opportunities Fund - FD L.P. and converted an aggregate of 50,000 shares of the Company’s 4.0% Series C Convertible Preferred Stock, resulting in the issuance of an aggregate of 1,312,860 shares of Common Stock. See Note 15: “Stockholders’ Equity-Blackstone Private Placement” and Note 18: “Subsequent Events” of our accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Convertible Senior Notes
In May 2020, the Company issued $115.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.00% convertible senior notes due in 2025, which includes the initial purchasers’ exercise in full of their option to purchase an additional $15.0 million principal amount of the Convertible Senior Notes, in a private placement exempt from registration under the Securities Act. The Company received $111.3 million from the offering, net of underwriting discounts and commissions of $3.7 million, and incurred approximately $345,200 in third-party offering related costs. The Convertible Senior Notes bear cash interest at a rate of 3.00%, payable semi-annually on June 1 and December 1 of each year, beginning on December 1, 2020 and will mature on June 1, 2025, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed, or converted in accordance with the terms of the Convertible Senior Notes. The Convertible Senior Notes comprise the Company’s senior, unsecured obligations and are (i) equal in right of payment with the Company’s existing and future senior, unsecured indebtedness; (ii) senior in right of payment to the Company’s existing and future indebtedness that is expressly subordinated to the Convertible Senior Notes; (iii) effectively subordinated to the Company’s existing and future secured indebtedness, to the extent of the value of the collateral securing that indebtedness; and (iv) structurally subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities, including trade payables, and (to the extent the Company is not a holder thereof) preferred equity, if any, of the Company’s subsidiaries. See Note 10 : “Convertible Senior Notes” and Note 18: “Subsequent Events” of our accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
June 2019 Public Offering
In June 2019, the Company completed an underwritten public offering of 4,312,500 shares of its common stock. The shares were issued and sold pursuant to an underwriting agreement, dated June 19, 2019, by and among the Company, on the one hand, and Jefferies LLC and SVB Leerink LLC, as representatives of certain underwriters at a public offering price per share of $17.00, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions. The shares include 562,500 shares issued and sold pursuant to the Underwriters’ exercise in full of their option to purchase additional shares of common stock pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement. The Company received net proceeds of approximately $68.8 million from the offering after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company.
The Company’s management recognizes that the Company may need to obtain additional capital to fund its operations until sustained profitable operations are achieved. Additional funding plans may include obtaining additional capital through equity and/or debt funding sources. No assurance can be given that additional capital, if needed, will be available when required or upon terms acceptable to the Company. See “- Risks Related to Our Financial Condition - We may need to raise additional capital in the future, and if we are unable to secure adequate funds on terms acceptable to us, we could be unable to execute our business plan” in the “Risk Factors” section in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements within the meaning of Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
Impact of Inflation
From time to time, Cryoport experiences price increases from third party manufacturers and these increases cannot always be passed on to Cryoport’s customers. While these price increases have not had a material impact on Cryoport’s historical operations or profitability in the past, they could affect revenues in the future.