ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this report. Operating results are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur in future periods.
Overview
We are a late-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering, developing and commercializing first-in-class muscle activators and next-in-class muscle inhibitors as potential treatments for debilitating diseases in which muscle performance is compromised and/or declining. We have discovered and are developing muscle-directed investigational medicines that may potentially improve the health span of people with devastating cardiovascular and neuromuscular diseases of impaired muscle function. Our research and development activities relating to the biology of muscle function have evolved from our knowledge and expertise regarding the cytoskeleton, a complex biological infrastructure that plays a fundamental role within every human cell. As a leader in muscle biology and the mechanics of muscle performance, we are developing small molecule drug candidates specifically engineered to impact muscle function and contractility.
Our clinical-stage drug candidates are: omecamtiv mecarbil, a novel cardiac myosin activator, CK-136 (formerly known as AMG 594), a novel cardiac troponin activator, reldesemtiv, a novel fast skeletal muscle troponin activator, CK-274, a novel cardiac myosin inhibitor, and CK-3772271 (“CK-271”), our second novel cardiac myosin inhibitor.
For further information regarding our business, refer to Part I, Item 1 (Business) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We review our estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration for those goods or services. To recognize revenue from a contract with a customer, we:
(i)
identify our contracts with our customers;
(ii)
identify our distinct performance obligations in each contract;
(iii)
determine the transaction price of each contract;
(iv)
allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and
(v)
recognize revenue as we satisfy our performance obligations.
At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct and determine those that are performance obligations. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Collaborative Arrangements
We enter into collaborative arrangements with partners that typically include payment to us for one of more of the following: (i) license fees; (ii) milestone payments related to the achievement of developmental, regulatory, or commercial goals; and (iii) royalties on net sales of licensed products. Each of these payments results in collaboration or other revenues. Where a portion of non-refundable up-front fees or other payments received are allocated to continuing performance obligations under the terms of a collaborative arrangement, they are recorded as deferred revenue and recognized as revenue when (or as) the underlying performance obligation is satisfied.
As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop estimates and assumptions that require judgment to determine the underlying stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation which determines how the transaction price is allocated among the performance obligation. The stand-alone selling price may include such items as, forecasted revenues, development timelines, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, discount rates and probabilities of technical and regulatory success, to determine the transaction price to allocate to each performance obligation.
For our collaboration agreements that include more than one performance obligation, such as a license combined with a commitment to perform research and development services, we make judgments to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees. We evaluate our progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of a performance obligation and related revenue recognition.
License Fees: If a license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front license fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments: We use judgement to determine whether a milestone is considered probable of being reached. Using the most likely amount method, we include the value of a milestone payment in the consideration for a contract at inception if we then conclude achieving the milestone is more likely than not. Otherwise, we exclude the value of a milestone payment from contract consideration at inception and recognize revenue for a milestone at a later date, when we judge that it is more likely than not that the milestone will be achieved. If we conclude it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone is included in the transaction price. We then allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect license, collaboration and other revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Royalties: For contracts that include sales-based royalties, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied. To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenues resulting from contracts.
Research and Development Cost Reimbursements: Our Astellas and Amgen agreements include promises of research and development services. We have determined that these services collectively are distinct from the licenses provided to Astellas and Amgen and as such, these promises are accounted for as a separate performance obligation to be recognized over time. We recognize revenue for these services as the performance obligations are satisfied, which we estimate using internal development costs incurred.
Accrued Research and Development Expenditures
A substantial portion of our preclinical studies and all of our clinical trials have been performed by third-party CROs and other vendors and our accruals for expenses for preclinical studies and clinical trials may be significant. For preclinical studies, the significant factors used in estimating accruals include the percentage of work completed to date and contract milestones achieved. For clinical trial expenses, the significant factors used in estimating accruals include the number of patients enrolled, duration of enrollment, milestones achieved and percentage of work completed to date. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activities to the extent practicable through internal reviews, correspondence and status meetings with CROs, and review of contractual terms. We depend on the timeliness and accuracy of data provided by our CROs and other vendors to accrue expenses. If we receive and rely on incomplete or inaccurate data, accruals and expenses may be too high or too low at a given point in time and corresponding adjustments to accruals and expenses would be made in future periods when the actual expense becomes known.
Liability Related to Sale of Future Royalties to RPI
We treat our liability to RPI related to sale of future royalties under the RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement as a debt financing, to be amortized under the effective interest rate method over the life of the related royalty stream.
Our liability to RPI related to sale of future royalties under the RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement (the “RPI Liability”) and related amortization are based on our current estimates of future royalties expected to be paid over the life of the arrangement. Concurrently with our entry into the RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement, we entered into a common stock purchase agreement with RPI. We allocated the consideration and issuance costs on a relative fair value basis to the RPI Liability and the common stock.
The RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement further provides that in the event Amgen elects to terminate the Amgen Agreement, we are obliged to enter into an agreement with RPI to preserve RPI’s rights under the RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement, which includes the payment by Cytokinetics of 4.5% of its worldwide net sales of omecamtiv mecarbil and other compounds with the same mechanism of action as omecamtiv mecarbil that are subject to the Amgen Agreement (together the “Amgen Alliance Compounds”), subject to a potential increase of up to an additional 1% under certain circumstances (delay in US marketing approval). Our obligation to enter into a new agreement with RPI does not impact our accounting treatment of the RPI Liability or our estimates.
The RPI Liability will be recognized using significant unobservable inputs. These inputs are derived using internal management estimates developed based on third party data and reflect management’s judgements, current market conditions surrounding competing products, and forecasts. The significant unobservable inputs include the estimated patient population, estimated selling price, estimated peak sales and sales ramp, the expected term of the royalty stream, timing of the expected launch and its impact on the royalty rate. A significant change in unobservable inputs could result in a material increase or decrease to the effective interest rate of the RPI Liability.
We will periodically assess the amount and timing of expected royalty payments using a combination of internal projections and forecasts from external sources. To the extent our future estimates of future royalty payments are greater or less than previous estimates or the estimated timing of such payments is materially different than previous estimates, we will adjust the amortization of the RPI Liability related to sale of future royalties and prospectively recognize the related non-cash interest expense. We have updated the analysis to include the data released on October 8, 2020 relating to GALACTIC-HF. Our estimates regarding the amount and timing of future royalty payments have not changed as a result of Amgen’s election to terminate the Amgen Agreement or Servier’s election to terminate the Servier Agreement.
Results of Operations
A discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 can be found in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2019 Annual Report.
Revenues
Our revenues since inception were primarily from our strategic alliances. Under our agreements with Amgen and Astellas, we received payments including upfront license fees, reimbursements of internal costs of certain FTEs and costs to support research and development programs, and milestone payments. We have not generated any revenue from commercial product sales to date.
License revenues for 2020 were the result of a series of transactions we entered into with RTW Royalty Holdings and Ji Xing related to Cytokinetics’ proprietary small molecule cardiac myosin inhibitor product referred to as CK-274 and other assets (together, the “RTW Transactions”).
We may also be entitled to additional milestone payments and other contingent payments upon the occurrence of specific events. We expect that our revenue will continue to fluctuate in future periods.
Research and development revenues in 2020 and 2019 were primarily from our strategic alliances with Astellas and Amgen.
Research and development revenues from Astellas were $6.6 million and $13.1 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, for reimbursements.
Research and development revenues from Amgen were $10.0 million and $13.8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, for reimbursements.
License revenues for 2020 was $36.5 million and consisted of the residual allocation of consideration from the RTW Transactions.
Milestone revenues for 2020 were $2.8 million and consisted primarily of the milestone earned from Ji Xing for the first patient dosed in Cohort 2 of REDWOOD-HCM.
We do expect future revenues from Amgen to decline due to the termination of the Amgen Agreement effective May 20, 2021.
Research and development expenses
We incur research and development expenses associated with both partnered and our own research activities.
Research and development expenses related to any development we elect to fund consist primarily of employee compensation, supplies and materials, costs for consultants and contract research and manufacturing, facilities costs and depreciation of equipment.
Research and development expenses increased to $97.0 million in 2020 from $86.1 million in 2019 primarily due to higher expenses for METEORIC-HF, for our cardiac myosin inhibitor program, and for reldesemtiv related to COURAGE-ALS offset by decreased spending for the Phase 2 clinical trial of reldesemtiv (FORTITUDE-ALS) which was completed in 2019.
Research and development expenses by program for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were:
We may continue to develop reldesemtiv to treat ALS and SMA. Under the Astellas FSRA Agreement, Astellas has agreed to pay one-third of the out-of-pocket clinical development costs which may be incurred in connection with Cytokinetics’ potential Phase 3 clinical trial of reldesemtiv in ALS up to a maximum contribution by Astellas of $12 million. On December 14, 2020, we announced the design of COURAGE-ALS (Clinical Outcomes Using Reldesemtiv on ALSFRS-R in a Global Evaluation in ALS), the planned Phase 3 clinical trial of reldesemtiv in patients with ALS. In addition, Astellas agreed to non-cash contributions to Cytokinetics, which include the transfer of its existing inventories of active pharmaceutical ingredient of reldesemtiv and CK-601. Astellas has also agreed to the continued conduct of ongoing stability studies pertaining to such existing inventories of active pharmaceutical ingredient, at its cost.
Under our strategic alliance with Amgen, Amgen is responsible for the development of omecamtiv mecarbil until the effective termination of the Amgen Agreement (expected May 20, 2021). Following the effective termination of the Amgen Agreement, we expect to continue the Phase 3 development of omecamtiv mecarbil for the potential treatment of heart failure, at our own cost. We expect to continue the development of CK-274 to assess the potential of CK-274 to improve exercise capacity and relieve symptoms in patients with hyperdynamic ventricular contraction due to HCM. Under our strategic alliance with Ji Xing, Ji Xing is responsible for the development of CK-274 in China and Taiwan, and we may be entitled to receive milestone payments upon the achievement of certain development and commercial milestones.
Clinical development timelines, the likelihood of success and total completion costs vary significantly for each drug candidate and are difficult to estimate. We anticipate that we will determine on an ongoing basis which research and development programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program, taking into account the potential scientific and clinical success of each drug candidate. The lengthy process of seeking regulatory approvals and subsequent compliance with applicable regulations requires the expenditure of substantial resources. Any failure by us to obtain and maintain, or any delay in obtaining, regulatory approvals could cause our research and development expenditures to increase and, in turn, could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation for employees in executive and administrative functions, including, but not limited to, finance, human resources, legal, business and commercial development and strategic planning. Other significant costs include facilities costs, consulting costs and professional fees for accounting and legal services, including legal services associated with obtaining and maintaining patents and regulatory compliance.
General and administrative expenses increased to $52.8 million in 2020 from $39.6 million in 2019, primarily due to an increase in personnel related costs including stock-based compensation and higher outside service spend.
General and administrative expenses by program for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were:
We expect that general and administrative expenses will fluctuate in the future, depending in part on the timing of and investments in commercial readiness.
Interest expense
Interest expense for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were:
Interest expense in 2020 and 2019 consists of interest expense related to the Term Loan Agreement and respective warrants by and among the Company, Oxford and Silicon Valley Bank and interest expense related to the 2026 Notes. Approximately half of the 2026 Notes’ interest expense is due to the amortization of the discount associated with the equity component of the 2026 Notes.
Interest expense increased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the convertible notes that were issued in November 2019 and offset by the decline in the term loan interest rate year over year.
Non-cash interest expense on Liability related to sale of future royalties
Non-cash interest expense related to the RPI Liability related to sale of future royalties in 2020, 2019 and 2018 results from accretion of the liability related to sale of future royalties. This non-cash interest expense will continue to increase until omecamtiv mecarbil is commercialized and we start paying royalties to RPI in excess of the interest being accreted.
The RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement provides that in the event Amgen elects to terminate the Amgen Agreement, we are obliged to enter into an agreement with RPI to preserve RPI’s rights under the RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement, which includes the payment by Cytokinetics of 4.5% of its worldwide net sales of omecamtiv mecarbil and other Amgen Alliance Compounds, subject to a potential increase of up to an additional 1% under certain circumstances (delay in US marketing approval). Our obligation to enter into a new agreement with RPI does not impact our accounting treatment of the RPI Liability or our estimates.
Interest and Other Income, net
Interest and other income, net for 2020, 2019 and 2018 consisted primarily of interest income generated from our cash, cash equivalents and investments.
We divested an equity investment in fiscal 2020 (classified as a Level 1 investment in our short-term investments) with a fair value of $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted in an increase in interest income of $2.6 million in 2020. In 2019, this equity investment resulted in a $0.3 million increase in interest income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash, cash equivalents and investments and a summary of our borrowings and working capital is summarized as follows:
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods set forth below:
Sources and Uses of Cash in 2020
We have funded our operations and capital expenditures with proceeds primarily from private and public sales of our equity securities, a royalty monetization agreement, strategic alliances, long-term debt, other financings and interest on investments. We have generated significant operating losses since our inception. Our expenditures are primarily related to research and development activities.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $8.9 million for 2020 which include a net loss of $127.3 million largely due to ongoing research and development activities, and general and administrative expenses to support those activities. Net loss for 2020 included, among other items: non-cash stock-based compensation, non-cash interest expense related to sale of future royalties and non-cash interest expense related to debt. The net loss was offset by $87.0 million in deferred revenues with respect to an agreement to sell to RTW Royalty Holdings our interest in certain future royalties on net sales of products containing the compound mavacamten that is being developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb Company. These funds were collected in 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities was $196.5 million in 2020 and was primarily due to purchases of investments offset by proceeds from maturity of investments. Cash purchases of property plant and equipment was also included for $11.1 million which will be primarily be utilized in our new building.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $234.1 million in 2020 and was primarily due to $188.9 million proceeds related to issuance of common stock in an underwritten public offering, proceeds from RTW private placement, stock based activities, and claims settlement with certain institutional investors that were beneficial owners of our common stock related to the disgorgement of short swing profits pursuant to Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act.
Public Offering of Common Stock
In July 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering of 8.4 million shares of our common stock at a public offering price per share of $24.00, which included the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase up to 1,093,750 shares of our common stock at the same price. The gross proceeds were $201.3 million and net proceeds were approximately $188.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering costs.
RTW Transactions
On July 14, 2020, we entered into the RTW Transactions with RTW Royalty Holdings and Ji Xing. The RTW Transactions include entering into a licensing and collaboration agreement with Ji Xing, the sale of Cytokinetics common stock to the RTW Investors (as defined below), an agreement to sell to RTW Royalty Holdings our interest in certain future royalties on net sales of products containing the compound mavacamten that is being developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb Company (formerly by MyoKardia, Inc.) and the ability for the Company to obtain additional funding in the future from RTW Royalty Holdings, upon the achievement of certain clinical trial milestones, in exchange for future royalty payments as further discussed below. As a result, we have or expect to receive a combination of committed capital, funding and sale proceeds from the RTW Investors, RTW Royalty Holdings and Ji Xing.
On July 14, 2020, we entered into Common Stock Purchase Agreements (each, a “CSPA”) with each of RTW Master Fund, Ltd., RTW Innovation Master Fund, Ltd. and RTW Venture Fund Limited (collectively, the “RTW Investors”). The CSPAs provide for the sale and issuance of an aggregate of 2.0 million shares of common stock of Cytokinetics (the “Shares”) at a price per share of $25.00 and an aggregate purchase price of $50.0 million. The closing occurred on July 14, 2020. The RTW Investors have agreed to certain trading and other restrictions with respect to the Shares, including a restriction on sales or other transfers of the Shares, subject to certain exceptions, for a period of two years from the closing date, which period will be extended if certain conditions are met.
As of December 31, 2020, we have received $25.0 million related to the licensing and collaboration agreement with Ji Xing, $50.0 million associated with the sale of Cytokinetics common stock to the RTW Investors and $85.0 million associated with the agreement to sell RTW Royalty Holdings our interest in certain future royalties on net sales of products containing the compound mavacamten that is being developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb Company (formerly by MyoKardia Inc).
Funding Agreement
We entered into a Funding Agreement (the “Funding Agreement”) with RTW Royalty Holdings. Pursuant to the Funding Agreement, RTW Royalty Holdings has committed to provide up to $90.0 million (the “Funding Commitment”), to fund our development and commercialization of CK-274 in nHCM and oHCM. Half of the Funding Commitment will be available, at our option, if certain clinical trial milestones of CK-274 for oHCM are achieved by January 14, 2023, and the remaining $45.0 million of the Funding Commitment will be available, at our option, if certain clinical trial milestones of CK-274 for nHCM are achieved by January 14, 2024. If we develop CK-274 in another indication, we will negotiate an additional funding commitment from RTW to fund our development and commercialization of CK-274 in such other indication (other than oHCM or nHCM).
In exchange for the Funding Commitment and upon receipt of such funding from RTW Royalty Holdings, we have agreed to make payments to RTW Royalty Holdings equal to 2%, if RTW Royalty Holdings funds $45.0 million of the Funding Commitment, or 4%, if RTW Royalty Holdings funds the full $90.0 million of the Funding Commitment, in each case in respect of net sales of CK-274 by us and any of our licensees in the CK-274 Territory. In addition, should we exercise our option draw borrowings pursuant to the Funding Agreement, such agreement contains certain covenants applicable to us, including, among other things, development and commercialization diligence obligations in connection to the CK-274 Territory, use of proceeds, reporting and encumbrances. There are no performance obligations related to the Funding Agreement, as access to the Funding Commitment is at the option of the Company and based upon the achievement of certain development milestones.
The Funding Agreement contains customary conditions to disbursement, which may include the consent of our senior secured lenders, Oxford and SVB, at the time of disbursement. On July 16, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the Term Loan Agreement, as defined in Financial Statement Note 6 - Debt, which permits, subject to entry into an intercreditor agreement between Oxford and RTW Royalty Holdings in form.
Sources and Uses of Cash in 2019
At December 31, 2019, our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments totaled $225.1 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $90.9 million for 2019 and was largely due to our net loss for 2019, offset by non-cash expenses included in net loss.
Net cash used in investing activities was $74.7 million in 2019 and was primarily due to purchases of investments of $277.9 million, offset by sales and maturities of investments of $205.8 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $159.8 million in 2019 and was primarily due to proceeds from public offerings of common stock of $36.2 million under the facility discussed below, proceeds from the convertible notes of $133.9 million as discussed below, offset by the purchase of the capped call options related to the convertible notes of $13.4 million as discussed below.
On November 13, 2019, the Company issued $138.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.0% convertible senior notes due 2026 (the “2026 Notes”). The 2026 Notes are unsecured obligations and bear interest at an annual rate of 4.0% per year, payable semi-annually on May 15 and December 15 of each year, beginning May 15, 2020. The 2026 Notes are governed by an indenture between the Company and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. The 2026 Notes will mature on November 15, 2026, unless earlier repurchased or redeemed by the Company or converted at the option of the holders. The Company may redeem the 2026 Notes prior to the maturity date but is not required to and no sinking fund is provided for the 2026 Notes. The 2026 Notes may be converted, under certain circumstances as described below, based on an initial conversion rate of 94.7811 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount (which represents an initial conversion price of $10.55 per share). The conversion rate for the 2026 Notes will be subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of certain specified events. In addition, upon the occurrence of a make-whole fundamental change (as defined in the indenture), the Company will, in certain circumstances, increase the conversion rate by a number of additional shares for a holder that elects to convert its notes in connection with such make-whole fundamental change. The Company received approximately $133.9 million in net proceeds, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount, from the issuance of the 2026 Notes.
In connection with the offering of the 2026 Notes, the Company entered into privately-negotiated capped call transactions with one of the underwriters in the offering or its affiliate. The Company used approximately $13.4 million of the net proceeds from the offering of the 2026 Notes to pay the cost of the capped call transactions. The capped call transactions are expected generally to reduce potential dilution to the Company’s common stock upon any conversion of the 2026 Notes and/or offset any cash payments the Company is required to make in excess of the principal amount of converted 2026 Notes, as the case may be, in the event that the market value per share of the Company’s common stock, as measured under the terms of the capped call transactions at the time of exercise, is greater than the strike price of the capped call transactions (which initially corresponds to the initial conversion price of the 2026 Notes, and is subject to certain adjustments), with such reduction and/or offset subject to a cap initially equal to approximately $14.07 (which represents a premium of approximately 70% over the last reported sale price of the Company’s common stock on November 7, 2019), subject to certain adjustments. The capped call transactions are separate transactions, entered into by the Company and are not part of the terms of the 2026 Notes.
In 2019, we terminated the original Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement (the “ATM Facility”) with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“Cantor”) for the sale, in our sole discretion, of shares of our common stock, having an aggregate offering price of up to $75.0 million through Cantor and we entered into a new sales agreement (the “New ATM Facility”) with Cantor, which provides for the sale, in our sole discretion, of shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $85.0 million through Cantor, as our sales agent. The issuance and sale of these shares by us pursuant to the New ATM Facility are deemed “at the market” offerings and are registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. We pay a commission of up to 3.0% of gross sales proceeds of any common stock sold under the New ATM Facility. In 2019, we issued 3,984,849 shares of common stock for net proceeds of $36.2 million under the New ATM Facility.
Future Sources and Uses of Cash
In 2021, in addition to the costs and expenses of our research and development activities, we expect to incur an increase in costs and expenses as compared to previous annual periods as a result of advancement of our pipeline, and our commercial planning activities in view of the potential commercial launch of omecamtiv mecarbil in the U.S. and potentially elsewhere. Such costs and expenses are likely to include an increase in headcount, particularly in our sales and marketing functions, and the procurement of omecamtiv mecarbil drug product for commercial launch. These costs and expenses will be greater than what they would have been had Amgen not elected to terminate the Amgen Agreement and Servier not elected to terminate the Servier Agreement. We may explore potential strategic transactions and/or structured financing transactions to finance the increase costs and expenses. We will also incur expenses in connection to our relocation from our Old Facilities to our New Facilities during the fourth quarter of 2021, including holdover rent payable to our current landlord.
In future periods, we expect to incur substantial costs as we continue to expand our research programs and related research and development activities. We expect to incur significant research and development expenses as we advance the research and development of compounds from our other muscle biology programs through research to candidate selection to clinical development. We may also incur significant sales and marketing expenses if and when one or more of our molecules receive regulatory approvals.
Our future capital uses and requirements depend on numerous factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following:
•
the initiation, progress, timing, scope and completion of preclinical research, non-clinical development, chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (“CMC”), and clinical trials for our drug candidates and other compounds;
•
the time and costs involved in obtaining regulatory approvals;
•
the jurisdictions in which we are granted regulatory approvals and thus are able to successfully launch our products for commercial sale;
•
delays that may be caused by requirements of regulatory agencies;
•
our level of funding for the development of current or future drug candidates;
•
the number of drug candidates we pursue and the stage of development that they are in;
•
the costs involved in filing and prosecuting patent applications and enforcing or defending patent claims;
•
our ability to establish and maintain selected strategic alliances required for the development of drug candidates and commercialization of our potential drugs;
•
our plans or ability to expand our drug development capabilities, including our capabilities to conduct clinical trials for our drug candidates;
•
our plans or ability to engage third-party manufacturers for our drug candidates and potential drugs;
•
our plans or ability to build or access sales and marketing capabilities and to achieve market acceptance for potential drugs;
•
the expansion and advancement of our research programs;
•
the hiring of additional employees and consultants;
•
the acquisition of technologies, products and other business opportunities that require financial commitments; and
•
our revenues, if any, from successful development of our drug candidates and commercialization of potential drugs.
On November 23, 2020, we announced that Amgen has elected to terminate the Amgen Agreement and thereby end its collaboration with Cytokinetics, effective May 20, 2021, and intends to transition development and commercialization rights for omecamtiv mecarbil and CK-136 (formerly known as AMG 594) to Cytokinetics.
On December 23, 2020, we announced that Amgen notified us that Servier elected to terminate the Servier Agreement. The termination is effective as of March 18, 2021, after which all development, commercialization and other rights with respect to omecamtiv mecarbil previously granted by Amgen to Servier will revert to Amgen. Given Servier’s notice to Amgen, all worldwide rights related to the development and commercialization of omecamtiv mecarbil will now return to Cytokinetics commensurate with the effective termination of the Amgen Agreement on May 20, 2021.
As a result of Amgen’s and Servier’s elections to terminate the Amgen Agreement and the Servier Agreement respectively, we will dedicate resources to ensure the transition of the programs related to omecamtiv mecarbil and CK-136 (formerly known as AMG 594) to us. In addition, we anticipate engaging with regulatory authorities in 2021 regarding the results of GALACTIC-HF with the objective to assess potential regulatory paths for an NDA submission for omecamtiv mecarbil and continuing our commercial planning activities. Finally, we plan to evaluate a wide range of corporate development strategies for potential co-development, co-commercialization and licensing deals in relation to omecamtiv mecarbil and our other drug candidates in order to mitigate the cost effects of the termination of the Amgen Agreement and Servier Agreement and enhance our commercial capabilities. These cost effects of termination include forfeiture of potential milestone payments from Amgen to us, as well as additional costs to us relating to clinical studies, regulatory filing, and commercialization of omecamtiv mecarbil.
The RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement provides that in the event Amgen elects to terminate the Amgen Agreement, we are obliged to enter into an agreement with RPI to preserve RPI’s rights under the RPI Royalty Purchase Agreement, which includes the payment by Cytokinetics of 4.5% of its worldwide net sales of omecamtiv mecarbil and other Amgen Alliance Compounds, subject to a potential increase of up to an additional 1% under certain circumstances (delay in US marketing approval). Our obligation to enter into a new agreement with RPI does not impact our accounting treatment of the RPI Liability or our estimates.
Future uses of cash also include capital purchases of equipment and tenant improvements to build out the Oyster Point Lease totaling approximately $35.0 million. We intend to occupy the Oyster Point building late 2021.
We have incurred an accumulated deficit of $992.3 million since inception and there can be no assurance that we will attain profitability. We are subject to risks common to clinical-stage companies including, but not limited to, development of new drug candidates, dependence on key personnel, and the ability to obtain additional capital as needed to fund our future plans. Our liquidity will be impaired if sufficient additional capital is not available on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Until we achieve profitable operations, we intend to continue to fund operations through payments from strategic collaborations, additional sales of equity securities, grants and other financings. We have never generated revenues from commercial sales of our drugs and may not have drugs to market for at least several years, if ever. Our success is dependent on our ability to obtain additional capital by entering into new strategic collaborations and/or through financings, and ultimately on our and our collaborators’ ability to successfully develop and market one or more of our drug candidates. We cannot be certain that sufficient funds will be available from such collaborators or financings when needed or on satisfactory terms. Additionally, there can be no assurance that any of our drug candidates will be accepted in the marketplace or that any future products can be developed or manufactured at an acceptable cost. These factors could have a material adverse effect on our future financial results, financial position and cash flows.
Based on the current status of our development plans, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, investments and interest earned on investments will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements for at least the next 12 months. If, at any time, our prospects for internally financing our research and development programs decline, we may decide to reduce research and development expenses by delaying, discontinuing or reducing our funding of development of one or more of our drug candidates or of other research and development programs. Alternatively, we might raise funds through strategic relationships, public or private financings or other arrangements. There can be no assurance that funding, if needed, will be available on attractive terms, or at all, or in accordance with our planned timelines. Furthermore, financing obtained through future strategic relationships may require us to forego certain commercialization and other rights to our drug candidates. Similarly, any additional equity financing may be dilutive to stockholders and debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Represents undiscounted future non-cancellable lease payments for our operating leases.
(2)
Represents future minimum payments for our term loan, including interest payable and final payment.
(3)
Represents interest payable for our convertible notes.
(4)
Represents payments for materials and software licenses that are firm commitments.
The above table does not include $43.8 million of cancellable purchase orders for the construction of the Oyster Point Lease.
The above table does not include the RPI Liability payments due to the uncertain nature and timing.
The obligations in the above table are as of December 31, 2020. We expect the amount of these obligations to change materially over time as new contracts are initiated and existing contracts are completed, terminated, or modified.
Segment Information
We have one primary business activity and operate in one reportable segment.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not party to any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The information required by this item is included in Item 8, Note 1, Organization and Accounting Policies, in our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.