Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on November 14, 2019 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar initial business combination with one or more businesses. Our sponsor is SVAC Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company.
Our registration statements for our IPO became effective on September 9, 2020. On September 14, 2020, we consummated the IPO of 36,000,000 units at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $360.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $23.0 million, inclusive of $16.2 million in deferred underwriting commissions. The underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the IPO to purchase up to 5,400,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per unit, less underwriting discounts and commissions. On September 18, 2020, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option and on September 23, 2020, purchased an additional 4,423,453 units, generating gross proceeds of approximately $44.2 million, and incurred additional offering costs of approximately $2.7 million (net of approximately $221,000 in reimbursement for certain expenses from the underwriters), including approximately $2.0 million in deferred underwriting fees. As of November 2, 2020, holders of the units may elect to separately trade the public shares and the detachable redeemable warrants included in the units.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 6,133,333 private warrants to our sponsor at a purchase price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of $9.2 million. In connection with the underwriters’ partial exercise of their over-allotment option, our sponsor purchased an additional 589,794 private placement warrants, generating gross proceeds of approximately $0.9 million.
Upon the closing of the IPO, the sale of the private placement warrants, the sale of the over-allotment units and the sale of 589,794 additional private placement warrants, $404.2 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of such sales were placed in the trust account located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities,” within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in money market funds meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of an initial business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described elsewhere herein.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the IPO, or September 14, 2022, we will (i) cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay our franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then-outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish the public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
On February 21, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement, which provides for, among other things, (i) Cyxtera to be contributed to Newco by the Cyxtera Stockholder, with Cyxtera becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of Newco, (ii) Merger Sub 1 to be merged with and into NewCo, with NewCo surviving the First Merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of SVAC and Merger Sub 1 ceasing to exist, and (iii) immediately following the First Merger, NewCo to be merged with and into Merger Sub 2, with Merger Sub 2 surviving the Second Merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of SVAC and NewCo ceasing to exist. As a result of the Cyxtera Business Combination, Cyxtera and the various operating subsidiaries of Cyxtera will become subsidiaries of SVAC, with the Cyxtera Stockholder becoming a stockholder of SVAC. Upon closing of the Cyxtera Business Combination, we will be renamed “Cyxtera Technologies, Inc.”
See “Item 1. Business-Proposed Business Combination” and Note 9 to our audited financial statements for further information related to the Cyxtera Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $2.6 million in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $2.5 million. Further, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our acquisition plans.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from our sponsor to purchase the founder shares, a loan under a promissory note of approximately $141,000 from our sponsor, and the net proceeds from the consummation of the sale of the private placement not held in the trust account. We fully repaid the promissory note on September 14, 2020. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. As of December 31, 2020, there were no working capital loans outstanding.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation, the preparation for the IPO, and since the closing of the IPO, the search for a prospective initial business combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of gain on investment (net), dividends and interest held in trust account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $206,000, which consisted of approximately $139,000 in general and administrative expenses, approximately $36,000 of administrative expenses paid to a related party and approximately $200,000 of franchise tax expense, which was partially offset by approximately $169,000 net gain on investments held in the trust account.
For the period from November 14, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had a net loss of approximately $1,300, which consisted of approximately $800 in general and administrative expenses and approximately $500 of franchise tax expense.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On November 27, 2019, our sponsor purchased 8,625,000 shares of our Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, for an aggregate price of $25,000. In June 2020, our sponsor transferred (i) 431,250 founder shares to Martin D. McNulty, Jr., our Chief Executive Officer and a member of the board of directors and (ii) 25,000 founder shares to each of Pauline J. Brown, Michelle Felman and Lowell Robinson. In July 2020, our sponsor transferred 25,000 Founder Shares to Robert L. Greene. On September 9, 2020, we effected a 1.2:1 share capitalization, resulting in an aggregate of 10,350,000 shares of Class B common stock outstanding. All shares and associated amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the share capitalization.
Our sponsor and our Chief Executive Officer agreed to forfeit up to 1,350,000 founder shares to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the founder shares would represent 20.0% of our issued and outstanding shares after the IPO. On September 23, 2020, upon the underwriters’ partial exercise of the over-allotment, an aggregate of 244,137 founder shares were forfeited by our sponsor and our Chief Executive Officer.
Our sponsor and our officers and directors agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the founder shares until (A) one year after the date of the consummation of the initial business combination or (B) subsequent to the initial business combination, (x) if the closing price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial business combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the public stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private placement of 6,133,333 private placement warrants to our sponsor, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds to our company of $9.2 million. In connection with the underwriters’ partial exercise of their over-allotment option, our sponsor purchased an additional 589,794 private placement warrants, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of approximately $0.9 million.
Each whole private placement warrant is exercisable for one whole share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the private placement warrants to our sponsor was added to the proceeds from the IPO held in the trust account. If we do not complete an initial business combination by September 14, 2022, the private placement warrants will expire worthless. The private placement warrants will be non-redeemable for cash and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by our sponsor or its permitted transferees.
Our sponsor has agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of its private placement warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial business combination.
Related Party Loans
On November 27, 2019, our sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the IPO pursuant to a promissory note. The promissory note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of October 31, 2020 or the completion of the IPO. We borrowed approximately $141,000 under the promissory note and fully repaid the promissory note on September 14, 2020.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, make working capital loans. If we complete an initial business combination, we will repay the working capital loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the working capital loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the working capital loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of an initial business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such working capital loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such working capital loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. To date, we had no borrowings under the working capital loans.
Administrative Services Agreement
We entered into an agreement that provides that, commencing on the date that our securities are first listed on The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC and continuing until the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or our liquidation, we will pay our sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, administrative and support services.
Our sponsor, our executive officers and directors or any of their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable initial business combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments made to our sponsor, officers, directors or their affiliates and will determine which expenses and the amount of expenses that will be reimbursed. There is no cap or ceiling on the reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses incurred by such persons in connection with activities on our behalf.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement with our sponsor to pay our sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, and administrative and support services.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the trust account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. Our investments held in the trust account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these investments are included in net gain from investments held in trust account in the statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the trust account are determined using available market information, other than for investments in open-ended money market funds with published daily net asset values (“NAV”), in which case we use NAV as a practical expedient to fair value. The NAV on these investments is typically held constant at $1.00 per unit.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020, 38,346,069 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the IPO and private placement to purchase an aggregate of 20,197,611 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted earnings per share is the same as basic earnings per share for the period.
Our statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per share, basic and diluted for Class A common stock is calculated by dividing the net gain from investments held in the trust account of approximately $169,000, net of applicable franchise taxes of approximately $169,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per share, basic and diluted for Class B common stock for the year ended December 31, 2020 is calculated by dividing the general and administration expenses of approximately $174,000 and franchise taxes of approximately $31,000, resulting in a net loss of approximately $205,000, by the weighted average number of Class B common stock outstanding for the period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We have elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our financial statements.