Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, the audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Caesars Entertainment, Inc., a Delaware corporation formerly known as Eldorado Resorts, Inc. (“ERI” or “Eldorado”), is referred to as the “Company,” “CEI,” “Caesars,” or the “Registrant,” and together with its subsidiaries may also be referred to as “we,” “us” or “our.”
We also refer to (i) our Consolidated Financial Statements as our “Financial Statements,” (ii) our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) as our “Statements of Operations,” (iii) our Consolidated Balance Sheets as our “Balance Sheets,” and (iv) our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as our “Statements of Cash Flows.” References to numbered “Notes” refer to Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8.
Objective
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to be a narrative explanation of the financial statements and other statistical data that should be read in conjunction with the accompanying financial statements to enhance an investor’s understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. Our objectives are: (i) to provide a narrative explanation of our financial statements that will enable investors to see the Company through the eyes of management; (ii) to enhance the overall financial disclosure and provide the context within which financial information should be analyzed; and (iii) to provide information about the quality of, and potential variability of, our earnings and cash flows so that investors can ascertain the likelihood that past performance is indicative of future performance.
Overview
We are a geographically diversified gaming and hospitality company that was founded in 1973 by the Carano family with the opening of the Eldorado Hotel Casino in Reno, Nevada. We partnered with MGM Resorts International to build Silver Legacy Resort Casino in Reno, Nevada in 1993 and, beginning in 2005, we grew through a series of acquisitions, including the acquisition of Eldorado Shreveport in 2005, MTR Gaming Group, Inc. in 2014, Circus Circus Reno (“Circus Reno”) and the 50% membership interest in the Silver Legacy that was owned by MGM Resorts International in 2015, Isle of Capri Casinos, Inc. (“Isle” or “Isle of Capri”) in 2017 and Grand Victoria Casino (“Elgin”) and Tropicana Entertainment, Inc. (“Tropicana”) in 2018. Prior to the Merger (as defined below), we operated 23 gaming facilities in 11 states, with no international operations, featuring approximately 23,900 slot machines, video lottery terminals (“VLTs”) and e-tables, approximately 660 table games and approximately 11,300 hotel rooms.
On July 20, 2020, we completed the merger with Caesars Entertainment Corporation (“Former Caesars”) pursuant to which Former Caesars became our wholly-owned subsidiary (the “Merger”). As a result of the Merger, we currently own, lease or manage an aggregate of 54 domestic properties in 16 states with approximately 54,600 slot machines, VLTs and e-tables, approximately 3,200 table games and approximately 47,700 hotel rooms as of December 31, 2020. We also have international operations in five countries outside of the U.S. In addition, we have other domestic and international properties that are authorized to use the brands and marks of Caesars Entertainment, Inc., as well as other non-gaming properties. Upon completion of our previously announced sales, or expected sales, of certain gaming properties, we expect that we will continue to own, lease or manage 48 properties. Our primary source of revenue is generated by gaming operations, and we utilize hotels, restaurants, bars, entertainment, racing, sportsbook offerings, retail shops and other services to attract customers to our properties.
In connection with the Merger, Caesars Entertainment Corporation changed its name to “Caesars Holdings, Inc.” and Eldorado Resorts, Inc. converted into a Delaware corporation and changed its name to “Caesars Entertainment, Inc.” In addition, effective as of July 21, 2020 our ticker symbol on the NASDAQ Stock Market changed from “ERI” to “CZR”. In connection with the Merger, we also entered into a Master Transaction Agreement (the “MTA”) with VICI Properties L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (“VICI”), pursuant to which, among other things, we agreed to consummate certain sale and leaseback transactions and amend certain lease agreements with VICI and/or its affiliates, with respect to certain property described in the MTA. See Note 3 for further discussion of the Merger and related transactions.
As of December 31, 2020, we owned 20 of our casinos and leased 29 casinos in the U.S. We have leases with GLP Capital, L.P., the operating partnership of Gaming and Leisure Properties, Inc. (“GLPI”), including our Master Lease that we entered into in connection with the acquisition of Tropicana on October 1, 2018 (as amended, the “GLPI Master Lease”) and our Lumière lease. Eight of the leased casinos are subject to leases with GLPI, and we lease an additional 21 casinos from other third parties, including VICI. See descriptions under the “GLPI Master Lease” and “VICI Leases.”
We periodically divest assets that we do not consider core to our business to raise capital or, in some cases, to comply with conditions, terms, obligations or restrictions imposed by antitrust, gaming and other regulatory entities. A summary of recently completed and planned divestitures of our properties as of December 31, 2020 is as follows:
(a)We closed the sales of Kansas City and Vicksburg on July 1, 2020 and recorded a gain of approximately $8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
(b)On April 24, 2020, we entered into a definitive purchase agreement with Twin River Worldwide Holdings, Inc. (“Twin River” or “Bally’s Corporation”) and certain of its affiliates for the sale of the equity interests of Eldorado Resort Casino Shreveport Joint Venture and Columbia Properties Tahoe, LLC, the entities that hold Eldorado Shreveport and MontBleu, respectively, for aggregate consideration of $155 million, subject to a customary working capital adjustment. The definitive agreement provides that the consummation of the sale is subject to satisfaction of customary conditions, including receipt of required regulatory approvals. The sale of Eldorado Shreveport closed on December 23, 2020 for $140 million, subject to a customary working capital adjustment and we recognized a gain of approximately $29 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The sale of MontBleu is expected to close in the first half of 2021. MontBleu met the requirements for presentation as assets held for sale as of December 31, 2020. However, the pending divestitures of MontBleu did not meet the requirements for presentation as discontinued operations and MontBleu’s results of operations are included in income from continuing operations in the periods presented. As a result of the agreement to sell MontBleu, an impairment charge totaling $45 million was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the carrying value exceeding the estimated net sales proceeds from the sale.
(c)In connection with its review of the Merger, the Indiana Gaming Commission determined on July 16, 2020 that, as a condition to their approval of the Merger, we are required to enter into agreements to divest of three properties within the state of Indiana in order to avoid undue economic concentration. On October 27, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement to sell Evansville to GLPI and Twin River for $480 million in cash, subject to a customary working capital adjustment. The sale is subject to satisfaction of customary conditions, including receipt of required regulatory approvals and is expected to close in mid-2021. In addition, on December 24, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement to divest of Caesars Southern Indiana (See (i) below). We expect to enter into an agreement to sell Horseshoe Hammond prior to December 31, 2021, as the deadline was extended by the Indiana Gaming Commission. Evansville met the requirements for presentation as assets held for sale as of December 31, 2020, while Caesars Southern Indiana and Horseshoe Hammond met the requirements for presentation as held for sale and discontinued operations.
(d)On December 1, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement to sell the Baton Rouge to CQ Holding Company, Inc. Pursuant to the terms of the GLPI Master Lease, Baton Rouge will be removed from the GLPI Master Lease, and the rent payments to GLPI will remain unchanged. GLPI will retain ownership of the real estate of Baton Rouge. As a result of the agreement to sell Baton Rouge, an impairment charge totaling $50 million was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the carrying value exceeding the estimated net sales proceeds. The transaction is expected to close in mid-2021 and is subject to regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions.
(e)These Former Caesars properties met held for sale criteria as of the acquisition date. The sales of these properties have or are expected to close within one year from the date of the closing of the Merger and the properties are classified as discontinued operations.
(f)On September 30, 2020, the Company and VICI completed the sale of Harrah’s Reno to and affiliate of CAI Investments for $42 million. The proceeds from the sale were split between the Company and VICI, and the Company received $8 million of net proceeds.
(g)On November 18, 2020, the Company and VICI completed the sale of Bally's Atlantic City to Bally’s Corporation for $25 million. The proceeds from the sale were split between the Company and VICI, and the Company received $5 million of net proceeds. As a result of the sale, the Company agreed to reimburse Bally’s Corporation $30 million for capital expenditures required at Bally’s Atlantic City and recorded a liability within Accrued other liabilities and recorded a charge to Discontinued operations, net of income taxes. Our commitment will be satisfied by adjusting obligations under certain sportsbook operating agreements between Bally’s Corporation and the Company following our expected acquisition of William Hill. In addition, on October 9, 2020, we reached an agreement to sell the Bally’s brand to Bally’s Corporation for $20 million, while retaining the right to use the brand within Bally’s Las Vegas into perpetuity.
(h)On September 3, 2020, the Company and VICI entered into an agreement with Rubico Acquisition Corp. to sell Harrah’s Louisiana Downs for $22 million, subject to a customary working capital adjustment, where the proceeds will be split between the Company and VICI. The sale is subject to satisfaction of customary conditions, including receipt of required regulatory approvals and is expected to close in the first half of 2021.
(i)On December 24, 2020, the Company entered into agreement to sell Caesars Southern Indiana to the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians (“EBCI”) for $250 million, subject to a customary working capital adjustment. Caesar’s annual payments to VICI under the Regional Lease will decline by $33 million upon closing of the transaction. Additionally, effective as of the closing of the transaction, Caesars and EBCI will enter into a long-term agreement for the continued use of the Caesars brand and Caesars Rewards loyalty program at Caesars Southern Indiana. The sale is subject to satisfaction of customary conditions, including receipt of required regulatory approvals and is expected to close in the third quarter of 2021.
Merger and Acquisitions Related Activities
Merger with Caesars Entertainment Corporation
On July 20, 2020, the Merger was consummated and Former Caesars became a wholly-owned subsidiary of ours. The strategic rationale for the Merger includes, but is not limited to, the following:
•Creation of the largest owner, operator and manager of domestic gaming assets;
•Diversification of the Company’s domestic footprint;
•Access to iconic brands, rewards programs and new gaming opportunities expected to enhance customer experience; and
•Realization of significant identified synergies.
Based on the closing price of $38.24 per share of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.00001 per share (“Company Common Stock”), reported on the NASDAQ Stock Market on July 20, 2020, the aggregate implied value of the aggregate merger consideration paid to former holders of Former Caesars common stock in connection with the Merger was approximately $8.5 billion, including approximately $2.4 billion in the Company Common Stock and approximately $6.1 billion in cash. The aggregate merger consideration transferred also included approximately $2.4 billion related to the repayment of certain outstanding debt balances of Former Caesars and approximately $48 million of other consideration paid, which includes $19 million related to a transaction success fee, for the benefit of Former Caesars, and $29 million for the replacement of equity awards of certain employees attributable to services provided prior to the Merger.
Pursuant to the Merger, each share of Former Caesars common stock was converted into the right to receive, at the election of the holder thereof and subject to proration, approximately $12.41 of cash consideration or approximately 0.3085 shares of Company Common Stock, with a value equal to approximately $12.41 in cash (based on the volume weighted average price per share of Company Common Stock for the 10 trading days ending on July 16, 2020). Following the consummation of the Merger, stockholders of the Company and stockholders of Former Caesars held approximately 61% and 39%, respectively, of the outstanding shares of Company Common Stock.
We recognized acquisition-related transaction costs in connection with the Merger of $160 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and $80 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Tropicana Entertainment Inc.
On October 1, 2018, we acquired Tropicana in a cash transaction valued at $1.9 billion (the “Tropicana Acquisition”). At the closing of the transaction Tropicana became a wholly-owned subsidiary of ours. Immediately prior to our acquisition, Tropicana sold Tropicana Aruba Resort and GLP Capital, L.P., a wholly-owned subsidiary of GLPI, acquired substantially all of Tropicana’s real estate, other than the real estate underlying MontBleu and Lumière, for approximately $964 million. We acquired the real estate underlying Lumière for $246 million with the proceeds of a $246 million loan from GLPI. We funded the remaining consideration payable with our cash on hand and cash on hand at Tropicana, borrowings under our revolving credit facility and proceeds from our offering of $600 million of 6% senior notes due 2026.
Substantially concurrently with the acquisition of the real estate portfolio by GLPI, we entered into a triple net master lease for the Tropicana properties acquired by GLPI (“GLPI Master Lease”). The initial annual rent under the terms of the lease was approximately $88 million and is subject to annual escalation. We do not have the ability to terminate the obligations under the Master Lease prior to its expiration without GLPI’s consent.
In connection with the purchase of the real estate related to Lumière, Tropicana St. Louis RE LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of ours, and GLPI entered into a loan agreement, dated as of October 1, 2018 (the “Lumière Loan”), relating to a loan of $246 million by GLPI to Tropicana St. Louis RE to fund the purchase price of the real estate underlying Lumière. The Lumière Loan was guaranteed by us, bore interest at a rate equal to 9.27% and had a maturity date of October 1, 2020. On June 24, 2020, the Company received approval from Missouri Gaming Commission to sell the real estate underlying Lumière to GLPI and leaseback the property under a long-term financing obligation. As of December 31, 2020, the Lumière loan has been satisfied in full and the real estate has been refinanced under a financing obligation.
Grand Victoria Casino
On August 7, 2018, we completed the acquisition (the “Elgin Acquisition”) of the Grand Victoria Casino (“Elgin”) in Elgin, Illinois. We purchased Elgin for $329 million, including a working capital adjustment totaling $1 million. The Elgin Acquisition was financed using cash on hand and borrowings under the Company’s revolving credit facility.
Partnerships and Acquisition Opportunities
William Hill
In September 2018, we entered into a 25-year agreement, which became effective January 29, 2019, with William Hill plc and William Hill U.S. Holdco. Inc. (“William Hill US”), its U.S. subsidiary (together, “William Hill”) pursuant to which we (i) granted to William Hill the right to conduct betting activities, including operating sportsbooks, in retail channels and under our first skin and third skin for online channels with respect to our current and future properties located in the United States and the territories and possessions of the United States, including Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands and (ii) agreed that William Hill will have the right to conduct real money online gaming activities utilizing our second skin available with respect to properties in such territories. Pursuant to the terms of the agreement, we received a 20% ownership interest in William Hill US with an initial value of approximately $129 million as well as 13 million ordinary shares of William Hill plc with an initial value of approximately $27 million upon closing of the transaction in January 2019. We granted William Hill the right to the use of certain skins in exchange for an equity method investment. The fair value of the William Hill US and William Hill plc shares received has been deferred and is recognized as revenue on a straight-line basis over the 25-year agreement term. The amortization of deferred revenues associated with our equity interests is included in other revenue within our Corporate and Other segment. Additionally, we receive a profit share from the operations of betting and other gaming activities associated with our properties.
On September 30, 2020, we announced that we had reached an agreement with William Hill plc on the terms of a recommended cash acquisition pursuant to which we would acquire the entire issued and to be issued share capital (other than shares owned by us or held in treasury) of William Hill plc, in an all-cash transaction of approximately £2.9 billion, or $3.7 billion. To
provide liquidity to fund the cash purchase price for the proposed acquisition, we entered into various financing transactions. On September 25, 2020, we borrowed $900 million under the CEI Revolving Credit Facility (defined below), which was fully repaid in October 2020. On October 1, 2020, we raised an additional $1.9 billion through a public offering of Company Common Stock which was deposited into an escrow account. As of December 31, 2020, these funds in escrow were classified as restricted cash and will remain restricted until the proposed acquisition of William Hill plc closes. In order to manage the risk of appreciation of the GBP denominated purchase price the Company has entered into foreign exchange forward contracts.
In connection with the proposed acquisition of William Hill plc, on September 29, 2020, the Company entered into a debt financing commitment letter pursuant to which the lenders party thereto have committed to arrange and provide a newly formed subsidiary of the Company with (a) a £1.0 billion senior secured 540-day bridge loan facility, (b) a £116 million senior secured 540-day revolving credit facility and (c) a £503 million senior secured 60-day bridge loan facility (collectively, the “Debt Financing”). The proceeds of the Debt Financing will be used (i) to pay a portion of the cash consideration for the proposed acquisition, (ii) to refinance certain of William Hill plc's and its subsidiaries' existing debt, (iii) to pay fees and expenses related to the acquisition and related transactions and (iv) for working capital and general corporate purposes.
Pending negotiation of the loan agreement for the Debt Financing, on October 6, 2020, our newly formed subsidiary entered into a £1.5 billion Interim Facilities Agreement (the “Interim Facilities Agreement”) with Deutsche Bank AG, London Branch and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. to provide: (a) a 90-day £1.0 billion interim asset sale bridge facility and (b) a 90-day £503 million interim cash confirmation bridge facility.
The transaction is conditioned on, among other things, the approval of William Hill plc shareholders, which was received on November 19, 2020, and receipt of required regulatory approvals. On December 28, 2020, we obtained the early termination of the waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 (“HSR Act”) relating to the proposed combination with William Hill plc. A final UK court hearing is scheduled for the last week of March 2021 and we expect to close the acquisition shortly thereafter.
The Stars Group/Flutter Entertainment
In November 2018, the Company entered into a 20-year agreement with The Stars Group Inc. (“TSG”) pursuant to which we agreed to provide TSG with options to obtain access to our second skin for online sports wagering and third skin for real money online gaming and poker, in each case with respect to states in which our properties are located. Under the terms of the agreement, we received 1 million TSG common shares. The fair value of the shares received has been deferred and is recognized as revenue on a straight-line basis over the 20-year agreement term. All shares are subject to a 1 year restriction on transfer from the date they are received. On May 5, 2020, Flutter Entertainment plc (“Flutter”) completed the acquisition of all of the issued and outstanding common shares of TSG in exchange for 0.2253 Flutter shares per common share of TSG. In addition, we receive a revenue share from the operation of the applicable verticals by TSG under our licenses. In December 2020, the Company sold 121,285 of these Flutter shares for net proceeds of approximately $24 million.
Reportable Segments
Segment results in this MD&A are presented consistent with the way our management assesses the operating results, assesses performance and allocates resources of the Company, which is a consolidated view that adjusts for the effect of certain transactions related to reportable segments within the Company. We view each property as an operating segment. Prior to the Merger, our principal operating activities occurred in five geographic regions and reportable segments: West, Midwest, South, East and Central, in addition to Corporate and Other. Following the Merger, our principal operating activities occur in three regionally-focused reportable segments. The Company’s reportable segments are: (1) Las Vegas, (2) Regional, and (3) Managed, International, CIE, in addition to Corporate and Other. See Item 2. Properties for listing of properties by segment.
Presentation of Financial Information
The financial information included in this Item 7 for the period after our acquisition of Former Caesars on July 20, 2020 is not fully comparable to the periods prior to the acquisition. In addition, the presentation of financial information included in this Item 7 for the periods after our sales and acquisitions of various properties are not fully comparable to the periods prior to their respective sale dates.
This MD&A is intended to provide information to assist in better understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations. Our historical operating results may not be indicative of our future results of operations because of the factors described in the preceding paragraph and the changing competitive landscape in each of our markets, including changes in market and societal trends, as well as by factors discussed elsewhere herein. We recommend that you read this MD&A in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Reclassifications
Certain reclassifications of prior year presentations have been made to conform to the current period presentation. Marketing and promotions expense previously disclosed for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 has been reclassified to Casino and pari-mutuel commissions expense and General and administrative expense based on the nature of the expense.
Key Performance Metrics
Our primary source of revenue is generated by our gaming operations, but we use our hotels, restaurants, bars, entertainment, retail shops, racing, sportsbook offerings and other services to attract customers to our properties. Our operating results are highly dependent on the volume and quality of customers visiting and staying at our properties. Key performance metrics include volume indicators such as table games drop and slot handle, which refer to amounts wagered by our customers. The amount of volume we retain, which is not fully controllable by us, is recognized as casino revenues and is referred to as our win or hold. In addition, hotel occupancy and price per room designated by average daily rate (“ADR”) are key indicators for our hotel business. Our calculation of ADR consists of the average price of occupied rooms per day including the impact of resort fees and complimentary rooms. Complimentary room rates are determined based on an analysis of retail or cash rates for each customer segment and each type of room product to estimate complimentary rates which are consistent with retail rates. Complimentary rates are reviewed at least annually and on an interim basis if there are significant changes in market conditions. Complimentary rooms are treated as occupied rooms in our calculation of hotel occupancy.
Significant Factors Impacting Financial Results
The following summary highlights the significant factors impacting our financial results during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Acquisitions and Transaction Costs
•Caesars - The Merger closed on July 20, 2020. Transaction costs related to our acquisition of Former Caesars totaled $160 million and $80 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
•Tropicana - Our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 include incremental revenues and expenses attributable to the seven properties we acquired in our acquisition of Tropicana on October 1, 2018. Transaction expenses related to our acquisition of Tropicana totaled $4 million and $18 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
•Elgin - Our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 include incremental revenues and expenses for the period of August 7, 2018 through December 31, 2018 attributable to Elgin. Transaction expenses related to our acquisition of Elgin totaled $0.2 million and $4 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Divestitures and Discontinued Operations
•Divestitures - We closed the sale of Eldorado Shreveport on December 23, 2020 and recorded a gain of approximately $29 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. We closed the sales of Kansas City and Vicksburg on July 1, 2020 and recorded a gain of approximately $8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. We closed the sales of Presque and Nemacolin on January 11, 2019 and March 8, 2019, respectively, and recorded a total net gain of $22 million, substantially related to the sale of Presque. We closed the sales of Mountaineer, Cape Girardeau and Caruthersville on December 6, 2019 and recorded a net gain of $29 million during the fourth quarter of 2019. The properties that have been sold are collectively referred to as “Divestitures.” In conjunction with the classification of MontBleu and Baton Rouge’s operations as assets held for sale as a result of the announced sale, impairment charges totaling $45 million and $50 million, respectively, were recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the carrying value exceeding the estimated net sales proceeds. None of the sales listed met requirements for presentation as discontinued operations and the results of operations of the relevant entities are included in income from continuing operations for the periods prior to their respective closing dates.
•Discontinued Operations - As result of the Merger, Former Caesars properties, including Harrah’s Louisiana Downs, Caesars Southern Indiana, Horseshoe Hammond, Harrah’s Reno, Caesars UK group, including Emerald Resort & Casino, and Bally’s Atlantic City, have met held for sale criteria as of the date of the closing of the Merger. The sales of these properties have or are expected to close within one year from the date of the closing of the Merger and the properties are classified as discontinued operations. Additionally, we closed the sale of Harrah’s Reno on September 30, 2020 and Bally’s Atlantic City on November 18, 2020. As a result of the sale of Bally’s Atlantic City, Caesars agreed to reimburse Bally’s Corporation $30 million for capital expenditures required at Bally’s Atlantic City and recorded a liability within Accrued other liabilities and a charge to Discontinued operations, net of income taxes. Our
commitment will be satisfied by adjusting obligations under certain sportsbook operating agreements between Bally’s Corporation and the Company following our expected acquisition of William Hill.
Financing and Lease Transactions
•New Debt Transactions related to the Merger - In connection with the Merger, we issued new notes, entered into a new credit agreement and assumed certain of Former Caesars indebtedness. In addition, we terminated previously outstanding credit agreements and discharged outstanding notes. As a result of these transactions, described more fully in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section below, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $132 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which is recorded within Loss on extinguishment of debt on the Statement of Operations, as well as an additional $388 million of interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. We also recorded a net gain of $16 million on conversions related to the 5% Convertible Notes during the year ended December 31, 2020.
•VICI Leases - Upon consummation of the Merger, CEI assumed obligations of certain real property assets leased from VICI by Former Caesars under various lease agreements. We recorded interest expense of $491 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
•GLPI Master Lease - We accounted for the GLPI Master Lease as a deferred financing obligation effective October 1, 2018. We recorded interest expense in the amount of $104 million, $99 million and $24 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, which was in excess of the cash lease payments as we continue to accrete up the liability during the earlier periods of the GLPI Master Lease.
•Tropicana Financing - On September 20, 2018, we issued $600 million in aggregate principal amount of 6.0% senior notes due 2026. The proceeds from the notes were used to fund the Tropicana Acquisition which closed on October 1, 2018. We incurred $10 million of incremental interest expense on these notes for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Other Significant Factors
•COVID-19 Public Health Emergency - In January 2020, an outbreak of a new strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) was identified and has since spread throughout much of the world, including the United States. All of our casino properties were temporarily closed for the period from mid-March 2020 through mid-May 2020 due to orders issued by various government agencies and tribal bodies as part of certain precautionary measures intended to help slow the spread of the COVID-19 public health emergency. On May 15, 2020, we began reopening our properties and have resumed certain operations at all of our properties as of December 31, 2020, with the exception of additional temporary closures of Caesars Windsor, Harrah’s Philadelphia, and our properties in Illinois. Subsequently, Harrah’s Philadelphia and our properties in Illinois have reopened. The COVID-19 public health emergency has had a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. We continued to pay our full-time employees through April 10, 2020, including tips and tokens. Effective April 11, 2020, we furloughed approximately 90% of our employees, implemented salary reductions and committed to continue to provide benefits to our employees during the duration of their respective furlough period. A portion of our workforce has returned to service as the properties have resumed with limited capacities and in compliance with operating restrictions imposed by governmental or tribal orders, directives, and guidelines. Due to the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 public health emergency on our results of operations, we obtained waivers on the financial covenants in our Former Caesars credit facility agreement and the GLPI Master Lease.
The extent of the ongoing and future effects of the COVID-19 public health emergency on our business and the casino resort industry generally is uncertain, but we expect that it will continue to have a significant impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition. The extent and duration of the impact of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations and financial condition will ultimately depend on future developments, including but not limited to, the duration and severity of the outbreak, the efficacy and availability of vaccines, restrictions on operations imposed by governmental authorities, the potential for authorities reimposing stay at home orders or additional restrictions in response to continued developments with the COVID-19 public health emergency, our ability to adapt to evolving operating procedures, the impact on consumer demand and discretionary spending, the length of time it takes for demand to return and our ability to adjust our cost structures for the duration of the outbreak’s effect on our operations.
•Impairment Charges - As a result of declines in recent performance and the expected impact on future cash flows as a result of COVID-19, we recognized impairment charges in our Regional segment related to goodwill and trade names totaling $100 million and $16 million, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, as a result of the agreements to sell properties in our Regional segment, as well as certain corporate assets, impairment charges
totaling $99 million were recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the carrying value exceeding the estimated net sales proceeds.
•Weather and Construction Disruption - Our Regional segment was negatively impacted by severe weather, including flooding, during the first quarter of 2019 compared to the same current year period. Additionally, our Regional segment was negatively impacted by disruption to our casino floor and hotel availability associated with renovation projects at our Black Hawk properties during the construction period from January to June 2019. In late August 2020, our Regional segment was negatively impacted by Hurricane Laura, causing severe damage to Isle of Capri Casino Hotel Lake Charles (“Lake Charles”), which remains closed as the construction of a new land-based casino is in process. We recorded an insurance receivable of $44 million, of which $15 million related to fixed asset impairments and $29 million related to remediation costs and repairs that have been incurred during year ended December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
The following table highlights the results of our operations:
___________________
(a)Corporate and Other includes revenues related to certain licensing revenue and various revenue sharing agreements. Corporate and Other expenses include corporate overhead costs, which consist of certain expenses, such as: payroll, professional fees, travel expenses and other general and administrative expenses that do not directly relate to or have not otherwise been allocated to a property. Expenses incurred for corporate activities that are directly attributable to a property or are otherwise incurred to support a property are allocated to each property.
(b)See the “Supplemental Unaudited Presentation of Consolidated Adjusted Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”)” discussion later in this MD&A for a description of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of net (loss) income to Adjusted EBITDA related margins.
(c)Net (loss) income margin is calculated as net (loss) income divided by net revenues.
Consolidated comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Comparisons between 2020 and 2019 are described below. A discussion of changes in our results of operations between year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 has been omitted from this Annual Report on Form 10-K and can be found in “Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018” of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Revenues
Net revenues were as follows:
Consolidated revenues increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of our acquisition of Former Caesars on July 20, 2020. This was offset by a decline in revenues associated with the impact of COVID-19 public health emergency and, to a lesser extent, divestitures of certain properties discussed earlier. All of our casino properties were temporarily closed for the period from mid-March 2020 through mid-May 2020 due to orders issued by various government agencies and tribal bodies as part of certain precautionary measures intended to help slow the spread of the COVID-19 public health emergency. On May 15, 2020, we began reopening our properties and have resumed certain operations at all of our properties as of December 31, 2020, with the exception of additional temporary closures of Caesars Windsor, Harrah’s Philadelphia, and our properties in Illinois. Subsequently, Harrah’s Philadelphia and our properties in Illinois have reopened. Our property in Lake Charles remains closed as a result of damage suffered in Hurricane Laura and will remain closed until construction of a new land-based casino is complete. Due to the impact of the COVID-19 public health emergency, including local and state regulations and the implementation of social distancing and health and safety protocols, our properties are subject to reduced gaming capacity and hotel occupancy, limited operation of food and beverage outlets, live entertainment events and conventions. As a result, gaming revenue represents a larger portion of our total revenues following the reopening of our properties as compared to earlier periods, which we expect to continue until such time as we are able to fully operate our non-gaming amenities following the reduction or elimination of social distancing and safety and health protocols, and other regulatory restrictions limiting capacity and other aspects of our business.
Our diversified portfolio has yielded mixed results as the properties have reopened under the conditions noted above. Net revenues for properties which have historically relied on a local customer base, not dependent on air travel or convention business, showed a smaller decrease as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 results. These properties’ gaming and hotel revenues have historically been the largest portion of their total revenue. Properties in destination markets such as Las Vegas, Atlantic City, Northern Nevada and New Orleans, which have historically relied on a broader regional and national customer base or convention business have declined significantly as compared to the prior year period. These destination markets were impacted by restrictions on, and an overall decline in, air travel related to COVID-19. These properties have historically relied on a broader mix of revenue sources including convention, entertainment, and food and beverage offerings. As a result of reduced visitation, air travel, state and local restrictions on capacity, and social distancing and safety and health protocols, these sources of revenue have been materially reduced as compared to prior periods.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses were as follows:
___________________
* Not meaningful.
Casino and pari-mutuel expenses consist primarily of salaries and wages associated with our gaming operations, marketing and promotions and gaming taxes. Hotel expenses consist principally of salaries, wages and supplies associated with our hotel operations. Food and beverage expenses consist principally of salaries and wages and costs of goods sold associated with our food and beverage operations. Other expenses consist principally of salaries and wages and costs of goods sold associated with our retail, entertainment and other operations.
Casino and pari-mutuel, hotel, food and beverage, and other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased year over year as a result of our acquisition of Former Caesars. This was partially offset as a result of the temporary closures of all of our properties due to the COVID-19 public health emergency, which reduced our salaries and wages, gaming taxes, costs of goods sold, and other expenses. As discussed above, our reopened properties are operating with reduced gaming and hotel capacity and limited food and beverage options. In addition, our properties have reduced marketing and promotional spend, resulting in further declines in gaming expenses.
General and administrative expenses include items such as information technology, facility maintenance, utilities, property and liability insurance, expenses for administrative departments such as accounting, compliance, purchasing, human resources, legal and internal audit, and property taxes. Property, general and administrative expenses also include stock-based compensation expense for certain property executives, sports sponsorships and other marketing expenses not directly related to our gaming operations.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased year over year as the result of our acquisition of Former Caesars. This was offset by actions taken to reduce our cost structure while our properties were temporarily closed and during the period of reduced operations due to the impact of the COVID-19 public health emergency, which are discussed above and implemented.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same prior year period, corporate expenses increased primarily due to the acquisition of Former Caesars offset by reductions in salaries and wages due to reductions in workforce implemented as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 public health emergency.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same prior year period, depreciation and amortization expense increased mainly due to the acquisition of Former Caesars offset by ceasing depreciation and amortization expense on assets held for sale and the Divestitures.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same prior year period, transaction costs and other operating costs increased primarily due to costs or fees incurred related to the Merger, various project exit fees and related write offs, and higher severance expense related to synergies associated with the Merger.
Impairment charges increased by $214 million in 2020 due to impairment related to goodwill and trade names recognized due to a triggering event resulting from the COVID-19 public health emergency as well as impairments related to our held for sale properties recognized due to the carrying value exceeding the estimated net sales proceeds.
Other expense
Other expense was as follows:
___________________
* Not meaningful.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense, net increased year over year as a result of our acquisition of Former Caesars. Outstanding debt assumed, additional debt raised, and assumed financing obligations resulted in the increase in interest expense.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the loss on extinguishment of debt increased year over year due to the early repayment of outstanding debt as a result of our acquisition of Former Caesars.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, other (loss) income increased year over year mainly due to a gain of $169 million related to the change in the foreign currency exchange rate associated with restricted cash held in GBP for, and a derivative contract related to, our expected acquisition of William Hill.
The effective tax rate was (7.7%) for 2020, 35.2% for 2019, and 29.8% for 2018. The effective tax rate in 2020 differed from the statutory rate of 21% primarily due to an increase in the valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets due to the series of transactions with VICI during the year.
Segment comparison for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Las Vegas Segment
___________________
* Not meaningful.
Las Vegas segment’s net revenues and Adjusted EBITDA increased as a result of the acquisition of Former Caesars. As of December 31, 2020, all of our Las Vegas properties were reopened. All of our properties within the Las Vegas segment reopened with reduced gaming and hotel capacity with limited food and beverage offerings as well as limited capacity at a few entertainment shows. As of December 31, 2020, convention venues have not reopened due to capacity limitations.
In the period between properties reopening and December 31, 2020, all of our reopened properties in the Las Vegas segment experienced a significant decline in net revenues and Adjusted EBITDA compared to Former Caesars’ prior year results for the same properties due to the general weakness in the economic environment resulting from reduced visitation and travel to Las Vegas resulting from the COVID-19 public health emergency. Compared to our Regional Segment, Adjusted EBITDA margin for our Las Vegas segment experienced a more significant negative impact from declines in revenue, as well as rent expense associated with our Rio lease beginning in December 2019.
Regional Segment
Regional segment’s net revenues increased as a result of our merger with Former Caesars. Adjusted EBITDA and margin decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same prior year period as a result of property closures due to the COVID-19 public health emergency. All of our properties in our Regional segment, with the exception of Lake Charles, Harrah’s Philadelphia and our properties in Illinois reopened as of December 31, 2020. Subsequently, Harrah’s Philadelphia and our properties in Illinois have reopened. All of our properties within the Regional segment reopened with reduced gaming and hotel capacity and with limited food and beverage offerings.
In the period between properties reopening and December 31, 2020, our Regional properties experienced a decline in net revenues as compared to the prior year. The majority of our Regional properties other than Atlantic City, Northern Nevada and New Orleans, Adjusted EBITDA declined slightly as compared to prior year, when including Former Caesars’ prior year, for the same properties. Adjusted EBITDA margin for these properties was higher as compared to prior year due to operating with a reduced workforce, reducing marketing costs, and limiting certain lower margin food and beverage offerings.
Properties in Atlantic City, Northern Nevada and New Orleans experienced significant declines in net revenues and Adjusted EBITDA as compared to prior year and Former Caesars’ prior year for the same properties as they were all negatively impacted by reduced visitation and limitations on capacity due to the COVID-19 public health emergency.
Managed, International & CIE Segment
___________________
* Not meaningful.
Managed, International, CIE segment’s net revenues and Adjusted EBITDA increased as a result of the acquisition of Former Caesars. All of our managed properties have reopened as of December 31, 2020, with the exception of Caesars Windsor. Our CIE business was not closed at any point related to the COVID-19 public health emergency.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net revenues for Managed, International and CIE declined as compared to Former Caesars’ prior period related to reimbursed management costs related to Caesars Windsor remaining closed throughout the current period. Excluding that, net revenues increased primarily related to increased revenue in our CIE business. Adjusted EBITDA for Managed, International and CIE increased as compared to Former Caesars’ prior period.
Corporate & Other
___________________
* Not meaningful.
Supplemental Unaudited Presentation of Consolidated Adjusted Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”) for the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Adjusted EBITDA (described below), a non-GAAP financial measure, has been presented as a supplemental disclosure because it is a widely used measure of performance and basis for valuation of companies in our industry and we believe that this non-GAAP supplemental information will be helpful in understanding our ongoing operating results. Management has historically used Adjusted EBITDA when evaluating operating performance because we believe that the inclusion or exclusion of certain recurring and non-recurring items is necessary to provide a full understanding of our core operating results and as a means to evaluate period-to-period results. Adjusted EBITDA represents net income (loss) before interest expense, (benefit) provision for income taxes, unrealized (gain) loss on investments and marketable securities, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, impairment charges, transaction expenses, severance expense, selling costs associated with the divestitures of properties, equity in income (loss) of unconsolidated affiliates, (gain) loss on the sale or disposal of property and equipment, (gain) loss related to divestitures, changes in the fair value of certain derivatives and certain non-recurring expenses such as sign-on and retention bonuses, business optimization expenses and transformation expenses, litigation awards and settlements, losses on inventory associated with properties temporarily closed as a result of the COVID-19 public health emergency, contract exit or termination costs, and regulatory settlements. Adjusted EBITDA also excludes the expense associated with certain of our leases as these transactions were accounted for as financing obligations and the associated expense is included in
interest expense. Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of performance or liquidity calculated in accordance with GAAP, is unaudited and should not be considered an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net income (loss) as an indicator of our operating performance. Uses of cash flows that are not reflected in Adjusted EBITDA include capital expenditures, interest payments, income taxes, debt principal repayments, payments under our leases with affiliates of GLPI and VICI Properties Inc. and certain regulatory gaming assessments, which can be significant. As a result, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a measure of our liquidity. Other companies that provide EBITDA information may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do. The definition of Adjusted EBITDA may not be the same as the definitions used in any of our debt agreements.
The following table summarizes our Adjusted EBITDA for our operating segments for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, in addition to reconciling net (loss) income to Adjusted EBITDA in accordance with US GAAP (unaudited):
____________________
(a)Other loss (income) for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily represents gains resulting from the change in the foreign currency exchange rate associated with restricted cash held in GBP and a derivative contract associated with our expected acquisition of William Hill, gains on William Hill UK and Flutter stock held by the Company and realized gain on conversion of CEC’s 5% convertible notes. Partially offsetting these gains is a loss on the change in fair value of the derivative liability related to CEC’s 5% convertible notes. Other loss (income) for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily represents unrealized loss on the change in fair value of the derivative liability related to CEC’s 5% convertible notes.
(b)Loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily represents loss on early repayment of debt in connection with the consummation of the Merger. Loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2019 is related to the pro-rated write off of deferred financing costs associated with permanent payments on the ERI Term Loan.
(c)Transaction costs and other operating costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 primarily represent costs related to the Merger with Former Caesars, various contract or license termination exit costs, and severance costs. Transaction costs for the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily represent costs related to the Tropicana acquisition.
(d)Other items include internal labor charges related to certain departed executives and contract labor and other miscellaneous items.
(e)Discontinued operations include Horseshoe Hammond, Caesars Southern Indiana, Harrah’s Louisiana Downs, Caesars UK group including Emerald Resorts & Casino, and Bally’s Atlantic City.
(f)Pre-acquisition CEC represents results of operations for Former Caesars for the period from January 1, 2020 to July 20, 2020, the date on which the Merger was consummated, for the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively, and for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. Such figures are based on unaudited internal financial statements and have not been reviewed by the Company’s auditors and, for the 2020 periods, do not conform to GAAP.
(g)2020 Total for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes results of operations from discontinued operations and from Former Caesars prior to July 20, 2020, the date on which the Merger was consummated. Such presentation does not conform to GAAP or the Securities and Exchange Commission rules for pro forma presentation; however, we believe that the additional financial information will be helpful to investors in comparing current results with results of prior periods. This is non-GAAP data and should not be considered a substitute for data prepared in accordance with GAAP, but should be viewed in addition to the results of operations reported by the Company.
(h)Divestitures for the year ended December 31, 2020 include results of operations for Kansas City and Vicksburg, Eldorado Shreveport, Harrah’s Reno, and Bally’s Atlantic City. Divestitures for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 include results of operations for Presque, Nemacolin, Mountaineer, Cape Girardeau, Caruthersville, Kansas City, Vicksburg, Eldorado Shreveport, Harrah’s Reno and Bally’s Atlantic City. Such figures are based on unaudited internal financial statements and have not been reviewed by the Company’s auditors and do not conform to GAAP.
(i)2020, 2019, and 2018 Totals for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 exclude results of operations from divestitures as detailed in (g) and includes results of operations from discontinued operations and from Former Caesars prior to July 20, 2020, the date, on which the Merger was consummated. Such presentation does not conform to GAAP or the Securities and Exchange Commission rules for pro forma presentation; however, we believe that the additional financial information will be helpful to investors in comparing current results with results of prior periods. This is non-GAAP data and should not be considered a substitute for data prepared in accordance with GAAP, but should be viewed in addition to our reported results of operations.
(j)Pre-acquisition Trop & Elgin represents results of operations for Tropicana for the nine months ended September 30, 2018 and for Elgin for the period beginning January 1, 2018 and ending August 6, 2018. Such figures are based on unaudited internal financial statements and have not been reviewed by the Company’s auditors and do not conform to GAAP.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We are a holding company and our only significant assets are ownership interests in our subsidiaries. Our ability to fund our obligations depends on existing cash on hand, contracted asset sales, cash flow from our subsidiaries and our ability to raise capital. Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources have been existing cash on hand, cash flow from operations, borrowings under our revolving credit facilities, proceeds from the issuance of debt and equity securities and proceeds from completed asset sales and sale leaseback transactions.
Our cash requirements fluctuate significantly depending on our decisions with respect to business acquisitions or divestitures and strategic capital investments to maintain the quality of our properties. Our operating cash flows also significantly depend on our properties to remain open. As describe above, all of our casino properties were temporarily closed for the period from mid-March 2020 through mid-May 2020 due to orders issued by various government agencies and tribal bodies to reduce the spread of COVID-19. Beginning on May 15, 2020, we began reopening our properties and as of December 31, 2020 we have resumed operations at all of our properties, with the exception of additional temporary closures of Caesars Windsor, Harrah’s Philadelphia, and our properties in Illinois. In an effort to mitigate the impacts of COVID-19 public health emergency on our business and maintain liquidity, we furloughed approximately 90% of our employees beginning on April 11, 2020. A portion of the workforce has returned to service as the properties have resumed with limited capacities and in compliance with operating restrictions in accordance with governmental orders, directives and guidelines. As a result of these payroll changes combined with other cost saving measures, our operating expenses and operating cash flows were reduced significantly.
In an effort to maintain liquidity and provide financial flexibility as the effects of COVID-19 public health emergency continued to evolve and impact global financial markets, we borrowed $465 million under our revolving credit facility on March 16, 2020, which we repaid utilizing, in part, proceeds from the sale of our interests in Kansas City and Vicksburg. Additionally, on June 19, 2020, we completed a public offering of 20,700,000 shares of Company Common Stock, at an offering price of $39.00 per share, which provided $772 million of proceeds, net of fees and estimated expenses of $35 million, for general corporate purposes.
On July 1, 2020, we completed the sale of Kansas City and Vicksburg for $230 million and used a portion of the proceeds to repay the outstanding balance under our revolving credit facility. In addition, we closed the sale of Harrah’s Reno on September 30, 2020 which provided additional proceeds of $8 million, net of certain closing costs.
On July 6, 2020, we issued $3.4 billion aggregate principal amount of 6.25% Senior Secured Notes due 2025 (the “CEI Senior Secured Notes”), $1.8 billion aggregate principal amount of 8.125% Senior Notes due 2027 (the “CEI Senior Notes”) and $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 5.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2025 (the “CRC Senior Secured Notes”).
On July 20, 2020, in connection with the Merger, we consummated certain sale leaseback transactions with VICI with respect to Harrah’s New Orleans, Harrah’s Laughlin and Harrah’s Resort Atlantic City, including the Harrah’s Atlantic City Waterfront Conference Center, for approximately $1.8 billion of net proceeds. Additionally, we received a one-time payment from VICI of approximately $1.4 billion for amendments to the VICI Leases. Furthermore, we entered into an incremental agreement to the existing CRC credit agreement, for an incremental term loan in an aggregate principal amount of $1.8 billion.
In connection with the consummation of the Merger, on July 20, 2020, our current and future liquidity significantly changed. A portion of the proceeds from our newly issued debt and proceeds we received from VICI, as well as cash on hand generated from the sale of Company Common Stock, were used (a) to fund a portion of the cash consideration of the Merger, (b) to prepay in full the loans outstanding and terminate all commitments under our existing credit agreement, dated as of April 17, 2017, (c) to satisfy and discharge our Senior Notes, (d) to repay $975 million of the outstanding amount under the existing CRC Revolving Credit Facility, (e) to repay in full the loans outstanding and terminate all commitments under the existing CEOC, LLC credit agreement, dated as of October 6, 2017, (f) to pay fees and expenses related to the financing arrangements, and (g) for general corporate purposes. Additionally, we entered into the CEI Revolving Credit Facility which provides for a five-year senior secured revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $1.2 billion, that matures in 2025.
On September 18, 2020, we entered into a $400 million loan agreement with a subsidiary of VICI for a term of five years, with such loan secured by, among other things, a first priority fee mortgage on the Caesars Forum Convention Center (the “Forum Convention Center Mortgage Loan”). The interest rate on the Forum Convention Center Mortgage Loan is initially 7.7% per annum, which escalates annually to a maximum interest rate of 8.3% per annum. After the second anniversary of the closing of the loan, we have the option of prepaying the loan, which may include a premium.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash on hand and revolving borrowing capacity were as follows:
On September 30, 2020, we announced that we had reached an agreement with William Hill on the terms of a recommended cash acquisition pursuant to which we would acquire the entire issued and to be issued share capital (other than shares owned by us or held in treasury) of William Hill, in an all-cash transaction of approximately £2.9 billion, or $3.7 billion. As required
by UK regulations, we were required to provide a cash confirmation of funding for our potential acquisition of William Hill. In support of the confirmation process, on September 25, 2020, we borrowed $900 million on our CEI Revolving Credit Facility. The transaction remains conditional on, among other things, approvals from state, federal and international regulators. We entered into a foreign exchange forward contract to hedge the risk of appreciation of the GBP denominated purchase price for the proposed William Hill acquisition. Under the agreement, we have agreed to purchase £536 million at a contracted exchange rate. The forward term of the contract ends on March 31, 2021.
On October 1, 2020, we completed a public offering of 35,650,000 shares of Company Common Stock at an offering price of $56.00 per share. Net proceeds from the offering, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated expenses, were approximately $1.9 billion which we intend to use for general corporate purposes, including to finance a portion of the proposed William Hill acquisition. As of December 31, 2020, we have restricted cash of approximately $1.9 billion which we expect to apply to pay a portion of the purchase price of the acquisition.
On October 6, 2020, we entered into a £1.5 billion Interim Facilities Agreement with Deutsche Bank AG, London Branch and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. Pursuant to the Interim Facilities Agreement, such lenders have made available to the Company: (a) a 540-day £1.0 billion asset sale bridge facility and (b) a 60-day £503 million cash confirmation bridge facility (collectively, the “Facility”). The Facility may be used to finance the acquisition, refinance or otherwise discharge the indebtedness of William Hill and its subsidiaries, pay transaction fees and expenses related to the foregoing and for working capital and general corporate purposes, among other things. The availability of the borrowings under the Facility is subject to the satisfaction of certain customary conditions. If drawn upon, outstanding borrowings under the Facility will bear interest at a rate equal to the London interbank offered rate plus 3.50% per annum. We entered into the Interim Facilities Agreement in connection with requirement under applicable United Kingdom law to demonstrate that we have “funds certain” to pay the entirety of the cash purchase price for the proposed acquisition of William Hill. We do not intend to borrow under the Interim Facilities Agreement. Instead, we intend to negotiate long-form financing documentation pursuant to which a subsidiary will incur the Debt Financing for the acquisition.
In addition to the capital required to complete the proposed acquisition of William Hill, we expect that our primary capital requirements going forward will relate to the operation and maintenance of our properties, taxes, servicing our outstanding indebtedness, and rent payments under the GLPI Master Lease, the VICI Leases and other leases. We make capital expenditures and perform continuing refurbishment and maintenance at our properties to maintain our quality standards. Our capital expenditure requirements for 2021 are expected to significantly increase as a result of the additional properties acquired in the Merger and new development projects. We also funded $400 million to escrow as of the closing of the Merger and will utilize those funds in accordance with a three year capital expenditure plan in the state of New Jersey, and an additional $25 million was funded in the fourth quarter of 2020 for improvements at our racing properties within the state of Indiana. These amounts are currently included in restricted cash. We are also in the process of a more than $47 million renovation to the resort rooms and suites of Silver Legacy Resort Casino, projected to be completed by summer 2021. In relation to the extension of the casino operating contract and ground lease for Harrah’s New Orleans (see Note 11), we are required to make a capital investment of $325 million by July 15, 2024.
Cash spent for capital expenditures totaled $163 million, $171 million, $147 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to our growth and maintenance capital projects. The following table summarizes our estimates for 2021 capital expenditures:
____________________
(a)Includes capital expenditures that may be incurred at our Atlantic City, Indiana and Lake Charles properties for normal maintenance projects in addition to amounts described above.
On August 27, 2020, Hurricane Laura made landfall on Lake Charles as a Category 4 storm. The hurricane severely damaged the Isle of Capri Casino Lake Charles, as a result of which the Company has recorded an insurance receivable of $44 million, of
which $15 million related to fixed asset impairments and $29 million related to remediation costs and repairs that have been incurred in the year ended December 31, 2020. The property will remain closed until construction of a new land-based casino is complete.
A significant portion of our liquidity needs are for debt service and payments associated with our leases. In addition to our newly issued debt, our debt obligations increased as a result of outstanding debt of Former Caesars that remained outstanding following the consummation of the Merger. Our estimated debt service (including principal and interest) is approximately $907 million for 2021. We also lease certain real property assets from third parties, including GLPI and VICI. We estimate our lease payments to be approximately $1.1 billion for 2021.
The 5% Convertible Notes (defined below) remain outstanding following the consummation of the Merger. As a result of the Merger, the 5% Convertible Notes are convertible into weighted average of the number of shares of Company Common Stock and the amount of cash actually received per share by holders of common stock of Former Caesars that made elections for consideration in the Merger. The 5% Convertible Notes are convertible at any time at the option of the holders thereof or the Company. We do not intend to exercise our option to cause the conversion of the 5% Convertible Notes prior to maturity. As of December 31, 2020, we have paid approximately $903 million and issued approximately 10.8 million shares upon conversion of $770 million in aggregate principal amount of the 5% Convertible Notes during 2020. At such time as the holders of the 5% Convertible Notes elect to cause conversion, we estimate using cash of $379 million and issuing 4.5 million shares to settle the remaining outstanding 5% Convertible Notes as of December 31, 2020.
On April 24, 2020, the Company entered into a definitive purchase agreement with Twin River and certain of its affiliates for the sale of the equity interests of Eldorado Resort Casino Shreveport Joint Venture and Columbia Properties Tahoe, LLC, the entities that hold Eldorado Shreveport and MontBleu, respectively, for aggregate consideration of $155 million, subject to a customary working capital adjustment. The definitive agreement provides that the consummation of the sale is subject to satisfaction of customary conditions, including receipt of required regulatory approvals. On December 23, 2020, the Company consummated the sale of Eldorado Shreveport to Bally's Corporation for $140 million resulting in a gain of $29 million. MontBleu is expected to close in the first half of 2021.
On September 3, 2020, the Company and VICI entered into agreement to sell Harrah’s Louisiana Downs with Rubico Acquisition Corp. for $22 million, subject to a customary working capital adjustment, where the proceeds will be split between the Company and VICI. The sale is subject to satisfaction of customary conditions, including receipt of required regulatory approvals and is expected to close in the first half of 2021.
We previously reached an agreement with VICI and closed the sale of Bally’s Atlantic City Hotel & Casino to Bally’s Corporation for $25 million on November 18, 2020. The proceeds from the sale were split between the Company and VICI, and the Company received $5 million of net proceeds. In addition, on October 9, 2020, we reached an agreement to sell the Bally’s brand to Bally’s Corporation Worldwide Holding, Inc. for $20 million, while retaining the right to use the brand within Bally’s Las Vegas into perpetuity.
On October 27, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement to sell Evansville to GLPI and Twin River for $480 million in cash, subject to a customary working capital adjustment. The sale is subject to satisfaction of customary conditions, including receipt of required regulatory approvals and is expected to close in mid-2021.
On December 1, 2020, the Company entered into a definitive agreement with CQ Holding Company, Inc. to sell the equity interests of Baton Rouge. The definitive agreement provides that the consummation of the sale is subject to satisfaction of customary conditions, including receipt of required regulatory approvals and is expected to close in mid-2021.
On December 24, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement to sell Caesars Southern Indiana to the EBCI for $250 million, subject to a customary working capital adjustment. The sale is subject to satisfaction of customary conditions, including receipt of required regulatory approvals and is expected to close in the third quarter of 2021.
In addition to the agreements above, we also expect to enter into additional agreements to divest of Horseshoe Hammond prior to December 31, 2021. Further, we expect to enter into agreements to sell several other non-core properties including our international properties within our Caesars UK group, which includes Emerald Resorts Casino. We expect these divestitures to close by mid-year 2021.
If the agreed upon selling price for future divestitures does not exceed the carrying value of the assets, we may be required to record additional impairment charges in future periods which may be material.
We expect that our current liquidity, cash flows from operations, borrowings under committed credit facilities and proceeds from the announced asset sales, will be sufficient to fund our operations, capital requirements and service our outstanding
indebtedness for the next twelve months. However, the COVID-19 public health emergency has had, and is expected to continue to have, an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations and has caused, and may continue to cause, disruption in the financial markets. While we have undertaken efforts to mitigate the impacts of COVID-19 on our business and maintain liquidity, the extent of the ongoing and future effects of the COVID-19 public health emergency on our business, results of operations and financial condition is uncertain and may adversely impact our liquidity in the future. Our ability to access additional capital may be adversely affected by the disruption in the financial markets caused by the COVID-19 public health emergency, restrictions on incurring additional indebtedness contained in the agreements governing our indebtedness and the impact of the public health emergency on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Debt and Master Lease Covenant Compliance
The CRC Credit Agreement, the CEI Revolving Credit Facility and the indentures related to the CRC Senior Notes and CEI Senior Secured Notes contain covenants which are standard and customary for these types of agreements. These include negative covenants, which, subject to certain exceptions and baskets, limit our ability to (among other items) incur additional indebtedness, make investments, make restricted payments, including dividends, grant liens, sell assets and make acquisitions. The covenants in the indenture for the 5% Convertible Notes are limited as a result of amendments that became effective in connection with the consummation of the Merger.
The CRC Revolving Credit Facility and CEI Revolving Credit Facility include a maximum first-priority net senior secured leverage ratio financial covenant of 6.35:1, which is applicable solely to the extent that certain testing conditions are satisfied. Failure to comply with such covenants could result in an acceleration of the maturity of indebtedness outstanding under the relevant debt documents.
The Company’s results of operations have been materially adversely affected by the impacts of the COVID-19 public health emergency. As a result, the current terms of the CRC Credit Agreement and the CEI Credit Agreement provide that the financial covenant measurement period is not effective through September 30, 2021 so long as CRC and the Company, respectively, comply with a minimum liquidity requirement, which includes any such availability under the applicable revolving credit facilities.
The GLPI Master Lease contains certain operating, capital expenditure and financial covenants thereunder, and our ability to comply with these covenants was negatively impacted by the effects of the COVID-19 public health emergency on our results of operations. On June 15, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the GLPI Master Lease which provides certain relief under these covenants in the event of facility closures due to public health emergencies, governmental restrictions and certain other instances of unavoidable delay. On July 17, 2020, the amendment to the GLPI Master Lease became effective as the Company obtained all necessary approvals and the applicable waiting period expired. Furthermore, the Company obtained waivers from VICI with relation to annual capital expenditure requirements for 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all of the applicable financial covenants under the CEI Credit Agreement, CEI Senior Secured Notes, CRC Credit Agreement, CEI Senior Notes, CRC Senior Secured Notes, 5% Convertible Notes, the GLPI Leases and VICI Leases.
Share Repurchase Program
On November 8, 2018, we issued a press release announcing that our Board has authorized a $150 million common stock repurchase program (the “Share Repurchase Program”) pursuant to which we may, from time to time, repurchase shares of common stock on the open market (either with or without a 10b5-1 plan) or through privately negotiated transactions. The Share Repurchase Program has no time limit and may be suspended or discontinued at any time without notice. There is no minimum number of shares of common stock that we are required to repurchase under the Share Repurchase Program.
As of December 31, 2020, we have acquired 223,823 shares of common stock under the program at an aggregate value of $9 million and an average of $40.80 per share. No shares were repurchased during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Debt Obligations and Leases
New Debt Transactions
We were party to a credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto dated as of April 17, 2017 (as amended, the “ERI Credit Facility”), consisting of a $1.5 billion term loan facility and a $500 million revolving credit facility.
In an effort to maintain liquidity and provide financial flexibility as the effects of COVID-19 continued to evolve and impact global financial markets, we borrowed $465 million under the ERI Credit Facility on March 16, 2020, which we repaid in July 2020 utilizing, in part, proceeds from the sale of our interests in Kansas City and Vicksburg.
On July 6, 2020, Colt Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“Escrow Issuer”) issued $3.4 billion aggregate principal amount of 6.25% Senior Secured Notes due 2025, $1.8 billion aggregate principal amount of 8.125% Senior Notes due 2027 and $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 5.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2025.
On July 20, 2020, in connection with the closing of the Merger, the Company entered into a new credit agreement which provides a five-year senior secured revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $1.2 billion. In addition, Caesars Resort Collection, LLC, which became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company as a result of the Merger (“CRC”), entered into incremental agreements to the CRC Credit Agreement (described below) for an aggregate principal amount of $1.8 billion.
A portion of the proceeds from these arrangements was used to prepay in full the loans outstanding and terminate all commitments under the ERI Credit Facility, and to satisfy and discharge the Company’s 6% Senior Notes due 2025, 6% Senior Notes due 2026, and the 7% Senior Notes due 2023.
The 6% Senior Notes due 2025 were redeemed at a redemption price of 104.5%, the 7% Senior Notes due 2023 were redeemed at a redemption price of 103.5%, and $210 million aggregate principal amount of the 6% Senior Notes due 2026 was redeemed at a redemption price of 106% with the remaining balance redeemed at a redemption price of 100% of the aggregate principal amount thereof plus the Applicable Premium, as defined in the indenture for the 6% Senior Notes due 2026. The redemption of these senior notes resulted in a loss on extinguishment of $132 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which is recorded within Loss on extinguishment of debt on the Statement of Operations.
CEI Senior Secured Notes due 2025
On July 6, 2020, Escrow Issuer issued $3.4 billion in aggregate principal amount of 6.25% CEI Senior Secured Notes due 2025 pursuant to an indenture dated July 6, 2020 (the “CEI Senior Secured Notes”), by and among the Escrow Issuer, U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, and U.S. Bank National Association, as collateral agent. In connection with the consummation of the Merger, we assumed the rights and obligations under the CEI Senior Secured Notes and the indenture governing the CEI Senior Secured Notes on July 20, 2020. The CEI Senior Secured Notes will mature on July 1, 2025 with interest payable semi-annually in cash in arrears on January 1 and July 1 of each year, commencing January 1, 2021.
CEI Senior Notes due 2027
On July 6, 2020, Escrow Issuer issued $1.8 billion in aggregate principal amount of 8.125% Senior Notes due 2027 pursuant to an indenture, dated July 6, 2020 (the “CEI Senior Notes”), by and between the Escrow Issuer and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. We assumed the rights and obligations under the CEI Senior Notes and the indenture governing the CEI Senior Notes on July 20, 2020. The CEI Secured Notes will mature on July 1, 2027 with interest payable semi-annually in cash in arrears on January 1 and July 1 of each year, commencing January 1, 2021.
CRC Senior Secured Notes due 2025
On July 6, 2020, Escrow Issuer issued $1.0 billion in aggregate principal amount of 5.75% Senior Notes due 2025 pursuant to an indenture, dated July 6, 2020 (the “CRC Senior Secured Notes”), by and among the Escrow Issuer, U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee and Credit Suisse AG, Cayman Islands Branch, as collateral agent. CRC assumed the rights and obligations under the CRC Senior Secured Notes and the indenture governing the CRC Senior Secured Notes on July 20, 2020. The CRC Senior Secured Notes will mature on July 1, 2025 with interest payable semi-annually in cash in arrears on January 1 and July 1 of each year, commencing January 1, 2021.
CEI Revolving Credit Facility
On July 20, 2020, we entered into a new credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, U.S. Bank National Association, as collateral agent, and certain banks and other financial institutions and lenders party thereto, as well as an incremental amendment thereto, which provide for a five-year CEI Revolving Credit Facility for an aggregate principal amount of $1.2 billion. The CEI Revolving Credit Facility matures in 2025 and includes a letter of credit sub-facility of $250 million.
The interest rate per annum applicable under the CEI Revolving Credit Facility, at the Company’s option is either (a) LIBOR adjusted for certain additional costs, subject to a floor of 0% or (b) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (i) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, (ii) the prime rate as determined by JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and (iii) the one-month adjusted LIBOR rate plus 1.00%, in each case plus an applicable margin. Such applicable margin shall be 3.25% per annum in the case of any LIBOR loan and 2.25% per annum in the case of any base rate loan, subject to three 0.25% step-downs based on the Company’s total leverage ratio.
Additionally, we are required to pay a commitment fee in respect of any unused commitments under CEI Revolving Credit Facility in the amount of 0.50% of principal amount of the commitments of all lenders, subject to a step-down to 0.375% based upon the Company’s total leverage ratio. We are also required to pay customary agency fees as well as letter of credit participation fees computed at a rate per annum equal to the applicable margin for LIBOR borrowings on the dollar equivalent of the daily stated amount of outstanding letters of credit, plus such letter of credit issuer’s customary documentary and processing fees and charges and a fronting fee in an amount equal to 0.125% of the daily stated amount of such letter of credit.
We had $1.2 billion of available borrowing capacity, after consideration of $19 million in outstanding letters of credit under CEI Revolving Credit Facility, as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding under the CEI Revolving Credit Facility.
Convention Center Mortgage Loan
On September 18, 2020, we entered into a loan agreement with VICI to borrow a five-year, $400 million Forum Convention Center mortgage loan (the “Mortgage Loan”). The Mortgage Loan bears interest at a rate of, initially, 7.7% per annum, which escalates annually to a maximum interest rate of 8.3% per annum.
Lumière Loan
The Company borrowed $246 million from GLPI to fund the purchase price of the real estate underlying Lumière, which was scheduled to mature on October 1, 2020. On June 24, 2020, the Company received approval from Missouri Gaming Commission to sell the real estate underlying Lumière to GLPI and leaseback the property under a long-term financing obligation. As of December 31, 2020, the Lumière loan has been satisfied in full and the real estate has been refinanced under a financing obligation. See Note 10.
Assumed Debt Activity
Former Caesars and its subsidiaries incurred the following indebtedness that remained outstanding following the consummation of the Merger.
CRC Term Loans and CRC Revolving Credit Facility
In connection with the Merger, we assumed the CRC senior secured credit facility (the “CRC Senior Secured Credit Facilities”), which included a $1.0 billion five-year revolving credit facility (the “CRC Revolving Credit Facility”) and an initial $4.7 billion seven-year first lien term loan (the “CRC Term Loan”), which was increased by $1.8 billion pursuant to an incremental agreement executed in connection with the Merger (the “CRC Incremental Term Loan”).
The CRC Revolving Credit Facility matures in 2022 and includes a letter of credit sub-facility. The CRC Term Loan matures in 2024. The CRC Incremental Term Loan matures in 2025. Each of the CRC Term Loan and the CRC Incremental Term Loan require scheduled quarterly principal payments in amounts equal to 0.25% of the original aggregate principal amount, with the balance due at maturity. The credit agreement for the CRC Revolving Credit Facility also includes customary voluntary and mandatory prepayment provisions, subject to certain exceptions. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $65 million was committed to outstanding letters of credit. As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding under the CRC Revolving Credit Facility.
Borrowings under the CRC Credit Agreement bear interest at a rate equal to either (a) LIBOR adjusted for certain additional costs, subject to a floor of 0% or (b) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (i) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%,
(ii) the prime rate as determined by Credit Suisse AG, Cayman Islands Branch, as administrative agent under the CRC Credit Agreement and (iii) the one-month adjusted LIBOR rate plus 1.00%, in each case plus an applicable margin. Such applicable margin shall be (a) with respect to the CRC Term Loan, 2.75% per annum in the case of any LIBOR loan or 1.75% per annum in the case of any base rate loan, (b) with respect to the CRC Incremental Term Loan, 4.50% per annum in the case of any LIBOR loan or 3.50% in the case of any base rate loan and (c) in the case of the CRC Revolving Credit Facility, 2.25% per annum in the case of any LIBOR loan and 1.25% per annum in the case of any base rate loan, subject in the case of the CRC Revolving Credit Facility to two 0.125% step-downs based on CRC’s senior secured leverage ratio, the ratio of first lien senior secured net debt to adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. The CRC Revolving Credit Facility is subject to a financial covenant discussed below.
In addition, CRC is required to pay a commitment fee in respect of any commitments under the CRC Revolving Credit Facility in the amount of 0.50% of the principal amount of the commitments, subject to step-downs to 0.375% and 0.25% based upon CRC’s senior secured leverage ratio. CRC is also required to pay customary agency fees as well as letter of credit participation fees computed at a rate per annum equal to the applicable margin for LIBOR borrowings on the dollar equivalent of the daily stated amount of outstanding letters of credit, plus such letter of credit issuer’s customary documentary and processing fees and charges and a fronting fee in an amount equal to 0.125% of the daily stated amount of such letter of credit.
CRC Notes
On October 16, 2017, CRC issued $1.7 billion aggregate principal amount of 5.25% senior notes due 2025 (the “CRC Notes”).
Former Caesars 5% Convertible Notes
On October 6, 2017, Former Caesars issued $1.1 billion aggregate principal amount of 5.00% convertible senior notes maturing in 2024 (the “5% Convertible Notes”).
The 5% Convertible Notes are convertible into weighted average of the number of shares of Company Common Stock and amount of cash actually received per share by holders of common stock of Former Caesars that made elections for consideration in the Merger. As of December 31, 2020, we have paid approximately $903 million and issued approximately 10.8 million shares upon conversion of $770 million of the 5% Convertible Notes during 2020.
The Company has determined that the 5% Convertible Notes contain derivative features that require bifurcation. The Company separately accounts for the liability component and equity conversion option of the 5% Convertible Notes. The portion of the overall fair value allocated to the liability was calculated by using a market-based approach without the conversion features included. The difference between the overall instrument value and the value of the liability component was assumed to be the value of the equity conversion option component. The value of the liability is determined based on a discounted cash flow of the debt instrument. See Note 8 for more information on the 5% Convertible Notes’ fair value measurements.
Net amortization of the debt issuance costs and the discount and/or premium associated with the Company’s indebtedness totaled $80 million, $8 million and $6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Amortization of debt issuance costs is computed using the effective interest method and is included in interest expense.
VICI Leases
Upon consummation of the Merger, we assumed obligations of certain real property assets leased from VICI by Former Caesars under the following agreements: (i) for a portfolio of properties at various locations throughout the United States (the “Non-CPLV lease”), (ii) for Caesars Palace Las Vegas (the “CPLV lease”), (iii) for Harrah’s Joliet Hotel & Casino (the “Joliet Lease”) and (iv) for Harrah’s Las Vegas (the “HLV Lease”). These lease agreements provided for annual fixed rent (subject to escalation) of $773 million during an initial period, then rent consisting of both base rent and variable rent elements. The lease agreements had a 15-year initial term and four five-year renewal options. The lease agreements included escalation provisions beginning in year two of the initial term and continuing through the renewal terms. The lease agreements also included provisions for variable rent payments calculated, in part, based on increases or decreases of net revenue of the underlying lease properties, commencing in year eight of the initial term and continuing through the renewal terms.
Former Caesars entered into a Golf Course Use Agreement with VICI, which has a 35-year term (inclusive of all renewal periods), pursuant to which such affiliates of the Company agreed to pay (i) an annual payment of $10 million, subject to escalation, (ii) an annual use fee of $3 million, subject to escalation beginning in the second year, and (iii) certain per-round fees, all as more particularly set forth in the Golf Course Use Agreement.
In connection with the closing of the Merger on July 20, 2020, we consummated a series of transactions with VICI and certain of its affiliates in accordance with the MTA entered on June 24, 2019 and certain purchase and sales agreement entered on
September 26, 2019. We consummated sale leaseback transactions related to Harrah’s New Orleans, Harrah’s Laughlin and Harrah’s Resort Atlantic City, including the Harrah’s Atlantic City Waterfront Conference Center, for approximately $1.8 billion of net proceeds. The CPLV Lease with VICI was amended, among other things, (i) add Harrah’s Las Vegas (“HLV”) to the leased premises thereunder (and in connection therewith HLV Lease was terminated), (ii) add (subject to certain adjustments) the rent payable with respect to HLV under such terminated stand-alone lease to such lease and further increase the annual rent payable with respect to HLV by approximately $15 million, (iii) increase the annual rent with respect to CPLV by approximately $84 million and (iv) extend the term of such lease so that following the amendment of such lease there will be 15 years remaining until the expiration of the initial term. In addition, Harrah’s New Orleans, Harrah’s Laughlin, and Harrah’s Resort Atlantic City, including the Harrah’s Atlantic City Waterfront Conference Center, were added to the Non-CPLV lease (as amended, the “Regional Lease”) and such lease was further amended to increase the annual rent thereunder by $154 million in the aggregate related to such added properties and extend the term of such lease so that following the amendment of such lease there will be 15 years remaining until the expiration of the initial term. Furthermore, the Joliet Lease, as well as the term of the Golf Course Use Agreement, were extended such that there will be 15 years remaining until the expiration of the initial term.
On December 24, 2020, the Company entered into agreement to sell Caesars Southern Indiana to the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians (“EBCI”) for $250 million, subject to a customary working capital adjustment. Caesar’s annual payments to VICI Properties under the Regional Lease will decline by $33 million upon closing of the transaction.
Our VICI lease is accounted for as a financing obligation and totaled $11.0 billion as of December 31, 2020. Furthermore, we obtained waivers from VICI with relation to annual capital expenditure requirements for 2020. See Note 10 to our Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements for additional information about our VICI Lease and related matters.
GLPI Leases
Our GLPI Master Lease is accounted for as a financing obligation and totaled $1.2 billion as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, our GLPI Master Lease contains certain operating, capital expenditure and financial covenants thereunder, and our ability to maintain compliance with these covenants was also negatively impacted. On June 15, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the GLPI Master Lease which, among other things, provides certain relief under these covenants in the event of facility closures due to pandemics, governmental restrictions and certain other instances of unavoidable delay. As of July 17, 2020, the amendment to the GLPI Master Lease became effective as we obtained all necessary approvals and the applicable waiting period expired. See Note 10 to our Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements for additional information about our GLPI Master Lease and related matters.
Other Liquidity Matters
We are faced with certain contingencies involving litigation and environmental remediation and compliance. These commitments and contingencies are discussed in greater detail in “Part I, Item 3. Legal Proceedings” and Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements, both of which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, new competition may have a material adverse effect on our revenues and could have a similar adverse effect on our liquidity. See “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business” which is included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our financial statements in conformity with GAAP. In preparing our financial statements, we have made our best estimates and judgments of the amounts and disclosures included in the financial statements, giving regard to materiality. When more than one accounting principle, or method of its application, is generally accepted, we select the principle or method that we consider to be the most appropriate under specific circumstances. Application of these accounting principles requires us to make estimates about the future resolution of existing uncertainties. Certain of our accounting policies, including those in connection with business combinations, certain fair value measurements, income taxes, long-lived assets, goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets, allowance for doubtful accounts related to certain gaming receivables, self-insurance reserves, and litigation, claims and assessments require that we apply significant judgment in defining the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates.
We consider accounting estimates to be critical accounting policies when:
•the estimates involve matters that are highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate is made; and
•different estimates or changes to estimates could have a material impact on the reported financial position, changes in financial position, or results of operations.
By their nature, these judgments and estimates are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Our judgments and estimates are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, observance of trends in the industry, information gathered from customer behavior, and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Due to the inherent uncertainty involving judgments and estimates, actual results may differ from those estimates.
Our most critical accounting estimates and assumptions are in the following areas:
Business Combinations
We applied the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805, “Business Combinations,” in the accounting for our acquisitions of Former Caesars, Tropicana, Elgin and our previous acquisitions. It required us to recognize the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at their acquisition date fair values, which were determined using market, income, and cost approaches, or a combination. Goodwill as of the respective acquisition dates was measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. Goodwill is generally the result of expected synergies of the combined company or an assembled workforce.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets acquired primarily include trademarks, Caesars Rewards acquired in the Merger, customer relationships and gaming rights. The fair value for these intangible assets was determined using either the relief from royalty method and excess earnings method under the income approach or a replacement cost market approach.
Trademarks and Caesars Rewards were valued using the relief from royalty method, which presumes that without ownership of such trademarks or loyalty program, we would have to make a stream of payments to a brand or franchise owner in return for the right to use their name or program. By virtue of this asset, we avoid any such payments and record the related intangible value of the Company’s ownership of the brand name or program.
Customer relationships were valued using the cost approach and the incremental cash flow method under the income approach. The incremental cash flow method compares the prospective cash flows with and without the customer relationships in place to estimate the fair value of the customer relationships, with the fair value assumed to be equal to the discounted cash flows of the business that would be lost if the customer relationships were not in place and needed to be replaced.
Gaming rights include our gaming licenses in various jurisdictions and may have indefinite lives or an estimated useful life. The fair value of the gaming rights was determined using the excess earnings or replacement cost methodology, based on whether the license resides in gaming jurisdictions where competition is limited to a specified number of licensed gaming operators. The excess earnings methodology is an income approach methodology that estimates the projected cash flows of the business attributable to the gaming license intangible asset, which is net of charges for the use of other identifiable assets of the business including working capital, fixed assets and other intangible assets. The replacement cost of the gaming license was used as an indicator of fair value.
Trade receivables and payables and other current and noncurrent assets and liabilities were valued at the existing carrying values as they represented the estimated fair value of those items at the acquisition date. Assets and liabilities held for sale are recorded at fair value, less costs to sell, based on the agreements reached as of the acquisition date, or an income approach.
The fair value of the financing obligations were calculated as the net present value of both the fixed base rent payments and the forecasted variable payments plus the expected residual value of the land and building returned at the end of the expected usage period.
The fair value of land was determined using the sales comparable approach. The market data is then adjusted for any significant differences, to the extent known, between the identified comparable sites and the site being valued. The value of building and site improvements was estimated via the income approach. Other personal property assets such as furniture, gaming and computer equipment, fixtures, computer software, and restaurant equipment were valued using the cost approach which is based on replacement or reproduction costs of the asset. The cost approach is an estimation of fair value developed by computing the current cost of replacing a property and subtracting any depreciation resulting from one or more of the following factors: physical deterioration, functional obsolescence, and/or economic obsolescence.
Cash flow estimates are significant to many valuations described above and may include forecasts with assumptions regarding factors such as recent and budgeted operating performance, future growth rates, and the determination of appropriate discount rates to estimate fair value. These inputs involve significant assumptions including the future effects of COVID-19 as well as the realization of synergies anticipated from a business combination, which may not be realized as projected. Certain assumptions, such as the effects of COVID-19, may be beyond our control.
Fair Value Measurements
The 5% Convertible Notes contain derivative features that require bifurcation. We estimate the fair value of the 5% Convertible Notes using a market-based approach that incorporates the value of both straight debt and conversion features of the notes. The valuation model incorporates actively traded prices of the 5% Convertible Notes as of the reporting date, the value of CEI’s equity into which these notes could convert, and assumptions regarding the incremental cost of borrowing for CEI. The fair value of the 5% Convertible Notes derivative liability is subject to interest rate and market price risk due to the conversion features of the notes and other factors. Generally, as the fair value of fixed interest rate debt increases (due to a decrease in interest rates) the derivative liability decreases and as the fair value of fixed interest rate debt decreases (due to an increase in interest rates) the derivative liability increases. The fair value of the 5% Convertible Notes derivative liability may also increase as the market price of our stock rises or due to increased volatility in our stock price which will result in a loss recognized in our Statement of Operations, and decrease as the market price of our stock falls or due to decreased volatility in our stock price which will result in income recognized in our Statement of Operations. On October 6, 2017, Former Caesars issued $1.1 billion aggregate principal amount of 5% Convertible Notes. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of the derivative associated with the 5% Convertible Notes was $326 million when the price per share of our common stock was $74.27. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a loss of $111 million associated to the changes in fair value of the derivative as a result of fluctuations in the share price of our common stock.
We use interest rate swaps, which are derivative instruments classified as hedging transactions, to limit our exposure to interest rate risk. Derivative instruments are recognized in the financial statements at fair value. The estimated fair values of our derivative instruments are based on market prices obtained from dealer quotes. Such quotes represent the estimated amounts we would receive or pay to terminate the contracts. Our derivative instruments contain a credit risk that the counterparties may be unable to meet the terms of the agreements. We minimize that risk by evaluating the creditworthiness of our counterparties, which are limited to major banks and financial institutions. The fair values of our derivative instruments are adjusted for the credit rating of the counterparty, if the derivative is an asset, or adjusted for the credit rating of the Company, if the derivative is a liability.
See Note 8 for more details regarding fair value measurements and