Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. This Act provides a “safe harbor” for forward-looking statements to encourage companies to provide prospective information about themselves as long as they identify these statements as forward-looking and provide meaningful cautionary statements identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ from the projected results. All statements other than statements of historical fact made in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are forward-looking. In particular, statements herein regarding economic outlook, impact of novel coronavirus or COVID-19; industry prospects and trends; expected business recovery; industry partnerships; future results of operations or financial position; future spending; breakeven revenue point; expected market decline bottom or growth; market acceptance of our newly introduced or upgraded products or services; the sufficiency of our cash to fund future operations and capital requirements; development, introduction and shipment of new products or services; changing foreign operations; trade issues and tariffs; expected inventory levels; expectations for unsupported platform or product versions and related inventory and other charges; and any other guidance on future periods are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements reflect management’s current expectations and are inherently uncertain. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance, achievements, or other future events. Moreover, neither Data I/O nor anyone else assumes responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of these forward-looking statements. We are under no duty to update any of these forward-looking statements after the date of this Annual Report. The Reader should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. The following discussions and the section entitled “Risk Factors - Cautionary Factors That May Affect Future Results” describes some, but not all, of the factors that could cause these differences.
OVERVIEW
We sustained our second loss in 6 years due to a pandemic related downturn in orders, combined with continued significant investments in our security deployment business. Our strong cash position and balance sheet combined with our long-term view of the market gives us the financial flexibility to make these security business decisions. At Data I/O, we are investing for the long term to retain and extend our leadership position. On the product side, we continue to invest with a long-term focus towards expanding our markets and creating unique value for our customers. This is true for both our traditional core business as well as the emerging security deployment business.
The automotive electronics market is cyclical and has been impacted by the pandemic, and, we experienced the downturn in capital and consumable spending related to it and the electronics industry. We continued our focus on automotive electronics and managing the core programming business to conserve cash and working capital during 2020 while positioning us for growth and profitability. Customer and industry sources have communicated expectations for automotive electronics to have a decade of growth at a 10 to 15% compound annual growth rate, confirming our focus on this market. In addition, the IoT market expected growth is the driver of future revenue and earnings growth as we invest resources in the security deployment market. During 2020, we launched a new generation of SentriX tools and capability. We made the strategic decision to control key pieces of the technology and enhance the ability to both simplify the security deployment process, own the end-to-end intellectual property and scale our business. As a result of this decision, we impaired the earlier generation of security deployment tools, inventory, and assets. This enables us to move forward and support customers with enhanced new technology unburdened by the restrictions, costs, and complexity of the previous tools. Our challenge continues to be operating in a cyclical and rapidly evolving industry environment. Our efforts are to balance industry changes, industry partnerships, new technologies, business geography shifts, exchange rate volatility, trade issues and tariffs, coronavirus impacts, increasing costs and strategic investments in our business with the level of demand and mix of business we expect. We continue to manage our costs carefully and execute strategies for cost reduction.
We are focusing our research and development efforts in our strategic growth markets, namely automotive electronics and IoT new programming technologies, secure supply chain solutions, automated programming systems and their enhancements for the manufacturing environment and software. We are developing technology and products to securely provision new categories of semiconductors, including Secure Elements, Authentication Chips, and Secure Microcontrollers. We plan to deliver new programming technology and automated handling systems for managed and secure programming in the manufacturing environment. We continue to focus on extending the capabilities and support for our product lines and supporting the latest semiconductor devices, including various configurations of NAND Flash, e-MMC, UFS, TPM and microcontrollers on our newer products.
Our customer focus has been on global and strategic high-volume manufacturers in key market segments like automotive electronics, IoT, industrial controls and consumer electronics as well as programming centers.
Although the long-term prospects for our strategic growth markets should be good, these markets and our business have been, and are likely to continue to be, adversely impacted, at least temporarily, by the global pandemic of coronavirus. See also the detailed discussion of the impacts of the coronavirus on our business and markets in Item 1A, Risk Factors. Annual and quarterly projections on spending, growth, mix, and profitability are likely to be revised substantially with changing pandemic impacts and as new information is obtained.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICY JUDGMENTS AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires that we make estimates and judgments, which affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, sales returns, bad debts, inventories, intangible assets, income taxes, warranty obligations, restructuring charges, contingencies such as litigation and contract terms that have multiple elements and other complexities typical in the capital equipment industry. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Revenue Recognition: Topic 606 provides a single, principles-based five-step model to be applied to all contracts with customers. It generally provides for the recognition of revenue in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled, net of allowances for estimated returns, discounts or sales incentives, as well as taxes collected from customers when control over the promised goods or services are transferred to the customer.
We expense contract acquisition costs, primarily sales commissions, for contracts with terms of one year or less and will capitalize and amortize incremental costs with terms that exceed one year. During 2020 and 2019, the impact of capitalization of incremental costs for obtaining contracts was immaterial. We exclude sales, use, value added, some excise taxes and other similar taxes from the measurement of the transaction price.
We recognize revenue upon transfer of control of the promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. We have determined that our programming equipment has reached a point of maturity and stability such that product acceptance can be assured by testing at the factory prior to shipment and that the installation meets the criteria to be a separate performance obligation. These systems are standard products with published product specifications and are configurable with standard options. The evidence that these systems could be deemed as accepted was based upon having standardized factory production of the units, results from batteries of tests of product performance to our published specifications, quality inspections and installation standardization, as well as past product operation validation with the customer and the history provided by our installed base of products upon which the current versions were based.
The revenue related to products requiring installation that is perfunctory is recognized upon transfer of control of the product to customers, which generally is at the time of shipment. Installation that is considered perfunctory includes any installation that is expected to be performed by other parties, such as distributors, other vendors, or the customers themselves. This considers the complexity, skill and training needed as well as customer expectations regarding installation.
We enter into arrangements with multiple performance obligations that arise during the sale of a system that includes an installation component, a service and support component and a software maintenance component. We allocate the transaction price of each element based on relative selling prices. Relative selling price is based on the selling price of the standalone system. For the installation and service and support performance obligations, we use the value of the discount given to distributors who perform these components. For software maintenance performance obligations, we use what we charge for annual software maintenance renewals after the initial year the system is sold. Revenue is recognized on the system sale based on shipping terms, installation revenue is recognized after the installation is performed, and hardware service and support and software maintenance revenue is recognized ratably over the term of the agreement, typically one year. Deferred revenue includes service, support and maintenance contracts and represents the undelivered performance obligation of agreements that are typically for one year.
When we sell software separately, we recognize revenue upon the transfer of control of the software, which is generally upon shipment, provided that only inconsequential performance obligations remain on our part and substantive acceptance conditions, if any, have been met.
We recognize revenue when there is an approved contract that both parties are committed to perform, both parties rights have been identified, the contract has substance, collection of substantially all the consideration is probable, the transaction price has been determined and allocated over the performance obligations, the performance obligations including substantive acceptance conditions, if any, in the contract have been met, the obligation is not contingent on resale of the product, the buyer’s obligation would not be changed in the event of theft, physical destruction or damage to the product, the buyer acquiring the product for resale has economic substance apart from us and we do not have significant obligations for future performance to directly bring about the resale of the product by the buyer. We establish a reserve for sales returns based on historical trends in product returns and estimates for new items. Payment terms are generally 30 days from shipment.
We transfer certain products out of service from their internal use and make them available for sale. The products transferred are typically our standard products in one of the following areas: service loaners, rental or test units; engineering test units; or sales demonstration equipment. Once transferred, the equipment is sold by our regular sales channels as used equipment inventory. These product units often involve refurbishing and an equipment warranty, and are conducted as sales in our normal and ordinary course of business. The transfer amount is the product unit’s net book value and the sale transaction is accounted for as revenue and cost of goods sold.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts: We base the allowance for doubtful accounts receivable on our assessment of the collectability of specific customer accounts and the aging of accounts receivable. If there is deterioration of a major customer’s credit worthiness or actual defaults are higher than historical experience, our estimates of the recoverability of amounts due to us could be adversely affected.
Inventory: Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Adjustments are made to standard cost, which approximates actual cost on a first-in, first-out basis. We estimate reductions to inventory for obsolete, slow-moving, excess and non-salable inventory by reviewing current transactions and forecasted product demand. We evaluate our inventories on an item by item basis and record inventory adjustments accordingly. If there is a significant decrease in demand for our products, uncertainty during product line transitions, or a higher risk of inventory obsolescence because of rapidly changing technology and customer requirements, we may be required to increase our inventory adjustments and our gross margin could be adversely affected.
Warranty Accruals: We accrue for warranty costs based on the expected material and labor costs to fulfill our warranty obligations. If we experience an increase in warranty claims, which are higher than our historical experience, our gross margin could be adversely affected.
Tax Valuation Allowances: Given the uncertainty created by our loss history, as well as the current and ongoing cyclical and COVID-19 related uncertain economic outlook for our industry and capital and geographic spending as well as income and current net deferred tax assets by entity and country, we expect to continue to limit the recognition of net deferred tax assets and accounting for uncertain tax positions and maintain the tax valuation allowances. At the current time, we expect, therefore, that reversals of the tax valuation allowance will take place as we are able to take advantage of the underlying tax loss or other attributes in carry forward or their use by future income or circumstances allow us to realize these attributes. The transfer pricing and expense or cost sharing arrangements are complex areas where judgments, such as the determination of arms-length arrangements, can be subject to challenges by different tax jurisdictions.
Share-based Compensation: We account for share-based awards made to our employees and directors, including employee stock option awards and restricted stock unit awards, using the estimated grant date fair value method of accounting. For options, we estimate the fair value using the Black-Scholes valuation model and an estimated forfeiture rate, which requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the option’s expected life and the price volatility of the underlying stock. The expected stock price volatility assumption was determined using the historical volatility of our common stock. Changes in the subjective assumptions required in the valuation model may significantly affect the estimated value of the awards, the related stock-based compensation expense and, consequently, our results of operations. Restricted stock unit awards are valued based on the average of the high and low price on the date of the grant and an estimated forfeiture rate. For both options and restricted awards, expense is recognized as compensation expense on the straight-line basis. Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) shares were issued under provisions that do not require us to record any equity compensation expense.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS:
NET SALES
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 declined approximately 5.7% to $20.3 million compared to 2019 primarily as a result of COVID-19 related downturn in capital spending resulting in lower demand in Automotive Electronics and Programming Centers during 2020. On a regional basis, net sales increased approximately 13% in Asia and decreased approximately 23% in the Americas and 5% in Europe.
Order bookings were $20.8 million for 2020, down approximately 8% compared to $22.5 million in 2019. Backlog at December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $3.9 million and $2.9 million, respectively. Deferred revenue was $1.1 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $1.5 million at December 31, 2019.
GROSS MARGIN
Gross margin as a percentage of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 53.2%, compared to 58.2% in 2019. The decline in gross margin percentage was due to the impact of channel and price mix, factory charges, including impairment obsolescence of $291,000 for certain end of service support and first generation SentriX parts, as well as lower sales volumes relative to fixed production costs.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Research and development (“R&D”) expense decreased $94,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily related to lower employee related costs and lower incentive compensation. R&D as a percentage of sales increased primarily due to the decline in 2020 sales.
We believe it is essential to invest in R&D to significantly enhance our existing products and to create new products as markets develop and technologies change. During 2020, we strategically invested in creating a second generation of SentriX, which was introduced in the fourth quarter. In addition to product development, a significant part of R&D spending is on creating software and support for new devices introduced by the semiconductor companies. We are currently focusing our research development efforts on strategic growth markets, including automotive electronics and IoT. We are developing technology and the SentriX product line to securely program new categories of semiconductors, including Secure Elements, Authentication Chips, and Secure Microcontrollers. We delivered new enhanced programming technology and automated handling systems for managed and secure programming in the manufacturing environment and extending the capabilities and support for our programmer architecture. Our R&D spending fluctuates based on the number, type, and the development stage of our product initiatives and projects.
SELLING, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) expenses decreased $486,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily related to reduced sales commissions on lower sales volume, lower incentive compensation and travel related expenses and partly offset by higher consulting costs and other third party costs and stock-based compensation. Cost control measures contributed to the reduction.
INTEREST
Interest income was lower for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to lower invested cash balances and lower interest rates.
INCOME TAXES
Income tax (expense) increased by $356,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily a result of the withholding tax of $257,000 on the repatriation of cash from subsidiaries in 2020. Income tax (expense) in 2020 and 2019 is primarily the result of foreign subsidiary income tax and minimal US state income tax.
The effective tax rate for 2020 of (10.8%) and 2019 of (2.7%) differed from the statutory tax rates in our tax reporting jurisdictions primarily due to the effect of valuation allowances. We have a valuation allowance of $8.9 million and $7.5 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our deferred tax assets and valuation allowance have been increased by approximately $365,000 and $348,000 associated with the requirements of accounting for uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Given the uncertainty created by our loss history particularly in the U.S. which is where most of our net deferred tax assets are located, and the ongoing uncertain economic outlook for our industry as well as capital and geographic spending, we currently expect to continue to limit the recognition of net deferred tax assets and maintain the tax valuation allowances.
Due to repatriations of cash from China and Canada, we were required to pay $257,000 in withholding tax during 2020, as compared with no withholding tax during 2019. Movements of cash that generated local country withholding taxes are a current tax expense that created additional deferred tax assets that resulted in additional tax valuation allowances.
INFLATION AND CHANGES IN FOREIGN CURRENCY EXCHANGE RATES
Sales and expenses incurred by foreign subsidiaries are denominated in the subsidiary’s local currency and translated into U.S. Dollar amounts at average rates of exchange during the year. We recognized foreign currency transaction loss of $(513,000) in 2020 and foreign transaction gain of $5,000 in 2019. The transaction gains or losses resulted primarily from translation adjustments to foreign inter-company accounts and U.S. Dollar accounts held by foreign subsidiaries and sales by our German subsidiary to certain customers, which were invoiced in U.S. Dollars. Because approximately 93% of our sales are to international markets, volatile exchange rates may also impact our competitiveness and margins.
IMPAIRMENT & RELATED CHARGES
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we launched a new generation of SentriX tools and capability. We made the strategic decision to control key pieces of the technology and enhance the ability to simplify the security deployment process, own the end-to-end intellectual property and scale our business. We accelerated the transition to second generation of SentriX by immediately upgrading all customers’ deployed first generation SentriX systems to the new hardware and software. This obsoleted components of the first generation hardware, software and inventory.
We also ended support for some legacy automated handlers, impairing the remaining service inventory.
As a result, certain capital equipment assets, advance payments and inventory were analyzed and determined to be impaired, totaling $943,000. This included impairment of $652,000, consisting of $252,000 of equipment and software, $400,000 of prepaid royalties, as well as impairment related charges of $291,000, due to inventory obsolescence (cost of goods sold) for end of certain product support.
FINANCIAL CONDITION:
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
At December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity consisted of existing cash and cash equivalents which increased $231,000 primarily due to shifts in working capital. Our working capital decreased in 2020 due to our operating loss offset in part by the CARES Act acceleration of the AMT credit refund to current assets. Our current ratio was 4.5 and 4.4 for December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The company continues to have no debt.
Although we have no significant external capital expenditure plans currently, we expect to continue to carefully make and manage capital expenditures to support our business. We plan to increase our internally developed rental, security provisioning, sales demonstration and test equipment as we develop and release new products. Capital expenditures are currently expected to be funded by existing and internally generated funds.
As a result of our cyclical and seasonal industry, significant product development, customer support and selling and marketing efforts, we have required substantial working capital to fund our operations. We have tried to balance our level of development spending with the goal of profitable operations or managing down business levels related to COVID-19. We have implemented or have initiatives to implement geographic shifts in our operations, optimize real estate usage, reduce exposure to the impact of currency volatility and tariffs, increase product development differentiation, and reduce costs.
We believe that we have sufficient cash or working capital available under our operating plan to fund our operations and capital requirements through at least the next one-year period. We may require additional cash at the U.S. headquarters, which could cause potential repatriation of cash that is held in our foreign subsidiaries. We have liquidated our subsidiary in Canada and repatriated its cash. For any repatriation, there may be tax and other impediments to any repatriation actions. As many repatriations typically have associated withholding taxes, those withheld will be a current tax without generating a current or deferred tax benefit. Our working capital may be used to fund possible losses, business growth, project initiatives, share repurchases and business development initiatives including acquisitions, which could reduce our liquidity and result in a requirement for additional cash before that time. Any substantial inability to achieve our current business plan could have a material adverse impact on our financial position, liquidity, or results of operations and may require us to reduce expenditures and/or seek possible additional financing.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Except as noted in the accompanying consolidated financial statements in Note 6, “Operating Lease Commitments” and Note 7, “Other Commitments”, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements.
SHARE REPURCHASE PROGRAMS
Data I/O did not offer a share repurchase program in 2020. In August of 2019, Data I/O completed the share repurchase program authorized in 2018.
NON-GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES (GAAP) FINANCIAL MEASURES
Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization (“EBITDA”) and Adjusted EBITDA excluding equity compensation and impairment & related charges (non-cash, one-time items) are set forth below. Non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our results and facilitate the comparison of results.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, certain capital equipment assets, advance payments and inventory were analyzed and determined to be impaired totaling $943,000. This included impairment of assets consisting of $252,000 of equipment and software, $400,000 of prepaid royalties, of $652,000 as well as impairment related charges of $291,000 due primarily to end of certain product support.
A reconciliation of net income to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA follows:
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2016-13, "Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments," which amends the impairment model by requiring entities to use a forward-looking approach based on expected losses rather than incurred losses to estimate credit losses on certain types of financial instruments. We are planning to adopt the standard effective for years after December 15, 2022 and do not expect this to have a material impact on our financial statements.