Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
A. H. Belo intends for the discussion of its financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist in understanding its financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those statements from period to period, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect its financial statements. The following information should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related notes filed as part of this report. All dollar amounts presented herein, except share and per share amounts, are in thousands, unless the context indicates otherwise.
This section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain certain forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those statements. See the Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements of this Annual Report for further discussion.
OVERVIEW
A. H. Belo Corporation (“A. H. Belo” or the “Company”), headquartered in Dallas, Texas, is the leading local news and information publishing company in Texas. The Company has a growing presence in emerging media and digital marketing, and maintains capabilities related to commercial printing, distribution and direct mail. A. H. Belo delivers news and information in innovative ways to a broad range of audiences with diverse interests and lifestyles.
The Company publishes The Dallas Morning News (www.dallasnews.com), Texas’ leading newspaper and winner of nine Pulitzer Prizes, and various niche publications targeting specific audiences. Its newspaper operations also provide commercial printing and distribution services to several large national newspapers. In addition, the Company has the capabilities of a full-service strategy, creative and media agency that focuses on strategic and digital marketing, and data intelligence that provide a measurable return on investment to its clients.
In the third quarter of 2019, in conjunction with a strategic change to move to a single decision-making reporting structure and based on how the Company’s chief operating decision-maker makes decisions about allocating resources and assessing performance, the Company determined it has one reportable segment. With this reorganization, the Company has focused on enhancing its capabilities to provide customers with strategic, creative and media marketing solutions.
Currently, the rapid spread of coronavirus (COVID-19 pandemic) globally has resulted in increased travel restrictions, and disruption and shutdown of businesses. The outbreak and any preventative or protective actions that the Company has taken and may continue to take, or may be imposed on the Company by governmental intervention, in respect of the pandemic may result in a period of disruption to the Company’s financial reporting capabilities, its printing operations, and its operations generally. COVID-19 is impacting, and may continue to impact, the Company’s customers, distribution partners, advertisers, production facilities, and third parties, and could result in additional loss of advertising revenue or supply chain disruption. Media was designated an essential business, therefore the Company’s operations have continued throughout the pandemic. While digital subscriptions grew in 2020, the Company experienced decreased demand for its print and digital advertising. As a result, the Company implemented measures to reduce costs and preserve cash flow. These measures include reduction in the quarterly dividend rate, decreases in employee compensation, as well as reductions in discretionary spending. In addition, the Company benefited from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). However, these measures may not be sufficient to fully offset the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business and, as such, the coronavirus is likely to continue to have an adverse impact on the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition at least for the near term.
‎
A. H. Belo Corporation 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Overview of Significant Transactions
Operating results for 2020 reflect continued challenges in print advertising revenue trends, primarily due to volume and rate declines, partially offset by an increase in the Company’s digital-only subscriptions revenue. In addition, the Company did experience declines resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic beginning late in the first quarter. The Company continues its efforts to diversify revenues through greater development of its digital platforms for delivery of news and advertising, and leveraging its brand and personnel to enhance its media agency solutions. However, there is no guarantee the Company will be able to generate enough digital revenue or margin to offset the loss of print advertising and circulation revenue and margin.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company performed a review of potential impairment indicators for its long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, and right-of-use assets. The Company determined there were indicators of possible impairment and conducted a long-lived assets impairment review. Upon completion, it was determined the undiscounted cash flows including from ultimate disposition of the assets exceeded the carrying value of the asset group, thus no impairment was indicated. See Note 5 - Leases for additional information on right-of-use asset impairment.
In the third quarter of 2019, in conjunction with the Company’s organizational changes, the Company conducted an impairment review of goodwill and long-lived assets. As a result, the Company’s goodwill was fully impaired in the third quarter of 2019.
In response to COVID-19, the CARES Act was signed into law on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act provides numerous tax provisions and other stimulus measures. The Company has benefited from the temporary five-year net operating loss carryback provision and the technical correction for qualified leasehold improvements, which changes 39-year property to 15-year property, eligible for 100 percent tax bonus depreciation. Applying the technical correction to 2018 has resulted in reporting additional tax depreciation of $1,017 and increased the 2018 net operating loss to approximately $6,829. The loss was carried back against 2014 taxes paid at the federal statutory rate of 35 percent that was previously in effect, resulting in a cash refund of $2,425, including interest, received on October 2, 2020. Additionally, The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (the “Act”), which includes The COVID-related Tax Relief Act of 2020 and the Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2020, was passed and signed into law the last week of 2020. Among others, the provisions in the Act included items such as guidance on expenses associated with forgiven Paycheck Protection Program loans, business meals deductions, individual tax rebates and unemployment benefits. The Company did not avail itself of any of the items contained in the new Act.
Quarterly dividends returned $5,139 and $6,876 to shareholders in 2020 and 2019, respectively. On December 3, 2020, the Company’s board of directors declared a $0.04 per share dividend to shareholders of record as of the close of business on February 12, 2021, paid on March 5, 2021.
In April 2019, the Company completed an asset acquisition. The new entity Cubic Creative, Inc. (“Cubic Creative”) is located in Tulsa, Oklahoma. This acquisition added creative strategy services, which complement service offerings currently available to A. H. Belo clients. The expected benefit from providing these additional services was attributed to goodwill, all of which is expected to be deductible for tax purposes. Operating results of the businesses acquired have been included in the Consolidated Statements of Operations from the initial acquisition date forward.
In May 2019, the Company completed the sale of the real estate assets in downtown Dallas, Texas, previously used as the Company’s headquarters for a sale price of $28,000. The sale price consisted of $4,597 cash received, after selling costs of approximately $1,000, and a two-year seller-financed promissory note of $22,400, secured by a first lien deed of trust covering the property. In the second quarter of 2019, the Company recorded a pretax gain of $25,908. Due to the offset by existing net operating loss carryforwards, the Company did not record any current tax expense related to the sale transaction. As a direct result of COVID-19 uncertainties, on April 3, 2020, the Company entered into a board-approved amendment to the two-year seller-financed promissory note. The second promissory note in the principal amount of $375 is secured by a second lien deed of trust covering the property and due June 30, 2021. The second promissory note includes a deferred interest payment that was due April 1, 2020, and a 2019 real property tax reconciliation payment due from the Purchaser. While it is anticipated that future interest payments will be made on a timely basis there is not a guarantee that the Purchaser will perform. The timing in general of commercial development may have been impacted by the pandemic, and thus capital constraints in commercial real estate markets may exist. Management continues to closely monitor the collectability of the notes and the value of the underlying collateral. Continued economic and other effects of the pandemic could impact the timing of payment or realization of the notes.
In 2019, the Company purchased 216,490 shares of its Series A common stock through open market transactions for $842. However, the agreement to repurchase the Company’s stock expired in the fourth quarter of 2019 and was not renewed. These purchases are recorded as treasury stock.
‎
A. H. Belo Corporation 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Results of Operations
This section contains discussion and analysis of net operating revenue, operating costs and expense and other information relevant to an understanding of results of operations for 2020 and 2019. In the third quarter of 2019, in conjunction with the Companies organizational changes, the Company determined it has one reportable segment (see Note 2 - Segment Reporting). The Company determined that disaggregating revenue by print and digital products best aligns with the Company’s structure.
The table below sets forth the components of A. H. Belo’s operating income (loss).
Traditionally, the Company’s primary revenues are generated from advertising within its core newspapers, niche publications and related websites and from subscription and single copy sales of its printed newspapers. As a result of competitive and economic conditions, the newspaper industry has faced a significant revenue decline over the past decade. Therefore, the Company has sought to diversify its revenues through development and investment in new product offerings, increased circulation rates and leveraging of its existing assets to offer cost efficient commercial printing and distribution services to its local markets. The Company continually evaluates the overall performance of its core products to ensure existing assets are deployed adequately to maximize return.
The Company’s advertising revenue from its core newspapers continues to be adversely affected by the shift of advertiser spending to other forms of media and the increased accessibility of free online news content, as well as news content from other sources, which resulted in declines in advertising and paid print circulation volumes and revenue. Decreases in print display and classified categories are indicative of continuing trends by advertisers towards digital platforms, which are widely available from many sources. In the current environment, companies are allocating more of their advertising spending towards programmatic channels that provide digital advertising on multiple platforms with enhanced technology for targeted delivery and measurement. In addition, the Company did experience declines resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic beginning late in the first quarter.
In response to the decline in print revenue, the Company has developed agency and digital advertising capabilities through multiple media channels. The Company leverages its news content to improve engagement on the Company’s digital platforms that results in increased digital subscriptions and associated revenue. The Company also continues to diversify its revenue base by leveraging the available capacity of its existing assets to provide print and distribution services for newspapers and other customers requiring these services, by introducing new advertising and marketing services products, and by increasing circulation prices.
Because of declining print circulation, the Company has developed broad digital strategies designed to provide readers with multiple platforms for obtaining online access to local news. The Company redesigned and expanded its website platforms and mobile applications in 2019 to provide a better customer experience with its digital news and information content. The Company continues to obtain additional key demographic data from readers, which allows the Company to provide content desired by readers and to modify marketing and distribution strategies to target and reach audiences valued by advertisers. The Company has access to programmatic digital advertising platform that provides digital ad placement and targeting efficiencies and increases utilization of digital inventory within the Company’s websites and external websites.
‎
A. H. Belo Corporation 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Advertising and marketing services revenue
Advertising and marketing services revenue was 46.8 percent and 52.2 percent of total revenue for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Print advertising
Print advertising is comprised of display, classified and preprint advertising revenue. Display and classified print revenue primarily represents sales of advertising space within the Company’s core and niche newspapers. As advertisers continue to diversify marketing budgets to incorporate more and varied avenues of reaching consumers, traditional display and classified advertising continues to decline. Display and classified print revenue decreased $9,637 and $3,635 in 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily due to a revenue decline in most advertising categories, with the largest declines in the retail categories. In addition to the general trends adversely impacting the publishing industry, the Company experienced unfavorable impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, which started in the latter part of the first quarter of 2020.
Preprint revenue primarily reflects preprinted advertisements inserted into the Company’s core newspapers and niche publications, or distributed to non-subscribers through the mail. Revenue decreased $6,301 and $3,327 in 2020 and 2019, respectively, due to a volume decline consistent with the decline in circulation volumes discussed below, which were significantly affected in 2020 by the pandemic.
Digital advertising and marketing services
Digital advertising and marketing services revenue consists of strategic marketing management, consulting, creative services, targeted and multi-channel (programmatic) advertising placed on third-party websites, digital sales of banner, classified and native advertisements on the Company’s news and entertainment-related websites and mobile apps, social media management, search optimization, direct mail and the sale of promotional materials. The Company’s auto sales division offered targeted advertising to auto dealerships primarily in the North Texas region desiring to advertise their inventory on the cars.com platform through September 30, 2019.
Revenue decreased $7,704 and $2,610 in 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily due to the cars.com agreement ending, and a lower volume of programmatic sales placed on third-party websites and online advertisements on dallasnews.com.
Circulation revenue
Circulation revenue was 42.1 percent and 37.2 percent of total revenue for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Print circulation
Revenue decreased in 2020 primarily driven by volume declines, partially offset by rate increases. Home delivery revenue decreased $3,043 or 5.5 percent, and single copy revenue decreased $1,863 or 24.7 percent primarily due to the significant reduction in the number of locations selling newspapers as a result of the pandemic. Circulation revenue from home delivery and single copy revenue is expected to continue to decline as audiences are shifting to subscribing for news from digital platforms.
Revenue decreased in 2019 primarily due to a decline in home delivery revenue, driven by a volume decline of 28.2 percent. The volume declines were partially offset by rate increases. Single copy revenue also decreased compared to prior year, due to single copy paid print circulation volume declines of 22.1 percent.
‎
A. H. Belo Corporation 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Digital circulation
Revenue increased in 2020 and 2019, due to an increase in digital-only subscriptions. In 2020, digital-only subscriptions increased 36.8 percent when compared to December 31, 2019, primarily resulting from a broad interest in news topics including the presidential election and the COVID-19 pandemic.
Printing, distribution and other revenue
Printing, distribution and other revenue was 11.1 percent and 10.6 percent of total revenue for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Revenue decreased 2020, primarily due to a decline in brokered and commercial printing revenue partially offset by an increase in shared mail packaging revenue.
Revenue decreased in 2019 primarily due to the Company eliminating its brokered printing business, in the first quarter of 2019, in which it provided services direct to small business clients. Additionally, the Company reduced the number of local and national commercial print customers it serves from more than 30 to 5. This strategic decision to streamline operations was implemented to improve operating income.
‎
A. H. Belo Corporation 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Operating Costs and Expense
The table below sets forth the components of the Company’s operating costs and expense.
Employee compensation and benefits - The Company continues to implement measures to optimize its workforce and evaluate strategies to reduce risk associated with future obligations for employee benefit plans. Employee compensation and benefits decreased $8,362 and $9,170 in 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily due to headcount reductions within the Company. Additionally in 2020, employees’ base compensation was reduced Company-wide starting in the second quarter in order to mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In August 2020, the Company began to restore base salaries and by October, the Company restored base salaries prospectively for all employees, with the exception of the executive officers that report to the Chief Executive Officer. The executive officers’ base salaries will be restored effective January 1, 2021. In 2019, headcount decreased primarily due to the Company’s strategic decision, in the first quarter of 2019, to eliminate its brokered printing business and reduce the number of local and national commercial print customers it serves.
Other production, distribution and operating costs - Expense decreased $10,665 in 2020, reflecting savings as the Company continued to manage discretionary spending and implemented measures to reduce costs in response to the unfavorable financial impact of the pandemic, including expense reductions in outside services, advertising and promotion, and travel and entertainment. Additionally, distribution expense decreased related to delivery of the Company’s various publications and products. Expense remained flat in 2019 due to the management of discretionary spending, offset by $1,920 of expense related to a strategy review with an outside consulting firm in the second quarter of 2019.
Newsprint, ink and other supplies - Expense decreased $6,402 in 2020, due to competitive pricing available under its paper supply agreement, reduced newsprint costs associated with lower circulation volumes and a decline in commercial printing. Expense decreased in 2019 due to lower circulation volumes and the elimination of brokered printing for small business clients. Newsprint consumption approximated 9,781 and 11,619 metric tons in 2020 and 2019, respectively, at an average cost per metric ton of $549 and $751, respectively.
Depreciation - Expense decreased in 2020 and 2019 due to a lower depreciable asset base as a higher level of in-service assets are now fully depreciated. The Company has reduced capital spending, but it is committed to investing the appropriate levels of capital to sustain existing operations.
Amortization - Expense decreased in 2020 due to an intangible asset being fully amortized in 2019, and the only remaining intangible asset to be amortized is comprised of customer relationships. Expense decreased in 2019 due to the impairment of intangible assets in the fourth quarter of 2018.
(Gain) loss on sale/disposal of assets, net - In 2020, the Company disposed of assets and sold production-related assets that were no longer in use. Additionally, in the fourth quarter the Company sold assets related to the production of promotional materials that will be outsourced beginning in 2021. In 2019, the Company completed the sale of real estate previously used as the Company’s headquarters for $28,000, resulting in a pretax gain of $25,908. In addition, the Company recorded a loss of $1,362 on the disposal of newspaper production assets, as a result of reduced brokered and commercial printing, and publishing software that was replaced by a new digital content platform.
Asset impairments - In 2020, the Company subleased office space in Dallas, Texas at a lower rate than the head lease, and accordingly an asset impairment of $461 was recorded in the fourth quarter. In the third quarter of 2019, in conjunction with the Company’s organizational changes, the Company conducted an impairment review of goodwill and long-lived assets. As a result, the Company recorded a noncash goodwill impairment charge of $1,593 in the third quarter of 2019, fully impairing goodwill.
‎
A. H. Belo Corporation 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Other
The table below sets forth the other components of the Company’s results of operations.
Other income, net - Other income, net includes net periodic pension and other post-employment benefit of $4,627 and $3,259 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, resulting from a favorable return on pension assets, partially offset by a decrease in the discount rate. Interest income (expense), primarily interest received of $897 and $395 in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, on the promissory note from the sale of the Company’s former headquarters, and gain (loss) from investments are also included in other income, net. On September 24, 2020, the Company’s shares of eSite Analytics, Inc. (“eSite”) were repurchased by eSite for $750, recognized in other income, net.
Income tax provision (benefit) - A tax benefit of $(1,687) was recorded in 2020. The benefit was primarily due to the recognition of the 2018 net operating loss carryback permitted by the CARES Act, partially offset by the effect of the Texas margin tax.
A tax provision of $4,416 was recorded in 2019. The provision was primarily due to annual income before income taxes, primarily a result of income generated from the sale of the Company’s former headquarters (see Note 14 - Disposal of Assets), the Texas margin tax and an increase in the valuation allowance due to a change in judgement as to the realization of the Company’s deferred tax assets.
Legal proceedings - From time to time, the Company is involved in a variety of claims, lawsuits and other disputes arising in the ordinary course of business. Management routinely assesses the likelihood of adverse judgments or outcomes in these matters, as well as the ranges of probable losses to the extent losses are reasonably estimable. Accruals for contingencies are recorded when, in the judgment of management, adverse judgments or outcomes are probable and the financial impact, should an adverse outcome occur, is reasonably estimable. The determination of likely outcomes of litigation matters relates to factors that include, but are not limited to, past experience and other evidence, interpretation of relevant laws or regulations and the specifics and status of each matter. Predicting the outcome of claims and litigation and estimating related costs and financial exposure involves substantial uncertainties that could cause actual results to vary materially from estimates and accruals. In the opinion of management, liabilities, if any, arising from other currently existing claims against the Company would not have a material adverse effect on A. H. Belo’s results of operations, liquidity or financial condition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
A. H. Belo’s consolidated financial statements reflect the application of accounting policies that require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. The Company believes that the following are the critical accounting policies, estimates and assumptions currently affecting A. H. Belo’s financial position and results of operations. See the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards, for additional information concerning significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition. The Company’s principal sources of revenue are sales of advertising within its newspaper and digital platforms, subscription and retail sales of its newspapers, commercial printing and distribution services, primarily related to national newspapers, and preprint advertising. In addition, revenue includes strategic marketing management, consulting, creative services, targeted and multi-channel (programmatic) advertising placed on third-party websites, social media management, search optimization, direct mail and the sale of promotional materials.
Advertising and marketing services revenue is primarily recognized at a point in time when the ad or service is complete and delivered, based on the customers’ contract price. Barter advertising transactions are recognized at estimated fair value based on the negotiated contract price and the range of prices for similar advertising from customers unrelated to the barter transaction. The Company expenses barter costs as incurred, which is independent from the timing of revenue recognition. In addition, certain digital advertising revenue related to website access is recognized over time, based on the customers’ monthly rate.
For ads placed on certain third-party websites, the Company must evaluate whether it is acting as the principal, where revenue is reported on a gross basis, or acting as the agent, where revenue is reported on a net basis. Generally, the Company reports advertising revenue for ads placed on third-party websites on a net basis, meaning the amount recorded to revenue is the amount billed to the customer net of amounts paid to the publisher of the third-party website. The Company is acting as the agent because the publisher controls the advertising inventory.
A. H. Belo Corporation 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Circulation revenue is generated primarily by selling home delivery, including premium publications, and digital subscriptions, as well as single copy sales to non-subscribers for which revenue is recognized at a point in time when the paper is purchased. Home delivery revenue is recognized over the subscription period based on the days of actual delivery over the total subscription days. Revenue is directly reduced for any non-payment for the grace period of home delivery subscriptions where the Company recorded revenue for newspapers delivered after a subscription expired. Digital-only subscription revenue is recognized over the subscription period based on daily or monthly access to the content in the subscription period.
Printing, distribution and other revenue is primarily generated from printing and distribution of other newspapers, as well as production of preprinted advertisements for other newspapers. Printing, distribution and other revenue is recognized at a point in time when the product or service is delivered.
Long-Lived Assets. The Company evaluates its ability to recover the carrying value of property, plant and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets, using the lowest level of cash flows associated with the assets, which are grouped based on the Company’s intended use of these assets. This evaluation is performed whenever a change in circumstances indicates that the carrying value of an asset group may not be recoverable. If the analysis of undiscounted future cash flows indicates the carrying value of the long-lived assets cannot be recovered, the assets are adjusted to the lower of its carrying value or fair value.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company performed a review of potential impairment indicators for its long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, and right-of-use assets. The Company determined there were indicators of possible impairment and conducted a long-lived assets impairment review. Upon completion, it was determined the undiscounted cash flows including from ultimate disposition of the assets exceeded the carrying value of the asset group, thus no impairment was indicated. See Note 5 - Leases for additional information on right-of-use asset impairment.
Pension. The Company follows accounting guidance for single-employer defined benefit plans. Plan assets and the projected benefits obligation are measured each December 31, and the Company records as an asset or liability for the net funded position of the plans. Certain changes in actuarial valuations related to returns on plan assets and projected benefit obligations are recorded to accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and are amortized to net periodic pension expense (benefit) over the weighted average remaining life of plan participants, to the extent the cumulative balance in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) exceeds 10 percent of the greater of the respective plan’s (a) projected benefit obligation or (b) the market-related value of the plan’s assets. Net periodic pension expense (benefit) is recognized each period by accruing interest expense on the projected benefit obligation and accruing a return on assets associated with the plan assets. Participation in and accrual of new benefits to participants has been frozen since 2007 and, accordingly, on-going service costs are not a component of net periodic pension expense (benefit). From time to time, the Company-sponsored plans may settle pension obligations with certain plan participants through the plans’ master trust as part of its de-risking strategies. The gains or losses associated with settlements of plan obligations to participants are recognized to earnings if such settlements exceed the interest component of net periodic pension cost for the year. Otherwise, such amounts are included in actuarial gains (losses) in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). Re-measurement of plan assets and liabilities upon a significant settlement or curtailment event is performed based on the values of the month-end closest to the event.
The projected benefit obligations of the A. H. Belo Pension Plans are estimated using the FTSE Pension Discount Curve, which is based upon a portfolio of high-quality corporate debt securities with maturities that correlate to the expected timing of estimated benefit payments to the Pension Plans’ participants. Future estimated benefit payments are discounted to their present value at the appropriate yield curve spot rate to determine the projected benefit obligation outstanding at each year end. The single equivalent discount rate as of December 31, 2020 was 2.1 percent and 2.9 percent for December 31, 2019.
Interest expense included in net periodic pension benefit is based on the FTSE Pension Discount Curve established at the beginning of the fiscal year. The discount rate for fiscal year 2020 and 2019 interest cost was 2.9 percent and 4.0 percent, respectively.
The Company assumed a 6.5 percent long-term return on the Pension Plans’ assets in 2020 and 2019. This return is based upon historical returns of similar investment pools having asset allocations consistent with the expected allocations of the A. H. Belo Pension Plans. Investment strategies for the Pension Plans’ assets are based upon factors such as the effective duration of the actuarial liabilities and market risks.
‎
A. H. Belo Corporation 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Income Taxes. The Company uses the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes and recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates. The Company establishes a valuation allowance if it is more-likely-than-not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The factors used to assess the likelihood of realization of the deferred tax assets include future reversal of deferred tax liabilities, available tax planning strategies, future taxable income and taxable income in prior carryback years.
The Company evaluates any uncertain tax positions each reporting period by tax jurisdiction to determine if it is more-likely-than-not that the tax position will not be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements for such positions are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. If a net operating loss or other tax credit carry forward exists, the Company records the unrecognized tax benefits for such tax positions as a reduction to a deferred tax asset. Otherwise, the unrecognized tax benefits are recorded as a liability. The Company records a liability for uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. Any change in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions is recognized in earnings in the period in which such change occurs. Interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits are recorded in other income, net.
Recent Accounting Standards
See the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards, regarding the impact of certain recent accounting pronouncements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s cash balances as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $42,015 and $48,626, respectively. The decrease in the cash balance during 2020 was primarily due to the return of capital to shareholders through dividends and the net loss from operations.
The Company intends to hold existing cash for purposes of future investment opportunities, potential return of capital to shareholders and for contingency purposes. Although revenue is expected to continue to decline in future periods, cash flows and other cost cutting measures are expected to be sufficient to fund operating activities and capital spending of approximately $1,000 in 2021.
The future approval of dividends is dependent upon available cash after considering future operating and investing requirements and cannot be guaranteed. The Company continues to have a board-authorized repurchase authority. However, the agreement to repurchase the Company’s stock expired in the fourth quarter of 2019 and was not renewed.
As a result of the recent COVID-19 outbreak that began in January 2020, the Company is experiencing an increase in digital subscriptions, which currently does not offset the loss of advertising revenue. On April 6, 2020, the Company announced that it was taking several actions to reduce cash outflow in response to the financial impact of COVID-19. The Company reduced operating expenses, reduced capital expenditures to less than $1,000 in 2020, and lowered the quarterly dividend rate to $0.04 per share for dividends declared. Beginning with the 2020 annual meeting of shareholders, the board of directors’ compensation was reduced and the board was reduced in size by two. In addition, employees’ base compensation was reduced Company-wide, and the annual bonus tied to financial metrics for eligible employees was not achieved. In August 2020, the Company began to restore base salaries and by October, the Company restored base salaries prospectively for all employees, with the exception of the executive officers that report to the Chief Executive Officer. The executive officers’ base salaries will be restored effective January 1, 2021.
In response to COVID-19, the CARES Act was signed into law on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act provides numerous tax provisions and other stimulus measures. The Company has benefited from the temporary five-year net operating loss carryback provision and the technical correction for qualified leasehold improvements, which changes 39-year property to 15-year property, eligible for 100 percent tax bonus depreciation. Applying the technical correction to 2018 has resulted in reporting additional tax depreciation of $1,017 and increased the 2018 net operating loss to approximately $6,829. The loss was carried back against 2014 taxes paid at the federal statutory rate of 35 percent that was previously in effect, resulting in a cash refund of $2,425, including interest, received on October 2, 2020. Additionally, the Act, which includes The COVID-related Tax Relief Act of 2020 and the Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2020, was passed and signed into law the last week of 2020. The Company did not avail itself of any of the items contained in the new Act.
‎
A. H. Belo Corporation 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
As a direct result of COVID-19 uncertainties, on April 3, 2020, the Company and the Purchaser entered into an amendment to the two-year seller-financed promissory note of $22,400, for the sale of the real estate assets previously used as the Company’s headquarters. The second promissory note, in the principal amount of $375, includes a deferred interest payment of $195 that was due April 1, 2020, and a 2019 real property tax reconciliation payment due from the Purchaser. The Company evaluated the collectability of the notes as a result of the purchaser’s request to defer the first quarter 2020 interest payment and the continuation of the pandemic. Management believes as of December 31, 2020, the promissory notes are recoverable since the purchaser is in compliance with the terms, is publicly indicating its intent to develop the property, and management believes that the value of the collateral has not materially changed from the sale date. In addition, on January 4, 2021, the Purchaser paid the fourth quarter 2020 interest payment of $253.
The Company continues to evaluate the future material impacts on its consolidated financial statements that may result from the actions taken by the Company and its customers in respect of the pandemic.
The following discusses the changes in cash flows by operating, investing and financing activities in 2020 and 2019.
Operating Cash Flows
Net cash provided by (used for) operating activities was $(1,490) and $1,205 in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash flows from operating activities decreased by $2,695 in 2020, when compared to the prior year period. The decrease was driven primarily by the net loss of $6,872 in 2020, and changes in working capital and other operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by the CARES Act refund of $2,425 and the sale of IP addresses for $744.
Cash flows from operating activities decreased in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to federal income tax refunds of $7,305 received in 2018 and changes in working capital and other operating assets and liabilities.
Investing Cash Flows
Net cash provided by (used for) investing activities was $18 and $(174) in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash flows from investing activities increased in 2020 due to a reduction in capital spending of $1,528 and cash proceeds of $750 from the sale of the Company’s eSite shares that were repurchased by eSite in the third quarter of 2020. The Company reduced its capital spending plan for 2020 in response to the financial impact of COVID-19 as discussed above.
Cash flows used for investing activities decreased in 2019 compared to 2018, due to a reduction in capital spending of $3,241 and cash proceeds of $4,597 from the sale of real estate previously used as the Company’s headquarters, partially offset by the acquisition of Cubic Creative for $2,356.
Financing Cash Flows
Net cash used for financing activities was $5,139 and $7,718 in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash used for financing activities included total dividends paid of $5,139 and $6,876 in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In 2019, the Company purchased 216,490 shares of its Series A common stock at a total cost of $842 under its board-authorized repurchase authority. However, the agreement to repurchase the Company’s stock expired in the fourth quarter of 2019 and was not renewed.
Financing Arrangements
None.
‎
A. H. Belo Corporation 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had contractual obligations, in aggregate, of $16,436 for the next five years and $19,691 thereafter, for operating leases, primarily for office space and other distribution centers, some of which include escalating lease payments. See Note 5 - Leases for future lease payments by year. In addition, the Company had expected purchase obligations of $117 related to capital expenditures.
In December 2017, AHC Dallas Properties, LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, assumed a 12-year lease agreement for office space that serves as the headquarters of the Denton Record-Chronicle. In connection with the sale of Denton Publishing Company, owner of the Denton Record-Chronicle, to Denton Media Company, Inc., the Company entered into a sublease with Denton Publishing Company for a term ending on July 30, 2023. While it is anticipated that lease payments will be made on a timely basis there is not a guarantee. If Denton Publishing Company is not able to meet the obligation, the Company may look to alternative sublease arrangements.
In December 2016, the Dallas Morning News, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into a 16-year lease agreement for office space for the Company’s new corporate headquarters. The Company recognizes rent expense on a straight-line basis. Per the amended lease agreement, rent payments began in November 2018.
The Company currently does not expect to make contributions to the A. H. Belo Pension Plans in 2021 and no contributions are required to these plans in 2021 under the applicable tax and labor laws governing pension plan funding.
On December 3, 2020, the Company’s board of directors declared a $0.04 per share dividend to shareholders of record as of the close of business on February 12, 2021, paid on March 5, 2021. On March 4, 2021, the Company’s board of directors declared a $0.04 per share dividend to shareholders of record as of the close of business on May 14, 2021, which is payable on June 4, 2021.