Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Dollars in millions)
Management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and accompanying notes in Item 8.
Management Overview
We are a global provider of high-technology products to virtually every major vehicle manufacturer in the world. We also serve the stationary industrial market. Our technologies include drive systems (axles, driveshafts, transmissions, and wheel and track drives); motion systems (winches, slew drives, and hub drives); electrodynamic technologies (motors, inverters, software and control systems, battery-management systems, and fuel cell plates); sealing solutions (gaskets, seals, cam covers, and oil pan modules); thermal-management technologies (transmission and engine oil cooling, battery and electronics cooling, charge air cooling, and thermal-acoustical protective shielding); and digital solutions (active and passive system controls and descriptive and predictive analytics). We serve our global light vehicle, medium/heavy vehicle and off-highway markets through four business units - Light Vehicle Drive Systems (Light Vehicle), Commercial Vehicle Drive and Motion Systems (Commercial Vehicle), Off-Highway Drive and Motion Systems (Off-Highway) and Power Technologies, which is the center of excellence for sealing and thermal-management technologies that span all customers in our on-highway and off-highway markets. We have a diverse customer base and geographic footprint which minimizes our exposure to individual market and segment declines. In 2020, 51% of our sales came from North American operations and 49% from operations throughout the rest of the world. Our sales by operating segment were Light Vehicle - 43%, Commercial Vehicle - 16%, Off-Highway - 28% and Power Technologies - 13%.
Operational and Strategic Initiatives
Our enterprise strategy builds on our strong technology foundation and leverages our resources across the organization while driving a customer centric focus, expanding our global markets, and delivering innovative solutions as we evolve into the era of vehicle electrification.
Central to our strategy is leveraging our core operations. This foundational element enables us to infuse strong operational disciplines throughout the strategy, making it practical, actionable, and effective. It enables us to capitalize on being a major drive systems supplier across all three end-mobility markets. We are achieving improved profitability by actively seeking synergies across our engineering, purchasing, and manufacturing base. We have strengthened the portfolio by acquiring critical assets; and we are utilizing our physical and intellectual capital to amplify innovation across the enterprise. Leveraging these core elements can further expand the cost efficiencies of our common technologies and deliver a sustainable competitive advantage for Dana.
Driving customer centricity continues to be at the heart of who we are. Putting our customers at the center of our value system is firmly embedded in our culture and is driving growth by focusing customer relationships and providing value to our customers. These relationships are strengthened as we are physically where we need to be in order to provide unparalleled service and we are prioritizing our customers’ needs as we engineer solutions that differentiate their products, while making it easier to do business with Dana by digitizing their experience. Our customer centric focus has uniquely positioned us to win more than our fair share of new business and capitalize on future customer outsourcing initiatives.
We continue to enhance and expand our global footprint, optimizing it to capture growth across all of our end markets.
Expanding global markets means utilizing our global capabilities and presence to further penetrate growth markets, focusing on Asia due to its position as the largest mobility market in the world with the highest market growth rate and its lead in the adoption of new energy vehicles. We are investing across various avenues to increase our presence in Asia Pacific by forging new partnerships, expanding inorganically, and growing organically. We continue to operate in this region through wholly owned and joint ventures with local market partners. We have recently made acquisitions that have augmented our footprint in the region, specifically in India and China. All the while, we have been making meaningful organic investments to grow with existing and new customers, primarily in Thailand, India, and China. These added capabilities have enabled us to target the domestic Asia Pacific markets and utilize the capacity for export to other global markets.
Delivering innovative solutions enables us to capitalize on market growth trends as we evolve our core technology capabilities. We are also focused on enhancing our physical products with digital content to provide smart systems and we see an opportunity to become a digital systems provider by delivering software as a service to our traditional end customers. This focus on delivering solutions based on our core technology is leading to new business wins and increasing our content per vehicle. We have made significant investments - both organically and inorganically - allowing us to move to the next phase, which is to Lead electric propulsion.
Over the past year we have achieved our goal to accelerate hybridization and electrification through both core Dana technologies and targeted strategic acquisitions and are positioned today to lead the market. The nine recent investments in electrodynamic expertise and technologies combined with Dana’s longstanding mechatronics capabilities has allowed us to develop and deliver fully integrated e-Propulsion systems that are power-dense and achieve optimal efficiency through the integration of the components that we offer due to our mechatronics capabilities. With recent electric vehicle program awards, we are well on our way to achieving our growth objectives in this emerging market.
The development and implementation of our enterprise strategy is positioning Dana to grow profitably due to increased customer focus as we leverage our core capabilities, expand into new markets, develop and commercialize new technologies including for hybrid and electric vehicles.
Capital Structure Initiatives
In addition to investing in our business, we plan to continue prioritizing the allocation of capital to reduce debt and maintain a strong financial position. We continue to drive toward investment grade metrics as part of a balanced approach to our capital allocation priorities and our goal of further strengthening our balance sheet.
Shareholder return actions - When evaluating capital structure initiatives, we balance our growth opportunities and shareholder value initiatives with maintaining a strong balance sheet and access to capital. Our strong financial position has enabled us to simplify our capital structure while providing returns to our shareholders in the form of cash dividends and a reduction in the number of shares outstanding. Our Board of Directors authorized a $200 share repurchase program effective in 2018 which expires at the end of 2023. Through December 31, 2020, we have used $50 of cash to repurchase common shares under the program. Through the first quarter of 2020, we had declared and paid quarterly common stock dividends for thirty-three consecutive quarters. In response to the global COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily suspended the declaration and payment of dividends to common shareholders and the repurchase of common stock under our existing common stock share repurchase program.
Financing actions - Over the past few years we have taken advantage of the lower interest rate environment to complete refinancing transactions that resulted in lower effective interest rates while extending maturities. During 2019 we expanded our credit and guaranty agreement, entering into $675 of additional floating rate term loans to fund the ODS acquisition (see Acquisitions section below) and increased our revolving credit facility to $1,000 and extended its maturity to August 2024. We completed a $300 2027 note offering and used the proceeds to repay $300 of higher cost 2023 notes. During 2019, we terminated one of our U.S. defined benefit pension plans, settling approximately $165 of previously unfunded pension obligations and eliminating future funding risk associated with interest rate and other market developments. In response to the global COVID-19 pandemic, during June 2020, we completed a $400 2028 note offering and a $100 add on to our 2027 notes. With the impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic on our operations dissipating, we paid down $474 of our floating rate term loans (the "Term A Facility") in the third and fourth quarters of 2020. See Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Other Initiatives
Aftermarket opportunities - We have a global group dedicated to identifying and developing aftermarket growth opportunities that leverage the capabilities within our existing businesses - targeting increased future aftermarket sales. Powered by recognized brands such as Dana®, Spicer®, Spicer Electrified™, Victor Reinz®, Glaser®, GWB®, Thompson®, Tru-Cool®, SVL®, and Transejes™, Dana delivers a broad range of aftermarket solutions - including genuine, all makes, and value lines - servicing passenger, commercial and off-highway vehicles across the globe.
Selective acquisitions - Although transformational opportunities like the GKN plc driveline business transaction that we pursued in 2018 will be considered when strategically and economically attractive, our acquisition focus is principally directed at “bolt-on” or adjacent acquisition opportunities that have a strategic fit with our existing core businesses, particularly opportunities that support our enterprise strategy and enhance the value proposition of our product offerings. Any potential acquisition will be evaluated in the same manner we currently consider customer program opportunities and other uses of capital - with a disciplined financial approach designed to ensure profitable growth and increased shareholder value.
Acquisitions
Ashwoods Innovations Limited - On February 5, 2020, we acquired Curtis Instruments, Inc.'s (Curtis) 35.4% ownership interest in Ashwoods Innovations Limited (Ashwoods). Ashwoods designs and manufactures permanent magnet electric motors for the automotive, material handling and off-highway vehicle markets. The acquisition of Curtis' interest in Ashwoods, along with our existing ownership interest in Ashwoods, provided us with a 97.8% ownership interest and a controlling financial interest in Ashwoods. We recognized a $3 gain to other income (expense), net on the required remeasurement of our previously held equity method investment in Ashwoods to fair value. The total purchase consideration of $22 is comprised of $8 of cash paid to Curtis at closing, the $10 fair value of our previously held equity method investment in Ashwoods and $4 related to the effective settlement of a pre-existing loan payable due from Ashwoods. During March 2020, we acquired the remaining noncontrolling interests in Ashwoods held by employee shareholders. The results of operations of Ashwoods are reported within our Off-Highway operating segment. The Ashwoods acquisition had an insignificant impact on our consolidated results of operations during 2020. See Hydro-Québec relationship discussion below for details of the subsequent change in our ownership interest in Ashwoods.
Nordresa - On August 26, 2019, we acquired a 100% ownership interest in Nordresa Motors, Inc. (Nordresa) for consideration of $12, using cash on hand. Nordresa is a prominent integration and application engineering expert for the development and commercialization of electric powertrains for commercial vehicles. The investment further enhances Dana's electrification capabilities by combining its complete portfolio of motors, inverters, chargers, gearboxes, and thermal-management products with Nordresa's proprietary battery-management system, electric powertrain controls and integration expertise to deliver complete electric powertrain systems. The results of operations of Nordresa are reported within our Commercial Vehicle operating segment. Nordresa had an insignificant impact on our consolidated results of operations during 2019.
Prestolite E-Propulsion Systems (Beijing) Limited - On June 6, 2019, we acquired Prestolite Electric Beijing Limited's (PEBL) 50% ownership interest in Prestolite E-Propulsion Systems (Beijing) Limited (PEPS). PEPS manufactures and distributes electric mobility solutions, including electric motors, inverters, and generators for commercial vehicles and heavy machinery. PEPS has a state-of-the-art facility in China, enabling us to expand motor and inverter manufacturing capabilities in the world's largest electric-mobility market. The acquisition of PEBL's interest in PEPS, along with our existing ownership interest in PEPS through our TM4 subsidiary, provides us with a 100% ownership interest and a controlling financial interest in PEPS. We recognized a $2 gain to other income (expense), net on the required remeasurement of our previously held equity method investment in PEPS to fair value. We paid $50 at closing using cash on hand. Reference is made to Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for the allocation of purchase consideration to assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The results of operations of PEPS are reported within our Commercial Vehicle operating segment. The PEPS acquisition contributed $8 of sales and de minimis adjusted EBITDA in 2019. See Hydro-Québec relationship discussion below for details of the subsequent change in our ownership interest in PEPS.
Oerlikon Drive Systems - On February 28, 2019, we acquired a 100% ownership interest in the Oerlikon Drive Systems (ODS) segment of the Oerlikon Group. ODS is a global manufacturer of high-precision gears, planetary hub drives for wheeled and tracked vehicles, and products, controls, and software that support vehicle electrification across the mobility industry. We paid $626 at closing, which was primarily funded through debt proceeds. Reference is made to Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for the allocation of purchase consideration to assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The results of operations of ODS are reported primarily within our Off-Highway and Commercial Vehicle operating segments. The ODS acquisition added $630 of sales and $87 of adjusted EBITDA during 2019.
SME - On January 11, 2019, we acquired a 100% ownership interest in S.M.E. S.p.A. (SME). SME designs, engineers, and manufactures low-voltage AC induction and synchronous reluctance motors, inverters, and controls for a wide range of off-highway electric vehicle applications, including material handling, agriculture, construction, and automated-guided vehicles. The addition of SME's low-voltage motors and inverters, which are primarily designed to meet the evolution of electrification in off-highway equipment, significantly expands Dana's electrified product portfolio. We paid $88 at closing, consisting of $62 in cash on hand and a note payable of $26 which allows for net settlement of potential contingencies as defined in the purchase agreement. The note is payable in five years and bears annual interest of 5%. Reference is made to Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for the allocation of purchase consideration to assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The SME acquisition added $21 of sales and de minimis adjusted EBITDA during 2019. See Hydro-Québec relationship discussion below for details of the subsequent change in our ownership interest in SME.
TM4 - On June 22, 2018, we acquired a 55% ownership interest in TM4 Inc. (TM4) from Hydro-Québec. TM4 designs and manufactures motors, power inverters and control systems for electric vehicles, offering a complementary portfolio to Dana's electric gearboxes and thermal-management technologies for batteries, motors and inverters. The transaction establishes Dana as the only supplier with full e-Drive design, engineering and manufacturing capabilities - offering electro mechanical propulsion solutions to each of our end markets. TM4's technology and advanced manufacturing facility in Boucherville, Quebec will add to our global technical centers, and their 50% interest in PEPS provides an opportunity to enhance our position in the fastest growing market for electric vehicles. See PEPS acquisition discussion above for details of the subsequent change in our ownership interest in PEPS. Dana is consolidating TM4 as the governing documents provide Dana with a controlling financial interest. We paid $125 at closing, using cash on hand. Reference is made to Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for the allocation of purchase consideration to assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The results of operations of the TM4 business are reported in our Commercial Vehicle operating segment. The TM4 acquisition contributed $11 of sales and de minimis adjusted EBITDA in 2018.
Hydro-Québec Relationship
On June 22, 2018, we acquired a 55% ownership interest in TM4 from Hydro-Québec. On July 29, 2019, we broadened our relationship with Hydro-Québec, with Hydro-Québec acquiring an indirect 45% redeemable noncontrolling interest in SME and increasing its existing indirect 22.5% noncontrolling interest in PEPS to 45%. We received $65 at closing, consisting of $53 of cash and a note receivable of $12. The note is payable in five years and bears annual interest of 5%. Dana will continue to consolidate SME and PEPS as the governing documents continue to provide Dana with a controlling financial interest in these subsidiaries. See Acquisitions section above for a discussion of Dana's acquisitions of PEPS and SME. On April 14, 2020, Hydro-Québec acquired an indirect 45% redeemable noncontrolling interest in Ashwoods. We received $9 in cash at closing, inclusive of $2 in proceeds on a loan from Hydro-Québec. Dana will continue to consolidate Ashwoods as the governing documents continue to provide Dana with a controlling financial interest in this subsidiary. See the Acquisitions section above for a discussion of Dana's acquisition of Ashwoods.
Segments
We manage our operations globally through four operating segments. Our Light Vehicle and Power Technologies segments primarily support light vehicle original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) with products for light trucks, SUVs, CUVs, vans and passenger cars. The Commercial Vehicle segment supports the OEMs of on-highway commercial vehicles (primarily trucks and buses), while our Off-Highway segment supports OEMs of off-highway vehicles (primarily wheeled vehicles used in construction, mining and agricultural applications).
Trends in Our Markets
We serve our customers in three core global end markets: light vehicle, primarily full frame trucks and SUVs; commercial vehicle, including medium-and heavy-duty trucks and busses; and off-highway, including construction, mining, and agriculture equipment.
In 2020, all of our end-markets were impacted to varying degrees by the global COVID-19 pandemic, which initially resulted in lower demand driven by production shutdowns related to virus mitigation efforts in the regions we serve. Each of our end-markets has unique cyclical dynamics and market drivers. These cycles are impacted by periods of investment where end-user vehicle fleets are refreshed or expanded in reaction to demand usage patterns, regulatory changes, or when the age of vehicles in service reach their useful life. Key market drivers include regional economic growth rates; industrial output; commodity production and pricing; and residential and nonresidential construction rates. Our multi-market coverage and broad customer base help provide stability across the cycles while mitigating secular variability.
Light vehicle markets - Our driveline business is weighted more heavily to the truck and SUV segments of the light-vehicle market versus the passenger-car segment. Our vehicle content is greater on rear-wheel drive, four-wheel drive, and all-wheel drive vehicles, as well as hybrid and electric vehicles. Global light-truck volumes have seen steady growth over the last three years, with the largest gains being in North America. The impact of COVID-19 saw the global market contract by 13% from 2019 levels. The outlook for the full year of 2021 reflects full-frame light-truck production to be up by a similar percentage, with all regions exhibiting a strong rebound and returning to 2019 levels as production constraints have eased, inventory returns to more normal levels, and constrained customer demand is fulfilled.
Commercial vehicle markets - Our primary business is driveline systems for medium and heavy-duty trucks and busses, including the emerging market for hybrid and electric vehicles. Key regional markets are North America, South America (primarily Brazil) and Asia Pacific. The Class-8 truck market in North America has experienced steady growth from 2017 through 2019, peaking at 345,000 trucks produced in 2019. Production of Class-8 trucks in 2020 was 38% below the record production in 2019 due to normal cycle dynamics and the impact of COVID-19. The outlook for 2021 is for stronger demand with production up 35% over the prior year driven by improving economic outlook and cyclical growth.
Medium-duty truck production in North America has grown steadily over the last several years before experiencing a 20% year- over-year decline from 2019 to 2020, primarily due to COVID-19. The outlook for 2021 is for a 6% increase in production over the prior year. Outside of North America, production of medium-and heavy-duty trucks in South America had been slowly improving prior to the COVID-19 pandemic as economic conditions had started to stabilize. Pandemic and economic conditions drove a 22% decline in production in 2020. The 2021 outlook for South America is for a 30% increase in production as the region recovers from the impact of the pandemic and the age of existing vehicles drives a replacement cycle for new trucks. In contrast to the rest of the world, Asia Pacific, driven by China, did not experience lower truck production in 2020, but is expected to slow output by 12% in 2021 as production matches lower demand, primarily driven by India where the recovery from the pandemic has been slower than in China.
Off-highway markets - Our off-highway business has a large presence outside of North America, with 64% of its 2020 sales coming from products manufactured in Europe; however, a large portion of these products are utilized in vehicle production outside the region. The construction equipment segment of the off-highway market is closely related to global economic growth and infrastructure investment. This segment has experienced a 5% market contraction, which began in late 2018 and further accelerated due to COVID-19, with 2020 production ending down an additional 10%. The 2021 outlook has production demand in the global construction market rebounding by 5% over the prior year. End-user investment in the mining equipment segment is driven by prices for commodity products produced by underground mining. The global mining equipment market has been mostly stable over the past several years as industry participants have maintained vehicle inventory levels to match commodity output, and this trend is expected to continue in 2021. The agriculture equipment market is the third of our key off-highway segments. Like the underground mining segment, investment in agriculture equipment is primarily driven by prices for farm commodities. From 2018 to 2019, global demand for agriculture equipment fell by 3% due to a slump in commodity prices. As prices have remained low, production in 2020 fell an additional 7%. The outlook for 2021 is for end-market demand to improve by 5% compared to the prior year, as farm subsidies in response to the global pandemic have bolstered the commodity market and is expected to drive the replacement of aging equipment.
Foreign currency - With 52% of our 2020 sales coming from outside the U.S., international currency movements can have a significant effect on our sales and results of operations. The euro zone countries and China accounted for 51% and 10% of our 2020 non-U.S. sales, respectively, while Brazil and India each accounted for 7%. Although sales in South Africa are less than 5% of our non-U.S. sales, the rand has been volatile and significantly impacted sales from time to time. International currencies weakened against the U.S. dollar in 2020, decreasing 2020 sales by $53. A weaker Brazilian real, South African rand and Indian rupee more than offset a stronger euro.
Argentina has experienced significant inflationary pressures the past few years, contributing to significant devaluation of its currency among other economic challenges. Our Argentine operation supports our Light Vehicle operating segment. Our sales in Argentina for 2020 of approximately $78 are 1% of our consolidated sales and our net asset exposure related to Argentina was approximately $21, including $5 of net fixed assets, at December 31, 2020. During the second quarter of 2018, we determined that Argentina's economy met the GAAP definition of a highly inflationary economy. In assessing Argentina's economy as highly inflationary we considered its three-year cumulative inflation rate along with other factors. As a result, effective July 1, 2018, the U.S. dollar is the functional currency for our Argentine operations, rather than the Argentine peso. Beginning July 1, 2018, peso-denominated monetary assets and liabilities are remeasured into U.S. dollars using current Argentine peso exchange rates with resulting translation gains or losses included in results of operations. Nonmonetary assets and liabilities are remeasured into U.S. dollar using historic Argentine peso exchange rates. Reference is made to Note 1 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Commodity costs - The cost of our products may be significantly impacted by changes in raw material commodity prices, the most important to us being those of various grades of steel, aluminum, copper, brass and rare earth materials. The effects of changes in commodity prices are reflected directly in our purchases of commodities and indirectly through our purchases of products such as castings, forgings, bearings, batteries and component parts that include commodities. Most of our major customer agreements provide for the sharing of significant commodity price changes with those customers based on the movement in various published commodity indexes. Where such formal agreements are not present, we have historically been successful implementing price adjustments that largely compensate for the inflationary impact of material costs. Material cost changes will customarily have some impact on our financial results as customer pricing adjustments typically lag commodity price changes. Lower commodity prices increased year-over-year earnings in 2020 by approximately $37, as compared to year-over-year earnings reductions of $30 from higher commodity prices in 2019. Material recovery and other pricing actions decreased year-over-year earnings by $80 and $10 in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Sales, Earnings and Cash Flow Outlook
* Our 2021 outlook does not include our pending acquisition of a portion of the thermal-management business of Modine Manufacturing Company, as the timing of closing the transaction is uncertain.
Adjusted EBITDA and adjusted free cash flow are non-GAAP financial measures. See the Non-GAAP Financial Measures discussion below for definitions of our non-GAAP financial measures and reconciliations to the most directly comparable U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) measures. We have not provided a reconciliation of our adjusted EBITDA outlook to the most comparable GAAP measure of net income. Providing net income guidance is potentially misleading and not practical given the difficulty of projecting event driven transactional and other non-core operating items that are included in net income, including restructuring actions, asset impairments and certain income tax adjustments. The accompanying reconciliations of these non-GAAP measures with the most comparable GAAP measures for the historical periods presented are indicative of the reconciliations that will be prepared upon completion of the periods covered by the non-GAAP guidance.
Our 2021 sales outlook is $8,050 to $8,550, reflecting improving post-pandemic global market demand and $500 of net new business backlog. Based on our current sales and exchange rate outlook for 2021, we expect overall stability in international currencies with a modest benefit to sales. At sales levels in our current outlook for 2021, a 5% movement on the euro would impact our annual sales by approximately $125. A 5% change on the Chinese renminbi, Indian rupee, Brazilian real and Thai baht rates would impact our annual sales in each of those countries by approximately $10 to $20. At our current sales outlook for 2021, we expect full year 2021 adjusted EBITDA to approximate $860 to $960. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is expected to be 11.0%, a 270 basis-point improvement over 2020, reflecting higher margin net new business and the benefit of operational inefficiencies associated with the global COVID-19 pandemic not repeating in 2021, being partially offset by increased investment to support our electrification strategy. In addition, we anticipate higher commodity costs to be largely offset by material recovery and other pricing actions. We expect to generate adjusted free cash flow of approximately $250, or 3.0% of sales for 2021. The benefit of higher year-over-year adjusted EBITDA will be partially offset by an elevated level of capital spending supporting new customer programs, as spending on certain projects was deferred during 2020 in response the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Among our operational and strategic initiatives are increased focus on and investment in product technology - delivering products and technology that are key to bringing solutions to issues of paramount importance to our customers. Our success on this front is measured, in part, by our sales backlog - net new business received that will be launching in the future and adding to our base annual sales. This backlog excludes replacement business and represents incremental sales associated with new programs for which we have received formal customer awards. At December 31, 2020, our sales backlog of net new business for the 2021 through 2022 period was $700. We expect to realize $500 of our sales backlog in 2021, with incremental sales backlog of $200 being realized in 2022. Our sales backlog is evenly balanced between electric-vehicle and traditional ICE-vehicle content.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Summary Consolidated Results of Operations (2020 versus 2019)
Sales - The following table shows changes in our sales by geographic region.
Sales in 2020 were $1,514 lower than in 2019. Weaker international currencies decreased sales by $53, principally due to a weaker Brazilian real, South African rand and Indian rupee, partially offset by a stronger euro. The acquisitions of ODS in last year's first quarter, PEPS in last year's second quarter and Ashwoods in this year's first quarter, generated a year-over-year increase in sales of $125. The organic sales decrease of $1,586, or 18%, resulted from weaker light and medium/heavy truck markets and lower global off-highway demand in January and February 2020 and the rapid dissipation in production volumes across all of our end markets beginning in March 2020 as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic. The impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic on our operations as well as those of our customers, suppliers and the global supply chains in which we participate, was most notable during April 2020, with a measured ramp up in production beginning in May followed by a rapid increase in customer demand through the third quarter. Sales in the fourth quarter of 2020 were $121 higher than the same period of 2019, primarily due to strong customer demand in, and the conversion of sales backlog by, our Light Vehicle operating segment. The conversion of sales backlog contributed $348 on a full-year basis, while pricing actions, including material commodity price and inflationary cost adjustments, reduced sales by $80.
The North America organic sales decrease of 20% was driven principally by weaker light and medium/heavy duty truck production volumes resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the conversion of sales backlog. Full frame light truck production was down 20% during 2020 while production of Class 8 and Classes 5-7 trucks were down 38% and 20%, respectively.
Excluding currency and acquisition effects, sales in Europe were down 19% compared with 2019. With our significant Off-Highway presence in the region, weakening construction/mining and agricultural markets due to the global COVID-19 pandemic were a major factor. Organic sales in this operating segment were down 22% compared with 2019.
Excluding currency effects, sales in South America decreased 15% compared to 2019 primarily due to the global COVID-19 pandemic. Medium/heavy truck production was down 22% and light truck production was down 17% compared to 2019.
Excluding currency and acquisition effects, sales in Asia Pacific decreased about 11% as China's economy showed signs of weakening even before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Light truck and light vehicle engine production were down 9% and 13%, respectively, while medium/heavy truck production was up 12% compared to 2019.
Cost of sales and gross margin - Cost of sales for 2020 decreased $1,004, or 13% when compared to 2019. Cost of sales as a percent of sales in 2020 was 440 basis points higher than in the previous year. Cost of sales attributed to acquisitions was approximately $137. Excluding the effects of acquisitions, cost of sales as a percent of sales was 90.9%, 400 basis points higher than in the previous year. The increase in cost of sales as a percent of sales is attributable to the rapid dissipation of customer demand across all of our end markets primarily during the second quarter of 2020, as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic, followed by a dramatic increase in demand during the third quarter of 2020. During the second quarter of 2020 actions to flex down our cost structure lagged the rapid dissipation of customer demand across all of our end markets, our inability to effectively reduce labor costs in certain countries due to government requirements, as well as our inability to reduce fixed costs including depreciation and rent expense. During the third quarter of 2020 we experienced operational inefficiencies and premium costs associated with taking a number of our plants from being idled just a few months prior to running at full capacity. Partially offsetting the impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic were lower commodity prices which lowered material costs by $37 and continued material cost savings of approximately $75.
Gross margin of $621 for 2020 decreased $510 from 2019. Gross margin as a percent of sales was 8.7% in 2020, 440 basis points lower than in 2019. The decline in margin as a percent of sales was driven principally by the cost of sales factors referenced above.
Selling, general and administrative expenses (SG&A) - SG&A expenses in 2020 were $421 (5.9% of sales) as compared to $508 (5.9% of sales) in 2019. SG&A attributed to acquisitions was $9. The year-over-year decrease of $96 exclusive of acquisitions was primarily due to lower year-over-year incentive compensation as well as lower salaried employee wages, benefits, travel expenses, marketing expenses and professional fees resulting from the execution of cost reduction initiatives in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Amortization of intangibles - Amortization expense was $13 in 2020 and $12 in 2019. The increase in amortization expense is primarily due to higher levels of intangible assets as the result of acquisition activity.
Restructuring charges, net - Restructuring charges of $34 in 2020 were comprised of severance and benefit costs primarily related to headcount reductions across our operations in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic and exit costs related to previously announced actions. Restructuring charges of $29 in 2019 were comprised of severance and benefit costs primarily related to integration of recent acquisitions, headcount reductions across our operations and exit costs related to previously announced actions. See Note 4 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Impairment of goodwill - During the first quarter of 2020, we recorded a $51 goodwill impairment charge. During the fourth quarter of 2019, we wrote off the goodwill recognized as part of a 2016 acquisition. See Note 3 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Pension settlement charges - During 2019, we recorded a $256 settlement charge related to the termination of one of our U.S. defined benefit pension plans and a $3 settlement charge related to the termination of one of our Canadian defined benefit pension plans. See Note 12 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Other income (expense), net - The following table shows the major components of other income (expense), net.
Strategic transaction expenses in 2020 were primarily attributable to the acquisition of ODS and Nordresa and certain other strategic initiatives. Strategic transaction expenses in 2019 were primarily attributable to the acquisition of ODS. We held $16 of convertible notes receivable from our investment in Hyliion Inc. On October 1, 2020, Hyliion Inc. completed its merger with Tortoise Acquisition Corp. The business combination resulted in the combined company being renamed Hyliion Holdings Corp. (Hyliion), with its common stock being listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol HYLN. Effective with the completed merger, our notes receivable were converted into 2,988,229 common shares of HYLN. Our investment in Hyliion will be included in noncurrent marketable securities and carried at fair value with changes in fair value included in net income in future periods. During the first quarter of 2019, we won a legal judgment regarding the methodology used to calculate PIS/COFINS tax on imports into Brazil. During the fourth quarter of 2019, we liquidated a foreign subsidiary. The resulting non-cash gain is attributable to the recognition of accumulated currency translation adjustments. See Note 19 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Loss on extinguishment of debt - On June 19, 2020, in connection with the issuance of our June 2028 Notes, we terminated our $500 bridge facility and wrote off $5 of deferred fees associated with the bridge facility. On December 31, 2020, we fully paid down our Term A Facility. We wrote off $3 of previously deferred financing costs associated with the Term A Facility. During the fourth quarter of 2019, we redeemed $300 of our September 2023 Notes. We incurred redemption premiums of $7 in connection with these repayments and wrote off $2 of previously deferred financing costs associated with the extinguished debt. See Note 14 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Interest income and interest expense - Interest income was $9 in 2020 and $10 in 2019. Interest expense increased from $122 in 2019 to $138 in 2020 due to higher average debt levels in 2020. The increase in average debt levels is primarily attributable to outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Facility during the first half of 2020 and the issuances of $400 of our June 2028 Notes and an additional $100 of our November 2027 Notes in June 2020. Average effective interest rates, inclusive of amortization of debt issuance costs, approximated 5.0% in both 2020 and 2019.
Income tax expense (benefit) - Income taxes were an expense of $58 in 2020 and benefit of $32 in 2019. During 2020, we recognized tax expense of $60 for additional valuation allowances in foreign jurisdictions due to reduced income projections. We also recognized a benefit of $26 for the release of valuation allowance in a subsidiary in Australia, based on recent history of profitability and increased income projections. In conjunction with the completion of the intercompany sale of certain assets to a non-U.S. affiliate, net tax expense of $12 was recorded, including the corresponding foreign derived intangible income benefit. For the year, we also recognized tax benefits of $37 related to tax actions that adjusted federal tax credits. A pre-tax goodwill impairment charge of $51 with an associated income tax benefit of $1 was recorded. During 2019, we recognized a benefit of $22 for the release of valuation allowance in a subsidiary in Brazil based on recent history of profitability and increased income projections. A pre-tax pension settlement charge of $259 was recorded, resulting in income tax expense of $11 and a valuation allowance release of $18. For the year, we also recognized benefits for the release of valuation allowance in the US of $34 based on increased income projections and $30 based on the development of a tax planning strategy related to federal tax credits. Partially offsetting this benefit in the US was $6 of expense related to a US state law change. During the second quarter of 2019, we also recorded tax benefits of $48 related to tax actions that adjusted federal tax credits. See Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
In countries where our history of operating losses does not allow us to satisfy the “more likely than not” criterion for recognition of deferred tax assets, we have generally recognized no income tax on the pre-tax income or losses as valuation allowance adjustments offset the associated tax effects. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we recognized a benefit of $26 for the release of valuation allowance in a subsidiary in Australia. During the third quarter of 2019, we recognized a benefit of $22 for the release of a valuation allowance in a subsidiary in Brazil.
Equity in earnings of affiliates - Net earnings from equity investments was $20 in 2020 and $30 in 2019. Equity in earnings from Dongfeng Dana Axle Co., Ltd. (DDAC) was $15 in 2020 and $18 in 2019. After experiencing significant impacts resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic during the first quarter of 2020, DDAC experienced higher demand levels during the balance of 2020 primarily driven by increased demand for certain medium/heavy vehicles by the Chinese government. Equity in earnings from Bendix Spicer Foundation Brake, LLC (BSFB) was $4 in 2020 and $12 in 2019. The year-over-year decrease in BSFB's earnings is primarily attributable to the global COVID-19 pandemic and the October 1, 2020 sale of our 20% ownership interest in BSFB to Bendix Commercial Vehicle Systems LLC. See Note 22 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Segment Results of Operations (2020 versus 2019)
Light Vehicle
Light Vehicle sales in 2020, exclusive of currency effects, were 15% lower than 2019. Full year 2020 full frame light truck production declined in North America, Europe, South America, and Asia Pacific by 20%, 20%, 17%, and 9%, respectively, compared to 2019. Full frame light truck production rapidly dissipated across all regions beginning in March 2020 as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic. The impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic on our Light Vehicle operations was most notable during April 2020, with a measured ramp up in production beginning in May followed by a rapid increase in customer demand through the third quarter. Light Vehicle sales in the fourth quarter of 2020, exclusive of currency effects, were $135 higher than the fourth quarter of 2019 primary due to the conversion of sales backlog and continued strengthening of customer demand. Net customer pricing and cost recovery actions further decreased year-over-year sales by $49.
Light Vehicle segment EBITDA decreased by $199 in 2020. Lower sales volumes provided a year-over-year headwind of $140 (28.3% decremental margin) as actions to flex down our cost structure during the second quarter of 2020 lagged the rapid dissipation of customer demand resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic. Performance during the third and fourth quarters was negatively impacted by taking a number of our Light Vehicle plants from being idled just a few months prior to running at full capacity. The year-over-year performance-related earnings decline was driven by operational inefficiencies of $86, lower net pricing and material cost recovery of $49 and incremental safety costs of $2 directly related to the global COVID-19 pandemic, including facility sanitization and personal protective equipment. Partially offsetting these performance-related earnings decreases were material cost savings of $32, commodity cost decreases of $26, lower salaried employee wages of $10, certain benefits of the CARES Act of $5, lower incentive compensation of $3 and lower warranty expense of $2.
Commercial Vehicle
Commercial Vehicle sales in 2020, exclusive of currency effects and the impact of acquisitions, were 24% lower than 2019. Declining market conditions coming out of 2019 deteriorated further with the rapid dissipation in customer demand resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic. Full year North America Class 8 production was down 38% and Classes 5-7 production was down 20% from 2019. Year-over-year medium/heavy truck production in Europe and South America were down 30% and 22%, respectively. Asia Pacific was impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic earlier than the other regions, with its most significant year-over-year production decline occurring during the first quarter of 2020. Asia Pacific medium/heavy truck production was up 12% compared to 2019. Net customer pricing and cost recovery actions further decreased year-over-year sales by $12.
Commercial Vehicle segment EBITDA decreased by $102 in 2020. Lower sales volumes provided a year-over-year headwind of $98 (25.9% decremental margin) as actions to flex down our cost structure during the second and third quarters of 2020 lagged the rapid dissipation of customer demand resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic. The year-over-year performance-related earnings improvement was driven by material cost savings of $14, lower salaried employee wages of $6, commodity cost decreases of $3, lower incentive compensation of $2, certain benefits of the CARES Act of $2 and lower warranty expense of $1. Partially offsetting these performance-related earnings increases were lower net customer pricing and cost recovery actions of $12, operational inefficiencies of $7 and incremental safety costs of $3 directly related to the global COVID-19 pandemic, including facility sanitization and personal protective equipment.
Off-Highway
Off-Highway sales in 2020, exclusive of currency effects and the impact of the ODS and Ashwoods acquisitions, were 22% lower than 2019. Already declining global construction/mining and agricultural equipment markets coming out of 2019 deteriorated further with the rapid dissipation of customer demand resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic. Net customer pricing and cost reduction actions further decreased year-over-year sales by $15.
Off-Highway segment EBITDA decreased by $96 in 2020. Lower sales volumes provided a year-over-year headwind of $115 (23.1% decremental margin) as actions to flex down our cost structure lagged the rapid dissipation of customer demand resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic. The year-over-year performance-related earnings decline was driven by operating inefficiencies of $23, lower net pricing and material recovery of $15, incremental safety costs of $4 directly related to the global COVID-19 pandemic, including facility sanitization and personal protective equipment and higher incentive compensation of $1. Partially offsetting these performance-related earnings decreases were material cost savings of $22, commodity cost decreases of $8, lower salaried employee wages of $8, certain benefits of the CARES Act of $1 and lower warranty expense of $1.
Power Technologies
Power Technologies primarily serves the light vehicle market but also sells product to the medium/heavy truck and off-highway markets. Net of currency effects, sales for 2020 were 12% lower than 2020, primarily due to lower market demand resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic. Full year 2020 light vehicle engine production declined in North America, Europe and Asia Pacific by 18%, 22% and 13%, respectively, compared to 2019. Net customer pricing and cost reduction actions further decreased year-over-year sales by $4.
Power Technologies segment EBITDA decreased by $23 in 2020. Lower sales volumes provided a year-over-year headwind of $39 (31.5% decremental margin) as actions to flex down our cost structure lagged the rapid dissipation of customer demand resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic. The year-over-year performance-related earnings increase was driven by operational efficiencies of $9, lower salaried employee wages of $9, material cost savings of $7 and certain benefits of the CARES Act of $1. Partially offsetting these performance-related earnings increases were lower net pricing and material recovery of $4, higher warranty expense of $3, incremental safety costs of $2 directly related to the global COVID-19 pandemic, including facility sanitization and personal protective equipment and higher incentive compensation of $1.
Summary Consolidated Results of Operations (2019 versus 2018)
Sales - The following table shows changes in our sales by geographic region.
Sales in 2019 were $477 higher than in 2018. Weaker international currencies decreased sales by $177, principally due to a weaker euro, Brazilian real, South African rand, Chinese renminbi and Indian rupee. The acquisitions of ODS and SME in the first quarter of 2019, PEPS in the second quarter of 2019, Nordresa in the third quarter of 2019 and TM4 in the second quarter of 2018, net of the divestiture of the Brazil suspension components business in the third quarter of 2018, generated a year- over-year increase in sales of $654. The organic sales increase in North America driven by stronger medium/heavy truck production and the conversion of sale backlog was offset by weaker global construction/mining and agricultural equipment markets and a softening in the Chinese economy. Pricing actions, including material commodity price and inflationary cost recovery, reduced sales by $10.
The North America organic sales increase of 4% was driven principally by stronger medium/heavy truck production volumes and the conversion of sales backlog. Production of Class 8 trucks was up 6% and production of Classes 5-7 was up 2% while full frame light truck production was flat compared to 2018. In addition, realization of light truck sales backlog helped to offset the year-over-year sales volume-related decline attributable to one of our largest light vehicle customer programs for which production continued on the outgoing model, concurrent with production of the new model vehicle, during the first quarter of 2018.
A weaker euro and South African rand were the primary driver of the decreased sales in Europe due to currency effects. Excluding currency and acquisition effects, sales in Europe decreased 3% compared to 2018. Strong market demand in the first half of 2019 in our Off-Highway segment was more than offset by weak demand in the second half of 2019.
A weaker Brazilian real reduced South America sales in 2019. The region overall experienced relatively stable markets, with medium/heavy truck production being flat and light truck production down 3% compared to 2018.
A weaker Chinese renminbi and Indian rupee were the primary drivers of the decreased sales in Asia Pacific due to currency effects. Excluding currency and acquisition effects, sales decreased about 11% as China's economy showed signs of weakening. Light truck, light vehicle engine and medium/heavy truck production were down 4%, 7% and 4% respectively, from 2018.
Cost of sales and gross margin - Cost of sales for 2019 increased $503, or 7% when compared to 2018. Similar to the factors affecting sales, the increase was primarily due to the inclusion of acquired businesses. Cost of sales as a percent of sales in 2019 was 110 basis points higher than in the previous year. Cost of sales attributed to net acquisitions, which included $13 of incremental cost assigned to inventory as part of business combination accounting, was approximately $620. Excluding the effects of acquisitions and divestitures, cost of sales as a percent of sales was 86.2%, 40 basis points higher than in 2018. The increased cost of sales as a percent of sales was largely attributable to higher commodity prices which increased material costs by about $30, an increase in engineering and development cost of $4, higher depreciation expense of $15 and operational inefficiencies and other cost increases. Partially offsetting these higher costs were continued material cost savings of $86, a net benefit of $17 from the monetization of a non-income tax claim, lower start-up and launch costs and lower premium freight.
Gross margin of $1,131 for 2019 decreased $26 from 2018. Gross margin as a percent of sales was 13.1% in 2019, 110 basis points lower than in 2018. The decline in margin as a percent of sales was driven principally by the cost of sales factors referenced above.
Selling, general and administrative expenses (SG&A) - SG&A expenses in 2019 were $508 (5.9% of sales) as compared to $499 (6.1% of sales) in 2018. SG&A attributed to net acquisitions was $33. Excluding the increase associated with net acquisitions, SG&A expenses were 10 basis points lower than the same period of 2018. The year-over-year decrease of $24 exclusive of net acquisitions was primarily due to lower salaries and benefits expenses resulting from the voluntary retirement program and other headcount reduction actions taken in the fourth quarter of 2018.
Amortization of intangibles - The $4 increase in amortization expense in 2019 was attributable to intangible assets obtained through the TM4, ODS, SME, and PEPS acquisitions, partially offset by certain intangible assets becoming fully amortized. See Note 2 and Note 3 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Restructuring charges, net - Restructuring charges of $29 in 2019 were comprised of severance and benefit costs related to integration of recent acquisitions, headcount reductions across our operations and exit costs related to previously announced actions. Restructuring charges of $25 in 2018 were primarily comprised of severance and benefit costs related to a voluntary retirement program in North America, headcount reduction actions in our operations and corporate functions in Brazil and administrative cost reduction initiatives primarily in Europe and North America. In response to continued market recovery in our Off-Highway business in Europe, management re-evaluated the economic conditions of our global Off-Highway business and determined that $7 of the previously approved restructuring actions are no longer economically prudent. See Note 4 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset - During the fourth quarter of 2019, we wrote off the goodwill recognized as part of a 2016 acquisition. During the second quarter of 2018, we wrote off the in-process research and development intangible asset recognized as part of a 2012 acquisition. See Note 3 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Gain on disposal group held for sale - Upon completion of the divestiture of our Brazil suspension components business in the second quarter of 2018, we reversed $3 of the previously recognized $27 pre-tax loss.
Pension settlement charges - During 2019, we recorded a $256 settlement charge related to the termination of one of our U.S. defined benefit pension plans and a $3 settlement charge related to the termination of one of our Canadian defined benefit pension plans. See Note 12 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Other income (expense), net - The following table shows the major components of other income (expense), net.
Strategic transaction expenses in 2019 were primarily attributable to our acquisition of ODS. Strategic transaction expenses in 2018 were primarily attributable to our bid to acquire the driveline business of GKN plc., our acquisition of an ownership interest in TM4, our pending acquisition of ODS and integration costs associated with our acquisitions of BFP and BPT, and were partially offset by a $40 transaction breakup fee associated with the GKN plc. transaction. During the first quarter of 2019, we won a legal judgment regarding the methodology used to calculate PIS/COFINS tax on imports into Brazil. During the fourth quarter of 2019, we liquidated a foreign subsidiary. The resulting non-cash gain is attributable to the recognition of accumulated currency translation adjustments. See Note 19 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Loss on extinguishment of debt - We redeemed $300 of our September 2023 Notes during the fourth quarter of 2019. We incurred redemption premiums of $7 in connection with these repayments and wrote off $2 of previously deferred financing costs associated with the extinguished debt. See Note 14 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Interest income and interest expense - Interest income was $10 in 2019 and $11 in 2018. Interest expense increased from $96 in 2018 to $122 in 2019 primarily due to increased debt levels used to fund recent acquisition activities. Average effective interest rates, inclusive of amortization of debt issuance costs, approximated 5.0% and 5.2% in 2019 and 2018.
Income tax expense - Income taxes were a benefit of $32 in 2019 and an expense of $78 in 2018. During 2019, we recognized a benefit of $22 for the release of valuation allowance in a subsidiary in Brazil based on recent history of profitability and increased income projections. A pre-tax pension settlement charge of $259 was recorded, resulting in income tax expense of $11 and a valuation allowance release of $18. For the year, we also recognized benefits for the release of valuation allowance in the US of $34 based on increased income projections and $30 based on the development of a tax planning strategy related to federal tax credits. Partially offsetting this benefit in the US was $6 of expense related to a US state law change. During the second quarter of 2019, we also recorded tax benefits of $48 related to tax actions that adjusted federal tax credits. During 2018, we recognized a benefit of $44 related to U.S. state law changes and the development and implementation of a tax planning strategy which adjusted federal tax credits, along with federal and state net operating losses and the associated valuation allowances. We also recognized benefits of $11 relating to the reversal of a provision for an uncertain tax position, $5 relating to the release of valuation allowances in the US based on improved income projections and $7 due to permanent reinvestment assertions. Partially offsetting these benefits was $5 of expense to settle outstanding tax matters in a foreign jurisdiction. See Note 18 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Excluding the effects of the items referenced in the preceding paragraph, our effective tax rates were 24% in 2019 and 28% in 2018. These rates vary from the applicable U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to establishment, release and adjustment of valuation allowances in several countries, nondeductible expenses, deemed income, local tax incentives in several countries outside the U.S., different statutory tax rates outside the U.S. and withholding taxes related to repatriations of international earnings.
In countries where our history of operating losses does not allow us to satisfy the "more likely than not" criterion for recognition of deferred tax assets, we have generally recognized no income tax on the pre-tax income or losses as valuation allowance adjustments offset the associated tax effects. During the third quarter of 2019, we recognized a benefit of $22 for the release of a valuation allowance in a subsidiary in Brazil.
Equity in earnings of affiliates - Net earnings from equity investments was $30 in 2019 compared with $24 in 2018. Equity in earnings from BSFB was $12 in 2019 and $7 in 2018. Equity in earnings from DDAC was $18 in 2019 and $15 in 2018. See Note 22 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional information.
Segment Results of Operations (2019 versus 2018)
Light Vehicle
Light Vehicle sales in 2019, exclusive of acquisition and currency effects, were 2% higher than 2018. Conversion of sales backlog was partially offset by lower full frame truck production in Asia Pacific and the year-over-year sales volume-related decline attributable to one of our largest customer programs for which production continued on the outgoing model, concurrent with production of the new model vehicle, during last year's first quarter. Full frame truck production in North America and Europe was flat compared to 2018. Net customer pricing and cost recovery actions resulted in a year-over-year decrease of $13.
Light Vehicle segment EBITDA increased by $40 in 2019. Higher sales volumes provided a year-over-year benefit of $18. The year-over-year performance related earnings improvement was driven by material cost savings of $37 and lower new program start-up and launch-related costs of $16. Lower net pricing and material cost recovery actions of $13, increased engineering spend of $9, higher warranty costs of $2 and operational inefficiencies and other cost increases of $3 reduced performance in 2019.
Commercial Vehicle
Excluding currency effects and the net impact of acquisitions and divestitures, Commercial Vehicle sales increased 2% compared to last year. The volume-related increase was primarily attributable to higher production levels in North America during the first half of 2019 where Class 8 production was up 22% and Classes 5-7 production was up 7% compared to the first half of 2018. During the second half of 2019, North American production volumes declined, with Class 8 production down 9% and Classes 5-7 down 3% compared to the second half of 2018. Similarly the impact of higher 2019 first-half production volumes in Europe and Asia Pacific have been largely offset by declining production volumes in both regions during the second half of 2019. With the improving economy in Brazil, our sales volume in 2019 benefited from year-over-year higher production levels in that country of around 7%. Net customer pricing and cost recovery actions increased year-over-year sales by $7.
Commercial Vehicle segment EBITDA was $8 lower than 2018. Higher sales volumes increased year-over-year earnings by $3. The year-over-year performance related earnings decline was driven by higher commodity costs of $21, increased engineering spend of $2 and operational inefficiencies and other cost increases of $8. Material cost savings of $19, higher net pricing and material cost recovery actions of $7 and net foreign currency transaction gains of $2 provided a partial offset.
Off-Highway
Excluding currency effects, primarily due to a weaker euro, and the impact of the ODS and SME acquisitions, Off-Highway segment sales decreased 2% compared to last year. The construction/mining and agricultural equipment markets were relatively stable during the first half of 2019 but deteriorated rapidly during the second half of 2019. Customer pricing and material cost recovery actions increased year-over-year sales by $5.
Off-Highway segment EBITDA increased by $45 in 2019. Marginally higher market demand through the first half of 2019 was more than offset by rapid market deterioration in the second half of 2019. The $15 performance-related deterioration in 2019 earnings was impacted by higher commodity costs of $6 and operational inefficiencies and other cost increases of $36, partially offset by material cost savings of $22 and customer pricing and material cost recovery actions of $5.
Power Technologies
Power Technologies primarily serves the light vehicle market but also sells product to the medium/heavy truck and off-highway markets. Net of currency effects, sales for 2019 were 4% lower than 2018, primarily due to program roll offs and lower market demand. Light vehicle engine production declined across all regions during 2019. Net customer pricing and material cost recovery actions decreased year-over-year sales by $9.
Power Technologies segment EBITDA decreased $32 compared to 2019. The $15 performance deterioration resulted from higher commodity costs of $2, operational inefficiencies and other cost increases of $4 and lower net pricing and material cost recovery actions of $9.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA
We have defined adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation, amortization, equity grant expense, restructuring expense, non-service cost components of pension and other postretirement benefits (OPEB) costs and other adjustments not related to our core operations (gain/loss on debt extinguishment, pension settlements, divestitures, impairment, etc.). Adjusted EBITDA is a measure of our ability to maintain and continue to invest in our operations and provide shareholder returns. We use adjusted EBITDA in assessing the effectiveness of our business strategies, evaluating and pricing potential acquisitions and as a factor in making incentive compensation decisions. In addition to its use by management, we also believe adjusted EBITDA is a measure widely used by securities analysts, investors and others to evaluate financial performance of our company relative to other Tier 1 automotive suppliers. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered a substitute for earnings before income taxes, net income or other results reported in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net income (loss) to adjusted EBITDA.
*
Other includes stock compensation expense, non-service cost components of pension and OPEB costs, strategic transaction expenses, net of transaction breakup fees and other items. See Note 21 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional details.
Free Cash Flow and Adjusted Free Cash Flow
We have defined free cash flow as cash provided by operating activities less purchases of property, plant and equipment. We have defined adjusted free cash flow as cash provided by operating activities excluding discretionary pension contributions less purchases of property, plant and equipment. We believe these measures are useful to investors in evaluating the operational cash flow of the company inclusive of the spending required to maintain the operations. Free cash flow and adjusted free cash flow are not intended to represent nor be an alternative to the measure of net cash provided by operating activities reported in accordance with GAAP. Free cash flow and adjusted free cash flow may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
The following table reconciles net cash flows provided by operating activities to adjusted free cash flow.
Liquidity
The following table provides a reconciliation of cash and cash equivalents to liquidity, a non-GAAP measure, at December 31, 2020:
Cash deposits are maintained to provide credit enhancement for certain agreements and are reported as part of cash and cash equivalents. For most of these deposits, the cash may be withdrawn if a comparable security is provided in the form of letters of credit. Accordingly, these deposits are not considered to be restricted. Marketable securities are included as a component of liquidity as these investments can be readily liquidated at our discretion. We had availability of $979 at December 31, 2020 under the Revolving Facility after deducting $21 of outstanding letters of credit.
The components of our December 31, 2020 consolidated cash balance were as follows:
A portion of the non-U.S. cash and cash equivalents is utilized for working capital and other operating purposes. Several countries have local regulatory requirements that restrict the ability of our operations to repatriate this cash. Beyond these restrictions, there are practical limitations on repatriation of cash from certain subsidiaries because of the resulting tax withholdings and subsidiary by-law restrictions which could limit our ability to access cash and other assets.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic we have taken controlled and measured actions to preserve liquidity including but not limited to flexing our cost structure, reducing capital spending and investments in research and development activities where and when appropriate, taking advantage of various government programs and subsidies including certain provisions of the CARES Act, temporarily suspending the declaration and payment of dividends to common shareholders and temporarily suspending the repurchase of common stock under our existing common stock share repurchase program. During June 2020, we completed the sale of $400 in senior unsecured notes due June 15, 2028 (June 2028 Notes) as well as a $100 add on to our senior unsecured notes due November 15, 2027 (November 2027 Notes).
On April 16, 2020, we amended certain provisions of our credit and guaranty agreement including gradually increasing the first lien net leverage ratio from a maximum of 2.00 to 1.00 to a maximum of 4.00 to 1.00 for the quarter ending December 31, 2020 and then, starting with the quarter ending December 31, 2021, decrease the ratio quarterly until it returns to its prior level of 2.00 to 1.00 for and after the quarter ending September 30, 2022, unless Dana, in its sole discretion, elects to return the first lien net leverage ratio to its prior level of 2.00 to 1.00 earlier than such date. We also amended certain restrictive covenants to provide additional limitations on incurring additional liens, taking on additional debt, paying dividends, entering into certain transactions with affiliates, making certain investments and disposing of certain assets until December 31, 2021, unless Dana, in its sole discretion, elects to return the first lien net leverage ratio to its prior level prior to December 31, 2021.
While varied, the markets in which participate generally saw marked improvement during the third and fourth quarters of 2020, returning to near pre-pandemic levels. Based on our strengthening operating results and improved adjusted free cash flow generation, we fully paid down our Term A Facility in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 and elected to return the maximum first lien net leverage ratio to its prior level of 2.00 to 1.00 in December 2020.
At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants of our financing agreements. Under the Term B Facility, the Revolving Facility and our senior notes, we are required to comply with certain incurrence-based covenants customary for facilities of these types. The incurrence-based covenants in the Term B Facility and the Revolving Facility permit us to, among other things, (i) issue foreign subsidiary indebtedness, (ii) incur general secured indebtedness subject to a pro forma first lien net leverage ratio not to exceed 1.50:1.00 in the case of first lien debt and a pro forma secured net leverage ratio of 2.50:1.00 in the case of other secured debt and (iii) incur additional unsecured debt subject to a pro forma total net leverage ratio not to exceed 3.50:1.00, tested at the time of incurrence. We may also make dividend payments in respect of our common stock as well as certain investments and acquisitions subject to a pro forma total net leverage ratio of 2.75:1.00. In addition, the Revolving Facility is subject to a financial covenant requiring us to maintain a first lien net leverage ratio not to exceed 2.00:1.00. The indentures governing the senior notes include other incurrence-based covenants that may subject us to additional specified limitations.
From time to time, depending upon market, pricing and other conditions, as well as our cash balances and liquidity, we may seek to acquire our senior notes or other indebtedness or our common stock through open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, tender offers, exchange offers or otherwise, upon such terms and at such prices as we may determine (or as may be provided for in the indentures governing the notes), for cash, securities or other consideration. There can be no assurance that we will pursue any such transactions in the future, as the pursuit of any alternative will depend upon numerous factors such as market conditions, our financial performance and the limitations applicable to such transactions under our financing and governance documents.
The principal sources of liquidity available for our future cash requirements are expected to be (i) cash flows from operations, (ii) cash and cash equivalents on hand and (iii) borrowings from our Revolving Facility. We believe that our overall liquidity and operating cash flow will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for capital expenditures, working capital, debt obligations and other commitments during the next twelve months. While uncertainty surrounding the current economic environment could adversely impact our business, based on our current financial position, we believe it is unlikely that any such effects would preclude us from maintaining sufficient liquidity.
Cash Flow
The table above summarizes our consolidated statement of cash flows.
Operating activities - Exclusive of working capital, other cash provided by operations was $339 during 2020 compared to $654 during 2019 and $681 during 2018. The decrease in 2020 is primarily attributable to lower operating earnings, as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic, and higher year-over-year cash paid for interest of $12 due to increased debt levels, partially offset by lower year-over-year pension contributions of $40, cash paid for income taxes of $27, cash paid for restructuring of $21 and cash paid for strategic transaction expenses of $21. The decrease in 2019 is principally due to the $61 of discretionary pension contributions, higher year-over-year cash paid for interest of $27, cash paid for strategic transaction expenses of $30 and cash paid for restructuring of $19, partially offset by higher operating earnings and lower year-over-year cash paid for income taxes of $20.
Working capital provided cash of $47 in 2020 and used cash of $17 in 2019 and $113 in 2018. Higher levels of receivables used cash of $66 in 2020 while lower levels of receivables generated cash of $135 in 2019. The cash used for receivables in 2020 is reflective of higher year-over-year fourth quarter sales resulting from stronger market demand. The cash generated from receivables in 2019 is reflective of lower year-over-year fourth quarter sales resulting from lower market demand. Lower inventories generated cash of $69 in 2020 and $35 in 2019 while higher inventory levels consumed cash of $110 in 2018. During the fourth quarter of 2020 we continued to closely monitor inventory levels across our facilities, as the recovery from the global COVID-19 pandemic has varied by end market. Inventory levels began to decline at the end of 2019 in response to lower market demand. Increases in accounts payable and other net liabilities provided cash of $44 in 2020 while decreases in accounts payable and other net liabilities used cash of $187 in 2019. Increases in accounts payable and other liabilities provided cash of $110 in 2018. Cash generated by accounts payable and other net liabilities in 2020 is primarily attributable to negotiating temporary extensions of payment terms with certain suppliers and service providers in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic. Cash used by accounts payable and other net liabilities in 2019 is primarily attributable to lower levels of purchasing during the fourth quarter of 2019 resulting from lower market demand, lower year-over-year accruals for professional service fees and strategic transaction expenses and the payment of higher incentive compensation accrued in 2018.
Investing activities - Expenditures for property plant and equipment were $326, $426 and $325 in 2020, 2019 and 2018. Capital spending increased in 2019 in support of new business sales backlog and for needed improvements at several ODS facilities. During 2020, capital spending was delayed where and when appropriate in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic. During 2020, we paid $8 to acquire Curtis' 35.4% ownership interest in Ashwoods. The acquisition of Curtis' interest in Ashwoods, along with our existing ownership interest in Ashwoods, provided us with a controlling financial interest in Ashwoods. During 2019, we paid $545, net of cash and restricted cash acquired, to purchase ODS, we paid $61 to acquire SME, we paid $48, net of cash acquired, to purchase PEPS and we paid $10 to acquire Nordresa. During 2019, we paid $21 to settle the undesignated Swiss franc notional deal contingent forward related to the ODS acquisition. In 2018, we paid $125 to acquire a 55% ownership interest in TM4 and, pursuant to our purchase and sale agreement for the Brevini Fluid Power S.p.A. (BFP) and Brevini Power Transmission S.p.A. (BPT) acquisitions in 2017, we made a net payment of $20 to complete a required purchase of real estate and settle purchase price adjustment amounts owed by the seller. During 2020, we sold our 20% ownership interest in Bendix Spicer Foundation Brake, LLC for $50, consisting of $21 in cash, a note receivable of $25 and deferred proceeds of $4. During 2018, we completed the sale of our Brazil suspension components business resulting in a net cash outflow of $6, as the cash transferred to the buyer in the transaction exceeded the proceeds received from the buyer. During all three years, purchases of marketable securities were largely funded by proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities.
Financing activities - During 2020, we completed the issuance of $400 of our June 2028 Notes and the issuance of an additional $100 of our November 2027 Notes, paying financing costs of $8. During 2020, we entered into a $500 bridge facility, paying financing costs of $5. We subsequently terminated the bridge facility. During 2020 we fully paid down the Term A Facility, making principle payments of $474. During 2019, we entered into an amended credit and guaranty agreement comprised of a $500 Term A Facility, a $450 Term B Facility and a $1,000 Revolving Facility. The Term A Facility was an expansion of our existing $275 term facility. We drew the $225 available under the Term A Facility and the $450 available under the Term B Facility. The proceeds from the Term Facilities were used to acquire ODS and pay for related integration activities. We paid financing costs of $16 to amend the credit and guaranty agreement. During 2019, we made combined principle payments of $117 on the Term Facilities. Also during 2019, we completed the issuances of $300 of our November 2027 Notes, paying financing cost of $4. We used the proceeds of the November 2027 Notes issuance to redeem all $300 of our September 2023 Notes, paying a redemption premium of $7. During 2019, we broadened our relationship with Hydro-Québec, with Hydro-Québec acquiring an indirect 45% redeemable noncontrolling interest in SME and increasing its existing indirect 22.5% noncontrolling interest in PEPS to an indirect 45% redeemable noncontrolling interest. We received $53 of cash at closing. During 2020, Hydro-Québec paid us $7 to acquire an indirect 45% redeemable noncontrolling interest in Ashwoods. During 2018, we paid $43 to acquire Intrafind S.p.A.'s (formerly Brevini Group S.p.A.) remaining 20% ownership interests in BFP and BPT. Also during 2018, Yulon Motor Co., Ltd. (Yulon) paid $22 to acquire a direct ownership interest in two of our consolidated operating subsidiaries. Yulon's ownership interest in the two consolidated operating subsidiaries did not change as a result of the transactions, as it previously owned the same percentages indirectly through a series of consolidated holding companies. The $22, less withholding taxes, was returned to Yulon in the form of a dividend in 2018. During 2020 we sold a portion of our ownership interest in ROC-Spicer, Ltd. (ROC-Spicer) to China Motor Corporation, reducing our ownership interest in ROC-Spicer to 50%. In conjunction with the decrease in our ownership interest, the ROC-Spicer shareholders agreement was amended, eliminating our controlling financial interest in ROC-Spicer. Upon our loss of control, we deconsolidated ROC-Spicer, including $14 of cash and cash equivalents. We used cash of $25 to repurchase common shares under our share repurchase program in both 2019 and 2018. We used $15, $58 and $58 for dividend payments to common stockholders in 2020, 2019 and 2018. During the second quarter of 2020, we temporarily suspended the declaration and payment of dividends to common stockholders and temporarily suspended the repurchase of common stock under our existing common stock repurchase program in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic. Distributions to noncontrolling interests totaled $11, $19 and $42 in 2020, 2019 and 2018. Distributions to noncontrolling interest in 2018 includes the dividend to Yulon discussed above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In connection with the divestiture of our Structural Products business in 2010, leases covering three U.S. facilities were assigned to a U.S. affiliate of the new owner, Metalsa S.A. de C.V. (Metalsa). Under the terms of the sale agreement, we guarantee the affiliate’s performance under the leases, which run through June 2025, including approximately $6 of annual payments. In the event of a required payment by Dana as guarantor, we are entitled to pursue full recovery from Metalsa of the amounts paid under the guarantee and to take possession of the leased property.
Contractual Obligations
We are obligated to make future cash payments in fixed amounts under various agreements. The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
______________________________________________________
Notes:
(1)
Principal payments on long-term debt.
(2)
Interest payments are based on long-term debt in place at December 31, 2020 and the interest rates applicable to such obligations.
(3)
Operating lease obligations, including interest, related to real estate, manufacturing and material handling equipment, vehicles and other assets.
(4)
Finance lease obligations, including interest, related to real estate and manufacturing and material handling equipment.
(5)
Unconditional purchase obligations are comprised of commitments for the procurement of fixed assets, the purchase of raw materials and the fulfillment of other contractual obligations.
(6)
This amount represents estimated 2021 minimum required contributions to our global defined benefit pension plans. We have not estimated pension contributions beyond 2021 due to the significant impact that return on plan assets and changes in discount rates might have on such amounts.
(7)
This amount represents estimated payments under our retiree health care programs. Obligations under the retiree health care programs are not fixed commitments and will vary depending on various factors, including the level of participant utilization and inflation. Our estimates of the payments to be made in the future consider recent payment trends and certain of our actuarial assumptions.
(8)
We are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of payments related to uncertain tax positions because the timing of settlement is uncertain. The above table does not reflect unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2020 of $104. See Note 18 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional discussion.
At December 31, 2020, we maintained cash balances of $3 on deposit with financial institutions primarily to support property insurance policy deductibles, certain employee retirement obligations and specific government approved environmental remediation efforts.
Contingencies
For a summary of litigation and other contingencies, see Note 16 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8. Based on information available to us at the present time, we do not believe that any liabilities beyond the amounts already accrued that may result from these contingencies will have a material adverse effect on our liquidity, financial condition or results of operations.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to use estimates and make judgments and assumptions about future events that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and the related disclosures. Considerable judgment is often involved in making these determinations. Critical estimates are those that require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments in the preparation of the financial statements and the accompanying notes. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on a regular basis. We believe our assumptions and estimates are reasonable and appropriate. However, the use of different assumptions could result in significantly different results and actual results could differ from those estimates. The following discussion of accounting estimates is intended to supplement the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies presented as Note 1 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Income taxes - Accounting for income taxes is complex, in part because we conduct business globally and therefore file income tax returns in numerous tax jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining the income tax provision, uncertain tax positions, deferred tax assets and liabilities and the valuation allowances recorded against our net deferred tax assets. A valuation allowance is provided when, in our judgment based upon available information, it is more likely than not that a portion of such deferred tax assets will not be realized. To make this assessment, we consider the historical and projected future taxable income or loss by tax jurisdiction. We consider all components of comprehensive income and weigh the positive and negative evidence, putting greater reliance on objectively verifiable historical evidence than on projections of future profitability that are dependent on actions that have not taken place as of the assessment date. We also consider changes to historical profitability of actions that occurred through the date of assessment and objectively verifiable effects of material forecasted events that would have a sustained effect on future profitability, as well as the effect on historical profits of nonrecurring events. We also incorporate the changes to historical and prospective income from tax planning strategies expected to be implemented.
In the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax determination is less than certain. We are regularly under audit by the various applicable tax authorities. Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, we believe that we have appropriate support for the positions taken on our tax returns and that our annual tax provisions include amounts sufficient to pay assessments, if any, upon final determination by the taxing authorities. Nonetheless, the amounts ultimately paid, if any, upon resolution of the issues raised by the taxing authorities may differ materially from the amounts accrued for each year. See additional discussion of our deferred tax assets and liabilities in Note 18 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Retiree benefits - Accounting for pension benefits and other postretirement benefits (OPEB) involves estimating the cost of benefits to be provided well into the future and attributing that cost to the time period each employee works. These plan expenses and obligations are dependent on assumptions developed by us in consultation with our outside advisers such as actuaries and other consultants and are generally calculated independently of funding requirements. The assumptions used, including inflation, discount rates, investment returns, life expectancies, turnover rates, retirement rates, future compensation levels and health care cost trend rates, have a significant impact on plan expenses and obligations. These assumptions are regularly reviewed and modified when appropriate based on historical experience, current trends and future outlook. Changes in one or more of the underlying assumptions could result in a material impact to our consolidated financial statements in any given period. If actual experience differs from expectations, our financial position and results of operations in future periods could be affected.
Mortality rates are based in part on the company's plan experience and actuarial estimates. The inflation assumption is based on an evaluation of external market indicators, while retirement and turnover rates are based primarily on actual plan experience. Health care cost trend rates are developed based on our actual historical claims experience, the near-term outlook and an assessment of likely long-term trends. For our largest plans, discount rates are based upon the construction of a yield curve which is developed based on a subset of high-quality fixed-income investments (those with yields between the 40th and 90th percentiles). The projected cash flows are matched to this yield curve and a present value developed which is then calibrated to develop a single equivalent discount rate. Pension benefits are funded through deposits with trustees that satisfy, at a minimum, the applicable funding regulations. For our largest defined benefit pension plans, expected investment rates of return are based on input from the plans’ investment advisers and actuary regarding our expected investment portfolio mix, historical rates of return on those assets, projected future asset class returns, the impact of active management and long-term market conditions and inflation expectations. We believe that the long-term asset allocation on average will approximate the targeted allocation and we regularly review the actual asset allocation to periodically re-balance the investments to the targeted allocation when appropriate. OPEB and the majority of our non-U.S. pension benefits are funded as they become due.
Actuarial gains or losses may result from changes in assumptions or when actual experience is different from that which was expected. Under the applicable standards, those gains and losses are not required to be immediately recognized in our results of operations as income or expense, but instead are deferred as part of AOCI and amortized into our results of operations over future periods.
U.S. retirement plans - Our U.S. defined benefit pension plans comprise 65% of our consolidated defined benefit pension obligations at December 31, 2020. These plans are frozen and no service-related costs are being incurred. Changes in our net obligations are principally attributable to changing discount rates and the performance of plan assets. In October 2017, upon authorization by the Dana Board of Directors, we commenced the process of terminating one of our U.S. defined benefit pension plans. During the second quarter of 2019, payments were made from plan assets to those plan participants that elected to take the lump-sum payout option. In June 2019, we entered into (a) a definitive commitment agreement by and among Dana, Athene Annuity and Life Company (Athene) and State Street Global Advisors, as independent fiduciary to the plan, and (b) a definitive commitment agreement by and among Dana, Companion Life Insurance Company (Companion) and State Street Global Advisors, as independent fiduciary to the plan. Pursuant to the definitive commitment agreements, the plan purchased group annuity contracts that irrevocably transferred to the insurance companies the remaining future pension benefit obligations of the plan. Plan participant’s benefits are unchanged as a result of the termination. We contributed $59 to the plan prior to the purchase of the group annuity contracts. The purchase of group annuity contracts was then funded directly by the assets of the plan in June 2019. By irrevocably transferring the obligations to Athene and Companion, we reduced our unfunded pension obligation by approximately $165 and recognized a pre-tax pension settlement charge of $256 in 2019.
Rising discount rates decrease the present value of future pension obligations - a 25 basis point increase in the discount rate would decrease our U.S. pension liability by about $20. As indicated above, when establishing the expected long-term rate of return on our U.S. pension plan assets, we consider historical performance and forward looking return estimates reflective of our portfolio mix and investment strategy. Based on the most recent analysis of projected portfolio returns, we concluded that the use of a 3.5% expected return in 2021 is appropriate for our U.S. pension plans. See Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for information about the investing and allocation objectives related to our U.S. pension plan assets.
We elected to use the Society of Actuaries (SOA) MP-2020 Mortality Improvement Scale. This update from the plan-specific mortality tables used in prior years did not have a material effect on our pension obligations.
We use a full yield curve approach to estimate the service (where applicable) and interest components of the annual cost of our pension and other postretirement benefit plans. This method estimates interest and service expense using the specific spot rates, from the yield curve, that relate to projected cash flows. We believe this method is a more precise measurement of interest and service costs by improving the correlation between the projected cash flows and the corresponding interest rates. The determination of the projected benefit obligation at year end is unchanged.
At December 31, 2020, we have $142 of unrecognized losses relating to our U.S. pension plans. Actuarial gains and losses, which are primarily the result of changes in the discount rate and other assumptions and differences between actual and expected asset returns, are deferred in AOCI and amortized to expense following the corridor approach. We use the average remaining service period of active participants unless almost all of the plan’s participants are inactive, in which case we use the average remaining life expectancy of inactive participants.
Based on the current funded status of our U.S. plans, we do not expect to make any contributions during 2021.
See Note 12 of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 for additional discussion of our pension and OPEB obligations.
Acquisitions - From time to time, we make strategic acquisitions that have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations or financial position. We allocate the purchase price of acquired businesses to the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and any redeemable noncontrolling interests or noncontrolling interests based upon their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. We determine the estimated fair values using information available to us and engage independent third-party valuation specialists when necessary. Estimating fair values can be complex and subject to significant business judgment. We believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based, in part, on historical experience and information obtained from management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from product sales, customer contracts and acquired technologies, and discount rates. The discount rates used to discount expected future cash flows to present value are typically derived from a weighted-average cost of capital analysis and adjusted to reflect inherent risks. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that could affect either the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results. Generally, we have, if necessary, up to one year from the acquisition date to finalize our estimates of acquisition date fair values.
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets - Our goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually as of October 31 for all of our reporting units, and more frequently if events or circumstances warrant such a review. We make significant assumptions and estimates about the extent and timing of future cash flows, including revenue growth rates, projected gross margins, discount rates, terminal growth rates, and exit earnings multiples. The cash flows are estimated over a significant future period of time, which makes those estimates and assumptions subject to a high degree of uncertainty. Our utilization of market valuation models requires us to make certain assumptions and estimates regarding the applicability of those models to our assets and businesses. We use our internal forecasts, which we update quarterly, to make our cash flow projections. These forecasts are based on our knowledge of our customers’ production forecasts, our assessment of market growth rates, net new business, material and labor cost estimates, cost recovery agreements with customers and our estimate of savings expected from our restructuring activities.
The most likely factors that would significantly impact our forecasts are changes in customer production levels and loss of significant portions of our business. We believe that the assumptions and estimates used in the assessment of the goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets as of October 31, 2020 were reasonable.
Long-lived assets with definite lives - We perform impairment assessments on our property, plant and equipment and our definite-lived intangible assets whenever events and circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of the assets may not be recoverable. When indications are present, we compare the estimated future undiscounted net cash flows of the operations to which the assets relate to the carrying amounts of such assets. We utilize the cash flow projections discussed above for property, plant and equipment and amortizable intangibles. We group the assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities and evaluate the asset group against the undiscounted future cash flows using the life of the primary assets. If the carrying amounts of the long-lived assets are not recoverable from future cash flows and exceed their fair value, an impairment loss is recognized to reduce the carrying amounts of the long-lived assets to their fair value. Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flows, third-party appraisals or other methods that provide appropriate estimates of value. Determining whether a triggering event has occurred, performing the impairment analysis and estimating the fair value of the assets require numerous assumptions and a considerable amount of management judgment.
Investments in affiliates - We had aggregate investments in affiliates of $152 at December 31, 2020 and $182 at December 31, 2019. We monitor our investments in affiliates for indicators of other-than-temporary declines in value on an ongoing basis in accordance with GAAP. If we determine that an other-than-temporary decline in value has occurred, we recognize an impairment loss, which is measured as the difference between the recorded carrying value and the fair value of the investment. Fair value is generally determined using the discounted cash flows (an income approach) or guideline public company (a market approach) methods.
Warranty - Costs related to product warranty obligations are estimated and accrued at the time of sale with a charge against cost of sales. Warranty accruals are evaluated and adjusted as appropriate based on occurrences giving rise to potential warranty exposure and associated experience. Warranty accruals and adjustments require significant judgment, including a determination of our involvement in the matter giving rise to the potential warranty issue or claim, our contractual requirements, estimates of units requiring repair and estimates of repair costs. If actual experience differs from expectations, our financial position and results of operations in future periods could be affected.
Contingency reserves - We have numerous other loss exposures, such as product liability and warranty claims and matters involving litigation. Establishing loss reserves for these matters requires the use of estimates and judgment regarding risk of exposure and ultimate liability. Product liability and warranty claims are generally estimated based on historical experience and the estimated costs associated with specific events giving rise to potential field campaigns or recalls. In the case of legal contingencies, estimates are made of the likely outcome of legal proceedings and potential exposure where reasonably determinable based on the information presently known to us. New information and other developments in these matters could materially affect our recorded liabilities.