ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The Company's actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth below under the heading “Forward Looking Statements” and in Item 1A of this report under the heading “Risk Factors.”
Fiscal Year 2020 Overview
The Company is a global developer and producer of sustainable natural ingredients from edible and inedible bio-nutrients, creating a wide range of ingredients and customized specialty solutions for customers in the pharmaceutical, food, pet food, feed, industrial, fuel, bioenergy and fertilizer industries. With operations on five continents, the Company collects and transforms all aspects of animal by-product streams into useable and specialty ingredients, such as collagen, edible fats, feed-grade fats, animal proteins and meals, plasma, pet food ingredients, organic fertilizers, yellow grease, fuel feedstocks, green energy, natural casings and hides. The Company also recovers and converts recycled oils (used cooking oil and animal fats) into valuable feed and collects and processes residual bakery products into feed ingredients. In addition, the Company provides environmental services, such as grease trap collection and disposal services to food service establishments. The Company sells its products domestically and internationally and operates within three industry segments: Feed Ingredients, Food Ingredients and Fuel Ingredients.
The Feed Ingredients operating segment includes the Company's global activities related to (i) the collection and processing of beef, poultry and pork animal by-products in North America and Europe into non-food grade oils and protein meals, (ii) the collection and processing of bakery residuals in North America into Cookie Meal®, which is predominantly used in poultry and swine rations, (iii) the collection and processing of used cooking oil in North America into non-food grade fats, (iv) the collection and processing of porcine and bovine blood in China, Europe, North America and Australia into blood plasma powder and hemoglobin, (v) the processing of selected portions of slaughtered animals into a variety of meat products for use in pet food in Europe and North America, (vi) the processing of cattle hides and hog skins in North America, (vii) the production of organic fertilizers using protein produced from the Company’s animal by-products processing activities in North America and Europe, and (viii) the rearing and processing of black soldier fly larvae into specialty proteins for use in animal feed and pet food in North America; and (ix) the provision of grease trap services to food service establishments in North America. Non-food grade oils and fats produced and marketed by the Company are principally sold to third parties to be used as ingredients in animal feed and pet food, as an ingredient for the production of biodiesel and renewable diesel, or to the oleo-chemical industry to be used as an ingredient in a wide variety of industrial applications. Protein meals, blood plasma powder and hemoglobin produced and marketed by the Company are sold to third parties to be used as ingredients in animal feed, pet food and aquaculture.
The Food Ingredients operating segment includes the Company's global activities related to (i) the purchase and processing of beef and pork bone chips, beef hides, pig skins, and fish skins into collagen in Europe, China, South America and North America, (ii) the collection and processing of porcine and bovine intestines into natural casings in Europe, China and North America, (iii) the extraction and processing of porcine mucosa into crude heparin in Europe, (iv) the collection and refining of animal fat into food grade fat in Europe, and (v) the processing of bones to bone chips for the collagen industry and bone ash in Europe. Collagens produced and marketed by the Company are sold to third parties to be used as ingredients in the pharmaceutical, nutraceutical, food, pet food and technical (e.g., photographic) industries. Natural casings produced and marketed by the Company are sold to third parties to be used as an ingredient in the production of sausages and other similar food products.
The Fuel Ingredients operating segment includes the Company's global activities related to (i) the Company’s share of the results of its equity investment in Diamond Green Diesel Holdings LLC, a joint venture with Valero Energy Corporation (“Valero”) to convert animal fats, recycled greases, used cooking oil, inedible corn oil, soybean oil, or other feedstocks that become economically and commercially viable into renewable diesel (the “DGD Joint Venture”) as described in Note 2 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements for the period ended January 2, 2021 included herein, (ii) the conversion of organic sludge and food waste into biogas in Europe, (iii) the collection and conversion of fallen stock and certain animal by-products pursuant to applicable E.U. regulations into low-grade energy sources to be used in industrial applications, and (iv) the processing of manure into natural bio-phosphate in Europe.
Corporate Activities principally includes unallocated corporate overhead expenses, acquisition-related expenses, interest expense net of interest income, and other non-operating income and expenses.
Observations on the Effects of COVID-19
In January 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) declared the coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”) a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. On February 28, 2020, the WHO raised its assessment of the COVID-19 threat from high to very high at a global level due to the continued increase in the number of cases and affected countries, and on March 11, 2020, the WHO characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. Since then, various federal, state and local government-imposed movement restrictions and initiatives have been implemented worldwide to reduce the global transmission of COVID-19, including reduced or eliminated food services, the promotion of social distancing and the adoption of remote working policies.
To date, these restrictions have not had a material impact on the Company’s operations, as the Company operates in industries that are deemed “critical” and “essential” under the rules imposing these restrictions; however, the Company did incur approximately $7.5 million of COVID-19 related charges globally in fiscal year 2020. The Company has implemented operational guidelines throughout the Company's organization consistent with the applicable governmental and regulatory policies in the geographies the Company operates intended to protect the Company's employees and prevent the spread of the virus in the Company's workplace, and to date, all of the Company's facilities are operational. The Company believes the severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain and such uncertainty will likely continue. Among the items that could have a significant impact on the Company's future results is a reduction in the Company's raw material supply due to disruptions in the operations of the Company's third-party suppliers. Accordingly, while to date the Company has experienced no material negative effects on the Company's business and results of operations as a result of the current COVID-19 outbreak, the situation remains dynamic and subject to rapid and possibly material change, including but not limited to changes that may materially affect the operations of the Company's supply chain partners and finished product customers, which ultimately could result in material negative effects on the Company's business and results of operations. Additionally, the Company’s raw material supplies are globally diverse. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company experienced various disruptions in raw material supplies and sales of its specialty collagens and gelatins, both of which returned to more normalized levels during the third quarter of 2020. However, it is possible that COVID-19 might cause similar disruptions to the Company's business and operations in the future.
DGD has also implemented operational guidelines in its organization, and to date, COVID-19 has not had a material impact on DGD’s operations. We expect that biofuel regulations and mandates will continue supporting renewable diesel demand; however, a prolonged or significant decline in overall fuel demand could negatively impact the sales and profitability of DGD’s business.
The extent to which COVID-19 impacts the Company’s and DGD's results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and any actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, among others. For additional information regarding the risks associated with COVID-19, see the important information in Item 1A. Risk Factors, under the caption “Pandemics, epidemics or disease outbreaks, such as the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”), may disrupt our business, including, among other things, our supply chain and production processes, each of which could materially affect our operations, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations.”
Operating Performance Indicators
The Company monitors the performance of its business segments using key financial metrics such as results of operations, non-GAAP measurements (Adjusted EBITDA), segment operating income, raw material processed, gross margin percentage, foreign currency translation, and corporate activities. The Company’s operating results can vary significantly due to changes in factors such as the fluctuation in energy prices, weather conditions, crop harvests, government policies and programs, changes in global demand, changes in standards of living, protein consumption, and global production of competing ingredients. Due to these unpredictable factors that are beyond the control of the Company, forward-looking financial or operational estimates are not provided. The Company is exposed to certain risks associated with a business that is influenced by agricultural-based commodities. These risks are further described in Item 1A of this report under the heading “Risk Factors.”
The Company’s Feed Ingredients segment animal by-products, bakery residuals, used cooking oil recovery, and blood operations are each influenced by prices for agricultural-based alternative ingredients such as corn oil, soybean oil, soybean meal, and palm oil. In these operations, the costs of the Company's raw materials change with, or in certain cases are indexed to, the selling price or the anticipated selling price of the finished goods produced from the acquired raw materials and/or in some cases, the price spread between various types of finished products. The Company believes that this methodology of procuring raw materials generally establishes a relatively stable gross margin upon the acquisition of the raw material. Although the costs of raw materials for the Feed Ingredients segment are generally based upon actual or anticipated finished goods selling
prices, rapid and material changes in finished goods prices, including competing agricultural-based alternative ingredients, generally have an immediate and often times, material impact on the Company’s gross margin and profitability resulting from the brief lapse of time between the procurement of the raw materials and the sale of the finished goods. In addition, the volume of raw material volume acquired, which has a direct impact on the amount of finished goods produced, can also have a material effect on the gross margin reported, as the Company has a substantial amount of fixed operating costs.
The Company’s Food Ingredients segment collagen and natural casings products are influenced by other competing ingredients including plant-based and synthetic hydrocolloids and artificial casings. In the collagen operation, the cost of the Company's animal-based raw material moves in relationship to the selling price of the finished goods. The processing time for the Food Ingredients segment collagen and casings is generally 30 to 60 days, which is substantially longer than the Company's Feed Ingredients segment animal by-products operations. Consequently, the Company’s gross margin and profitability in this segment can be influenced by the movement of finished goods prices from the time the raw materials were procured until the finished goods are sold.
The Company's Fuel Ingredients segment converts fats into renewable diesel, organic sludge and food waste into biogas, and fallen stock into low-grade energy sources. The Company's gross margin and profitability in this segment are impacted by world energy prices for oil, electricity, natural gas and governmental subsidies.
The reporting currency for the Company's financial statements is the U.S. dollar. The Company operates in over 15 countries and therefore, certain of the Company's assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses are denominated in functional currencies other than the U.S. dollar, primarily in the Euro, Brazilian real, Chinese renminbi, Canadian dollar and Polish zloty. To prepare the Company's consolidated financial statements, assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses must be translated into U.S. dollars at the applicable exchange rate. As a result, increases or decreases in the value of the U.S. dollar against these other currencies will affect the amount of these items recorded in the Company's consolidated financial statements, even if their value has not changed in the functional currency. This could have a significant impact on the Company's results, if such increase or decrease in the value of the U.S. dollar relative to these other currencies is substantial.
In 2019, the Company continued to evaluate operational developments and the impact of anticipated significant expansion of the DGD Joint Venture. This evaluation was impactful to the consideration of how the Company most appropriately reflects its share of equity income from the DGD Joint Venture. Based on the Company's analysis, it was determined that the DGD Joint Venture has evolved into an integral and integrated part of the Company's ongoing operations. The Company determined this justifies a more meaningful and transparent presentation of equity in net income of the DGD Joint Venture as a component of the Company's operating income.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended January 2, 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended December 28, 2019
Fiscal 2020 includes an additional week of operations which occurs every five to six years. In Fiscal 2020 the additional week occurred in the fourth quarter and increased net sales and operating income by approximately $73 million and $8 million, respectively.
Operating Performance Metrics
Other operating performance metrics indicators which management routinely monitors as an indicator of operating performance include:
•Finished product commodity prices
•Segment results
•Foreign currency exchange
•Corporate activities
•Non-U.S. GAAP measures
These indicators and their importance are discussed below.
Finished Product Commodity Prices
Prices for finished product commodities that the Company produces in the Feed Ingredients segment are reported each business day on the Jacobsen Index (the “Jacobsen”), an established North American trading exchange price publisher. The
Jacobsen reports industry sales from the prior day's activity by product. Included on the Jacobsen are reported prices for finished products such as MBM, PM and feather meal (“FM”), hides, BFT and YG and corn, which is a substitute commodity for the Company's BBP as well as a range of other branded and value-added products, which are products of the Company's Feed Ingredients segment. In the U.S. the Company regularly monitors the Jacobsen for MBM, PM, FM, BFT, YG and corn because it provides a daily indication of the Company's U.S. revenue performance against business plan benchmarks. In Europe, the Company regularly monitors Thomson Reuters (“Reuters”) to track the competing commodities palm oil and soy meal.
Although the Jacobsen and Reuters provide useful metrics of performance, the Company's finished products are commodities that compete with other commodities such as corn, soybean oil, palm oil complex, soybean meal and heating oil on nutritional and functional values. Therefore, actual pricing for the Company's finished products, as well as competing products, can be quite volatile. In addition, neither the Jacobsen nor Reuters provides forward or future period pricing for the Company's commodities. The Jacobsen and Reuters prices quoted below are for delivery of the finished product at a specified location. Although the Company's prices generally move in concert with reported Jacobsen and Reuters prices, the Company's actual sales prices for its finished products may vary significantly from the Jacobsen and Reuters because of production and delivery timing differences and because the Company's finished products are delivered to multiple locations in different geographic regions which utilize alternative price indexes. In addition, certain of the Company's premium branded finished products may sell at prices that may be higher than the closest product on the related Jacobsen or Reuters index. During fiscal year 2020, the Company's actual sales prices by product trended with the disclosed Jacobsen and Reuters prices.
Average Jacobsen and Reuters prices (at the specified delivery point) for fiscal year 2020, compared to average Jacobsen and Reuters prices for fiscal year 2019 are:
The following table shows the average Jacobsen and Reuters prices for the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020, compared to the average Jacobsen and Reuters prices for the third quarter of fiscal year 2020.
Segment Results
Segment operating income for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 was $430.9 million, which reflects a decrease of $44.9 million or (9.4)% as compared to the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019.
Feed Ingredients Segment
Raw material volume. In fiscal year 2020, the raw material processed by the Company's Feed Ingredients segment totaled 8.95 million metric tons. Compared to fiscal year 2019, overall raw material volume processed in the Feed Ingredients segment increased approximately 2.4%.
Sales. During the year ended January 2, 2021, net sales for the Feed Ingredients segment were $2,072.1 million as compared to $1,970.6 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase of approximately $101.5 million. Net sales for fats were approximately $661.7 million and $584.3 million for the years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively. Protein net sales were approximately $830.2 million and $791.3 million for the years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively. Other rendering net sales, which include hides, pet food, and service charges, were approximately $178.6 million and $167.9 million for the years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively. Total rendering net sales were approximately $1,670.5 million and $1,543.5 million for the years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively. Used cooking oil net sales were approximately $176.7 million and $185.7 million for the
years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively. Bakery net sales were approximately $183.8 million and $191.6 million for the years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively, and other net sales, which includes trap services, were approximately $41.1 million and $49.8 million for the years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively.
The increase in net sales for the Feed Ingredients segment was primarily due to the following (in millions of dollars):
Margins. In the Feed Ingredients segment for fiscal year 2020, the gross margin percentage was 25.5% as compared to 22.9% for fiscal year 2019. The increase in fiscal year 2020 was primarily due to overall increasing protein and fat finished product sales prices and increased sales volumes.
Segment operating income. Feed Ingredients' operating income for fiscal year 2020 was $96.6 million, an increase of $41.9 million or 76.6% as compared to fiscal year 2019. This increase was primarily due to increasing overall protein and fat finished product sales prices that more than offset higher depreciation and amortization and a lower gain on sale of assets.
Food Ingredients Segment
Raw material volume. In fiscal year 2020, the raw material processed by the Company's Food Ingredients segment totaled 1.08 million metric tons. Compared to fiscal year 2019, overall raw material volume processed in the Food Ingredients segment increased approximately 0.4%.
Sales. Overall sales increased in the Food Ingredients segment primarily due to higher sales prices in collagen and edible fat sales markets.
Margins. In the Food Ingredients segment for fiscal year 2020, the gross margin percentage was 22.4% as compared to 22.7% for fiscal year 2019. The slight decrease is primarily a result of the sales mix in collagen business that more than offset higher fat prices.
Segment operating income. Food Ingredients' operating income was $83.4 million for fiscal year 2020, a decrease of $7.2 million or (7.9)% as compared to fiscal year 2019. The decrease is primarily due to the gain on the sale of assets in China reported last year and the impact of a weak Brazilian real as well as lower sales volumes in Europe as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak in fiscal year 2020.
Fuel Ingredients Segment
Raw material volume. In fiscal year 2020, the raw material processed by the Company's Fuel Ingredients segment, excluding the DGD Joint Venture, totaled 1.31 million metric tons. Compared to fiscal year 2019, overall raw material volume processed in the Fuel Ingredients segment increased approximately 3.4%.
Sales. Overall sales increased in the Fuel Ingredients segment primarily due to higher sales volumes in Europe.
Margins. In the Fuel Ingredients segment (exclusive of the equity contribution from the DGD Joint Venture) for fiscal year 2020, the gross margin percentage was 28.8% as compared to 25.3% for fiscal year 2019. The increase is primarily due to higher sales volumes from improved demand and finished prices in Europe.
Segment operating income. The Company's Fuel Ingredients segment operating income (inclusive of the equity contribution from DGD Joint Venture) for fiscal year 2020 was $317.3 million, a decrease of $81.5 million or (20.4)% as compared to fiscal year 2019. The decrease in earnings was primarily due to the reinstated fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019 blenders tax credits recorded in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019 as compared to one year of blenders tax credits recorded in fiscal 2020 and $38.2 million restructuring and asset impairment charges due to the shut down of processing operations at the Company's biodiesel facilities located in the United States and Canada.
Foreign Currency
During fiscal year 2020, the Euro strengthened against the U.S. dollar as compared to fiscal year 2019. Using actual results for fiscal year 2020 and the prior year's average foreign currency rates for fiscal year 2019 would result in a decrease in operating income of approximately $6.4 million. The average rates assumption used in this calculation was the actual average rate for fiscal year 2020 of €1.00:USD$1.14 and CAD$1.00:USD$0.75 as compared to the average rate for fiscal year 2019 of €1.00:USD$1.12 and CAD$1.00:USD$0.75, respectively.
Corporate Activities
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $55.3 million during fiscal year 2020, a $2.6 million decrease from $57.9 million during fiscal year 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower legal fees, and lower travel related costs that more than offset an increase in insurance costs.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization charges increased $0.6 million to $11.0 million during fiscal year 2020 as compared to $10.4 million during fiscal year 2019. The increase was primarily due to the increased leasehold improvement and office equipment depreciation expense at the Company's corporate office in fiscal year 2020.
Interest Expense. Interest expense was $72.7 million for fiscal year 2020, compared to $78.7 million for fiscal year 2019, a decrease of $6.0 million. The decrease was primarily due to lower term loan B debt outstanding and lower interest rates that were partially offset by an increase in deferred loan costs from the pay down of the term loan B and a decrease in capitalized interest.
Debt Extinguishment costs. There were no debt extinguishment costs in fiscal year 2020 as compared to $12.1 million for fiscal year 2019, which were related to the termination of the 5.375% Senior Notes.
Foreign Currency Losses. Foreign currency losses were $2.3 million during fiscal year 2020, as compared to a loss of approximately $1.3 million for fiscal year 2019. The increase is due primarily to higher losses on the revaluation of non-functional currency liabilities as compared to the same period in fiscal 2019.
Gain (loss) on Disposal of Subsidiaries. There were no gains or losses on disposal of subsidiaries in fiscal year 2020 as compared to a $3.0 million gain incurred in fiscal year 2019.
Other Expense, net. Other expense was $5.5 million for fiscal year 2020, compared to $6.7 million in fiscal year 2019. The decrease in other expense was primarily due to a decrease in pension expense, a decrease in insurance proceeds on fire and casualty losses and a decrease in interest income.
Equity in Net Income in Investment of Other Unconsolidated Subsidiaries. The change in this line item is not significant and primarily represents the Company's pro rata share of the net income from its foreign unconsolidated subsidiaries.
Income Taxes. The Company recorded income tax expense of $53.3 million for fiscal year 2020, compared to $59.5 million of income tax expense recorded in fiscal year 2019, a decrease of $6.2 million, which was primarily due to a decrease in income from operations before income taxes. The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2020 and fiscal year 2019 was 15.1% and 15.6%, respectively. The effective tax rate for both fiscal years 2020 and 2019 differs from the statutory rate of 21% due primarily to the biofuel tax incentives and the relative mix of earnings among jurisdictions with different tax rates.
Non-U.S. GAAP Measures
Adjusted EBITDA is not a recognized accounting measurement under GAAP; it should not be considered as an alternative to net income, as a measure of operating results, or as an alternative to cash flow as a measure of liquidity. It is presented here not as an alternative to net income, but rather as a measure of the Company's operating performance. Since EBITDA (generally, net income plus interest expenses, taxes, depreciation and amortization) is not calculated identically by all
companies, the presentation in this report may not be comparable to EBITDA or adjusted EBITDA presentations disclosed by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA is calculated below and represents, for any relevant period, net income/(loss) plus depreciation and amortization, goodwill and long-lived asset impairment, interest expense, (income)/loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, income tax provision, other income/(expense) and equity in net (income)/loss of unconsolidated subsidiaries. Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA is useful in evaluating the Company's operating performance compared to that of other companies in its industry because the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA generally eliminates the effects of financing, income taxes and certain non-cash and other items that may vary for different companies for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance.
As a result, the Company’s management uses Adjusted EBITDA as a measure to evaluate performance and for other discretionary purposes. In addition to the foregoing, management also uses or will use Adjusted EBITDA to measure compliance with certain financial covenants under the Company's Senior Secured Credit Facilities, 5.25% Notes and 3.625% Notes that were outstanding at January 2, 2021. However, the amounts shown below for Adjusted EBITDA differ from the amounts calculated under similarly titled definitions in the Company’s Senior Secured Credit Facilities, 5.25% Notes and 3.625% Notes, as those definitions permit further adjustments to reflect certain other non-recurring costs, non-cash charges and cash dividends from the DGD Joint Venture. Additionally, the Company evaluates the impact of foreign currency exchange on operating cash flow, which is defined as segment operating income (loss) plus depreciation and amortization.
Reconciliation of Net Income to (Non-GAAP) Adjusted EBITDA and (Non-GAAP) Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA
Fiscal Year 2020 As Compared to Fiscal Year 2019
(1) The average rate assumption used in this calculation was the actual fiscal average rate for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 of €1.00:USD$1.14 and CAD$1.00:USD$0.75 as compared to the average rate for the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 of €1.00:USD$1.12 and CAD$1.00:USD$0.75, respectively.
For the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021, the Company generated Adjusted EBITDA (Non-GAAP) of $504.2 million, as compared to $436.9 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. The increase is primarily due to overall increasing protein and fat finished product sales prices and increased sales volumes in the Feed Ingredients segment.
On a Pro forma Adjusted EBITDA to Foreign Currency (Non-GAAP) basis, the Company would have generated $497.8 million for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021, as compared to $436.9 million for the year ended December 28, 2019.
DGD Joint Venture Adjusted EBITDA (Darling's Share) is not reflected in the Adjusted EBITDA or the Pro forma Adjusted EBITDA to Foreign Currency (Non-GAAP). In fiscal 2019, the $364.5 million equity in net income of Diamond Green Diesel includes approximately $78 million of blenders tax credits from fiscal 2018. See Note 2 to Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein for financial information regarding the DGD Joint Venture.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 29, 2018 and for the year ended December 28, 2019 compared to the year ended December 29, 2018 are included in Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results in our 2019 Form 10-K and is incorporated herein by reference.
FINANCING, LIQUIDITY, AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Indebtedness
Certain Debt Outstanding at January 2, 2021. On January 2, 2021, debt outstanding under the Company's Amended Credit Agreement, the Company's 5.25% Notes and the Company's 3.625% Notes consists of the following (in thousands):
At January 2, 2021, the U.S. dollar was weaker as compared to the euro at December 28, 2019. Using the euro based debt outstanding at December 28, 2019 and comparing the closing balance sheet rates at January 2, 2021 to those at December 28, 2019, the U.S. dollar debt balances of euro based debt increased by $57.8 million, at January 2, 2021. The closing balance sheet rate assumptions used in this calculation were the actual fiscal closing balance sheet rate at January 2, 2021 of €1.00:USD$1.227500 as compared to the closing balance sheet rate at December 28, 2019 of €1.00:USD$1.114750.
Senior Secured Credit Facilities. On January 6, 2014, Darling, Darling International Canada Inc. (“Darling Canada”) and Darling International NL Holdings B.V. (“Darling NL”) entered into a Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (as subsequently amended, the “Amended Credit Agreement”), restating its then existing Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated September 27, 2013, with the lenders from time to time party thereto, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent, and the other agents from time to time party thereto. Effective September 18, 2020, the Company, and certain of its subsidiaries entered into an amendment (the “Sixth Amendment”) with its lenders to the Amended Credit Agreement. Among other things, the Sixth Amendment (i) extended the maturity date of the revolving credit facility under the Credit Agreement from December 16, 2021 to September 18, 2025, (ii) increased the leverage ratio applicable to achieving the lowest applicable margin on borrowings under the revolving credit facility from 1.0 to 1.5, (iii) eliminated or modified certain of the negative covenants to increase the allowances for certain actions, including the incurrence of debt and investments, (iv) limited guarantees from, and security with respect to, entities organized outside of the United States and Canada to a limited group of foreign subsidiary holding companies, (v) included a collateral release mechanism, subject to the consent of the term loan B lenders, upon the Company achieving certain investment grade credit ratings, and (vi) made other market updates and changes. For more information regarding the Amended Credit Agreement see Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
•As of January 2, 2021, the Company had availability of $893.9 million under the revolving loan facility, taking into account an aggregate of $55.0 million in outstanding borrowings, $47.2 million of ancillary facilities and letters of credit issued of $3.9 million.
•As of January 2, 2021, the Company has borrowed all $525.0 million under the terms of the term loan B facility and repaid approximately $225.0 million, which when repaid, cannot be reborrowed. The term loan B facility is repayable in quarterly installments of 0.25% of the aggregate principal amount of the relevant term loan B facility on the last day of each March, June, September and December of each year commencing on the last day of each month falling on or after the last day of the first full quarter following December 18, 2017, and continuing until the last day of each quarter period ending immediately prior to December 18, 2024; and one final installment in the amount of the relevant term loan B facility then outstanding, due on December 18, 2024. The term loan B facility will mature on December 18, 2024.
•The interest rate applicable to any borrowings under the revolving credit facility will equal either LIBOR/euro interbank offered rate/CDOR plus 1.50% per annum or base rate/Canadian prime rate plus 0.50% per annum, subject to certain step-downs or step-ups based on the Company's total leverage ratio. The interest rate applicable to any borrowings under the term loan B facility will equal the base rate plus 1.00% or LIBOR plus 2.00%.
5.25% Senior Notes due 2027. On April 3, 2019, Darling issued and sold $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.25% Senior Notes due 2027 (the “5.25% Notes”). The 5.25% Notes, which were offered in a private offering, were issued pursuant to a Senior Notes Indenture, dated as of April 3, 2019 (the “5.25% Indenture”), among Darling, the subsidiary guarantors party thereto from time to time, and Regions Bank, as trustee. The 5.25% Notes are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by Darling and all of Darling's restricted subsidiaries (other than foreign subsidiaries). For a description of the terms of the 5.25% Notes see Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
3.625 % Senior Notes due 2026. On May 2, 2018, Darling Global Finance B.V. issued and sold €515.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.625% Senior Notes due 2026 (the “3.625% Notes”). The 3.625% Notes, which were offered in a private offering, were issued pursuant to a Senior Notes Indenture, dated as of May 2, 2018 (the “3.625% Indenture”), among Darling Global Finance B.V., Darling, the subsidiary guarantors party thereto from time to time, Citibank, N.A., London Branch, as trustee and principal paying agent, and Citigroup Global Markets Deutschland AG, as principal registrar. The 3.625% Notes are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by Darling and all of Darling's restricted subsidiaries (other than any foreign subsidiary or any receivable entity) that guarantee the Senior Secured Credit Facilities. For a description of the terms of the 3.625% Notes see Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
Other debt consists of U.S., Canadian and European ancillary and overdraft facilities and capital lease obligations and note arrangements in Brazil, China and Europe that are not part of the Company's Amended Credit Agreement, 5.25% Notes or 3.625% Notes.
The classification of long-term debt in the Company’s January 2, 2021 consolidated balance sheet is based on the contractual repayment terms of the 5.25% Notes, the 3.625% Notes and debt issued under the Amended Credit Agreement.
As a result of the Company's borrowings under its Amended Credit Agreement, the 5.25% Indenture and the 3.625% Indenture, the Company is highly leveraged. Investors should note that, in order to make scheduled payments on the indebtedness outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement, the 5.25% Notes and the 3.625% Notes, and otherwise, the Company will rely in part on a combination of dividends, distributions and intercompany loan repayments from the Company's direct and indirect U.S. and foreign subsidiaries. The Company is prohibited under the Amended Credit Agreement, the 5.25% Indenture and the 3.625% Indenture from entering (or allowing such subsidiaries to enter) into contractual limitations on the Company's subsidiaries’ ability to declare dividends or make other payments or distributions to the Company. The Company has also attempted to structure the Company's consolidated indebtedness in such a way as to maximize the Company's ability to move cash from the Company's subsidiaries to Darling or another subsidiary that will have fewer limitations on the ability to make upstream payments, whether to Darling or directly to the Company's lenders as a Guarantor. Nevertheless, applicable laws under which the Company's direct and indirect subsidiaries are formed may provide limitations on such dividends, distributions and other payments. In addition, regulatory authorities in various countries where the Company operates or where the Company imports or exports products may from time to time impose import/export limitations, foreign exchange controls or currency devaluations that may limit the Company's access to profits from the Company's subsidiaries or otherwise negatively impact the Company's financial condition and therefore reduce the Company's ability to make required payments under the Amended Credit Agreement, the 5.25% Notes and the 3.625% Notes, or otherwise. In addition, fluctuations in foreign exchange values may have a negative impact on the Company's ability to repay indebtedness denominated in U.S. or Canadian dollars or euros. See “Risk Factors - Our business may be adversely impacted by fluctuations in exchange rates, which could
affect our ability to comply with our financial covenants” and “- Our ability to repay our indebtedness depends in part on the performance of our subsidiaries, including our non-guarantor subsidiaries, and their ability to make payments” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021.
As of January 2, 2021, the Company believes it is in compliance with all financial covenants under the Amended Credit Agreement, as well as all of the other covenants contained in the Amended Credit Agreement, the 5.25% Indenture and the 3.625% Indenture.
Working Capital and Capital Expenditures
On January 2, 2021, the Company had working capital of $311.7 million and its working capital ratio was 1.46 to 1 compared to working capital of $228.9 million and a working capital ratio of 1.33 to 1 on December 28, 2019. At January 2, 2021, the Company had unrestricted cash of $81.6 million and funds available under the revolving credit facility of $893.9 million, compared to unrestricted cash of $72.9 million and funds available under the revolving credit facility of $911.9 million at December 28, 2019. The Company diversifies its cash investments by limiting the amounts deposited with any one financial institution and invests primarily in government-backed securities.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $624.7 million and $362.6 million for the fiscal years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively, an increase of $262.1 million due primarily to a decrease in net income that was more than offset by the effect of sale of assets, the effect of asset impairments, a positive impact from equity in net income of the DGD Joint Venture as well as an increase in distributions from unconsolidated subsidiaries of approximately $138.1 million and to changes in operating assets and liabilities that include an increase in cash provided by accounts receivable of approximately $48.5 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and inventory of $20.4 million, a decrease in income taxes refundable/payable of approximately $5.3 million and a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expense of approximately $21.2 million. Cash used by investing activities was $310.6 million during fiscal year 2020, compared to $338.1 million in fiscal year 2019, a decrease in cash used of $27.5 million, primarily due to a decrease in capital expenditures that more than offset an increase in acquisition costs and a decrease in proceeds from the sale of assets, a decrease in proceeds from the sale of subsidiaries and a decrease in insurance proceeds. Net cash used by financing activities was $307.0 million during fiscal year 2020, compared to $54.9 million in fiscal year 2019, an increase in cash used of $252.1 million, primarily due to an increase in debt payments, an increase from the repurchase of common stock and an increase from the acquisition of noncontrolling interest as compared to fiscal year 2019.
Capital expenditures of $280.1 million were made during fiscal year 2020 as compared to $359.5 million in fiscal year 2019, a decrease of $(79.4) million, or (22.1)%. The Company had originally planned to spend approximately $306.0 million in capital expenditures for fiscal year 2020; however, due to the COVID-19 outbreak and the government-imposed movement and work restrictions, the Company initiated a temporary reduction in non-essential capital expenditures until the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 outbreak improved. The Company returned to regular capital expenditures in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020. In fiscal year 2021, the Company expects to incur approximately $230 million in maintenance and compliance type capital expenditures and approximately $82 million primarily for expansion projects for a total of approximately $312 million. These costs are expected to be financed using cash flows from operations. Capital expenditures related to compliance with environmental regulations were $38.7 million in fiscal year 2020, $37.4 million in fiscal year 2019 and $32.1 million in fiscal year 2018.
Accrued Insurance and Pension Plan Obligations
Based upon the annual actuarial estimate, current accruals and claims paid during fiscal year 2020, the Company has accrued approximately $10.4 million as of January 2, 2021 that it expects will become due during the next twelve months in order to meet obligations related to the Company's self insurance reserves and accrued insurance obligations, which are included in current accrued expenses at January 2, 2021. The self insurance reserve is composed of estimated liability for claims arising for workers’ compensation and for auto liability and general liability claims. The self insurance reserve liability is determined annually, based upon a third party actuarial estimate. The actuarial estimate may vary from year to year, due to changes in costs of health care, the pending number of claims and other factors beyond the control of management of the Company.
Based upon current actuarial estimates, the Company expects to make payments of approximately $0.3 million in order to meet minimum pension funding requirements to its domestic plans in fiscal year 2021. In addition, the Company expects to make payments of approximately $3.5 million under its foreign pension plans in fiscal year 2021. The minimum pension funding requirements are determined annually, based upon a third party actuarial estimate. The actuarial estimate may vary from year to year, due to fluctuations in return on investments or other factors beyond the control of management of the
Company or the administrator of the Company’s pension funds. No assurance can be given that the minimum pension funding requirements will not increase in the future. The Company has made required and tax deductible discretionary contributions to its domestic pension plans in fiscal year 2020 and fiscal year 2019 of approximately $7.5 million and $0.9 million, respectively. Additionally, the Company has made required and tax deductible discretionary contributions to its foreign pension plans in fiscal year 2020 of approximately $4.0 million, as compared to $3.4 million in contributions in fiscal year 2019.
The U.S. Pension Protection Act of 2006 (“PPA”) went into effect in January 2008. The stated goal of the PPA is to improve the funding of U.S. pension plans. U.S. plans in an under-funded status are required to increase employer contributions to improve the funding level within PPA timelines. Volatility in the world equity and other financial markets could have a material negative impact on U.S. pension plan assets and the status of required funding under the PPA. The Company participates in various U.S. multiemployer pension plans which provide defined benefits to certain employees covered by labor contracts. These plans are not administered by the Company and contributions are determined in accordance with provisions of negotiated labor contracts to meet their pension benefit obligations to their participants. The Company's contributions to each individual U.S. multiemployer plan represent less than 5% of the total contributions to each such plan. Based on the most currently available information, the Company has determined that, if a withdrawal were to occur, withdrawal liabilities on two of the U.S. plans in which the Company currently participates could be material to the Company, with one of these material plans certified as critical or red zone. With respect to the other U.S. multiemployer pension plans in which the Company participates and which are not individually significant, five plans have certified as critical or red zone and two have certified as endangered or yellow zone, as defined by the PPA. The Company has received notices of withdrawal liability from five U.S. multiemployer pension plans in which it participated. During fiscal year 2020, the Company settled one of the withdrawal liabilities for approximately $2.5 million. As a result, the Company has an accrued aggregate current liability of approximately $2.7 million representing the present value of scheduled withdrawal liability payments under these multiemployer plans. While the Company has no ability to calculate a possible current liability for under-funded multiemployer plans that could terminate or could require additional funding under the PPA, the amounts could be material.
DGD Joint Venture
In January 2011, Darling, through a wholly-owned subsidiary, entered into a limited liability company agreement (as subsequently amended, the “DGD LLC Agreement”) with Valero to form the DGD Joint Venture. The DGD Joint Venture is owned 50% / 50% with Valero and was formed to design, engineer, construct and operate the DGD Norco Facility located adjacent to Valero's refinery in Norco, Louisiana. The DGD Norco Facility reached mechanical completion and began the production of renewable diesel in late June 2013 and is currently capable of producing 290 million gallons of renewable diesel per year and certain other co-products. Effective May 1, 2019, the DGD LLC Agreement was amended and restated for the purpose of updating the agreement in certain respects, including to remove certain provisions that were no longer relevant and to add new provisions relating to the DGD Joint Venture’s ongoing expansion project to construct a new, parallel facility located next to the current facility, as further described below.
On May 1, 2019, Darling, through its wholly owned subsidiary Darling Green Energy LLC, (“Darling Green”), and Diamond Alternative Energy, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Valero (“Diamond Alternative” and together with Darling Green, the “DGD Lenders”) entered into a revolving loan agreement (the “DGD Loan Agreement”) with the DGD Joint Venture. The DGD Lenders have committed to make loans available to the DGD Joint Venture in the total amount of $50.0 million with each lender committed to $25.0 million of the total commitment. Any borrowings by the DGD Joint Venture under the DGD Loan Agreement are at the applicable annum rate equal to the sum of (a) the LIBO Rate (meaning Reuters BBA Libor Rates Page 3750) on such day plus (b) 2.50%. The DGD Loan Agreement matures on April 29, 2021, unless extended by agreement of the parties. The DGD Loan Agreement replaced a similar agreement with lower commitment levels that expired on December 31, 2018. As of January 2, 2021, no amounts are owed to the DGD Lenders under the DGD Loan Agreement.
Based on the sponsor support agreements executed in connection with the initial construction of the DGD Norco Facility, the Company contributed a total of approximately $111.7 million for completion of the DGD Norco Facility including the Company's portion of cost overruns and working capital funding. As of January 2, 2021, under the equity method of accounting the Company has an investment in the DGD Joint Venture of approximately $772.8 million included on the consolidated balance sheet.
The DGD Joint Venture began work on an expansion of the DGD Norco Facility in 2019, which is expected to increase its renewable diesel production by 400 million gallons per year and provide the capability to separate renewable naphtha (approximately 30 million gallons) and other light end renewable hydrocarbons for sale into low carbon fuel markets. In addition, the expansion project includes expanded inbound and outbound logistics, thereby improving feedstock sourcing flexibility as well as finished product marketing flexibility. The DGD Joint Venture estimates completion and startup of the expanded portion of the facility in the fourth quarter of 2021, and the total cost of the expansion project, including the naphtha
production and improved logistics capability, is estimated to be approximately $1.1 billion. Based on forecasted margins as of the date of this report, the expansion project is expected to be substantially funded by DGD Joint Venture cash flow; however, the DGD LLC Agreement provides that until such time as the expansion of the DGD Norco Facility is complete and operational, the joint venture partners shall be required to make capital contributions or, if they agree, loans, to the DGD Joint Venture should the excess available cash in the DGD Joint Venture, as determined and in accordance with the DGD LLC Agreement, fall below $50 million. Additionally, in January 2021, the joint venture partners approved the construction of a new facility to be located next to Valero’s Port Arthur Refinery in Port Arthur, Texas, capable of producing 470 million gallons per year of renewable diesel and 20 million gallons per year of renewable naphtha and having similar logistics flexibilities as those of the DGD Norco Facility. The new plant is anticipated to commence operations in the second half of 2023 and the total cost of the expansion project is estimated to be approximately $1.45 billion. Once operational, the new plant is expected to increase the DGD Joint Venture’s total renewable diesel production capacity to almost 1.2 billion gallons per year. Based on forecasted margins as of the date of this report, the Port Arthur expansion project is expected to be substantially funded by DGD Joint Venture cash flow; however, if the DGD Joint Venture cash flow is not sufficient to fully fund the project, the DGD Joint Venture may need to borrow funds or the joint venture partners may be required to contribute additional funds to complete the project.
In April 2019, the joint venture partners adopted a distribution policy that, unless earlier terminated by the partners, will remain in place through the construction and completion of the expansion of the DGD Norco Facility. Pursuant to the distribution policy, the DGD Joint Venture will make quarterly distributions to the partners to the extent that distributable cash (as determined in accordance with the policy) exceeds $50 million and as allowed by the DGD Joint Venture’s forward looking cash forecast. During the year ended January 2, 2021, the DGD Joint Venture made approximately $205.2 million in distributions to each of the partners.
The Company’s original investment in DGD has expanded since 2011 to the point that it is now integral to how the Company operates its business. The Company traditionally collected and converted used cooking oil and animal fats into feed ingredients which were sold on a caloric value to feed animals as well as for industrial technical uses. Over the past decade, the world’s increasing focus on climate change and greenhouse gas has provided a new finished market for the Company’s finished fats ingredients. With the Company’s significant fats ownership, this has and continues to transform how the Company operates. In 2020, a large portion of Darling’s total U.S. finished fats products were sold to the DGD Norco Facility as feedstock for renewable diesel. In 2020, 2019 and 2018, DGD was the Company’s largest finished product customer in terms of sales, with the Company recording sales to DGD in those years of $264.1 million, $208.7 million and $131.8 million, respectively.
From a procurement, production and distribution standpoint, DGD has become integral to the Company’s base business. DGD is integrated into the Company’s operations via the combined vertical operating structure from collecting raw fats, to processing collected fats at the Company facilities nationwide to transporting the refined fats to the DGD Norco Facility as feedstock. The Company supply chain has become more efficient and sustainable with transparency for verification to obtain full value to low carbon intensity markets. The development of the low carbon markets in North America and Europe has influenced how the Company operates its core business and has also been a driver for the recent DGD expansions, which are making DGD much more relevant to the Company’s earnings. Since 2011 when construction began on DGD, Darling has invested substantially to increase its U.S. railcar fleet to efficiently manage nationwide transportation of Darling fats to DGD. Additionally, the Company acquired an Iowa location on the Mississippi River that further enhances the ability of the Company's Midwest network of facilities to collect and deliver feedstocks to DGD via water, rail or truck from a centralized location. The Company has also stepped up collection efforts by providing indoor used cooking oil collection units in exchange for extended collection contracts at eating establishments and has moved to more of a centralized digital marketing effort with restaurant chains and franchise groups and invested in internet search engine key words to improve visibility with restaurants. The Company also includes DGD in marketing efforts to emphasize environmental sustainability that restaurants participate in when their used cooking oil is collected by the Company. From a production standpoint, the Company now isolates used cooking oil from other fats to preserve identification to qualify for a higher carbon intensity value. As a result, the Company includes its equity in net income of the DGD Joint Venture as operating income.
Financial Impact of Significant Debt Outstanding
The Company has a substantial amount of indebtedness, which could make it more difficult for us to satisfy our obligations to our financial lenders and our contractual and commercial commitments, limit our ability to obtain additional financing to fund future working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions or other general corporate requirements on commercially reasonable terms or at all, require us to use a substantial portion of our cash flows from operations to pay principal and interest on our indebtedness instead of other purposes, thereby reducing the amount of our cash flows from operations available for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes, increase our
vulnerability to adverse economic, industry and business conditions, expose us to the risk of increased interest rates as certain of our borrowings are at variable rates of interest, limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and the industry in which we operate, place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to other, less leveraged competitors, and/or increase our cost of borrowing.
Cash Flows and Liquidity Risks
Management believes that the Company’s cash flows from operating activities consistent with the level generated in fiscal year 2020, unrestricted cash and funds available under the Amended Credit Agreement, will be sufficient to meet the Company’s working capital needs and maintenance and compliance-related capital expenditures, scheduled debt and interest payments, income tax obligations, and other contemplated needs through the next twelve months. Numerous factors could have adverse consequences to the Company that cannot be estimated at this time, such as negative impacts from the current COVID-19 outbreak and those factors discussed below under the heading “Forward Looking Statements”. These factors, coupled with volatile prices for natural gas and diesel fuel, currency exchange fluctuations, general performance of the U.S. and global economies, disturbances in world financial, credit, commodities and stock markets, and any decline in consumer confidence, including the inability of consumers and companies to obtain credit due to lack of liquidity in the financial markets, among others, could negatively impact the Company's results of operations in fiscal year 2021 and thereafter. The Company reviews the appropriate use of unrestricted cash periodically. As of the date of this report, no decision has been made as to non-ordinary course material cash usages at this time; however, potential usages could include: opportunistic capital expenditures and/or acquisitions and joint ventures; investments relating to the Company’s renewable energy strategy, including, without limitation, potential required funding obligations with respect to the DGD Joint Venture expansion projects or potential investments in additional renewable diesel; investments in response to governmental regulations relating to human and animal food safety or other regulations; unexpected funding required by the legislation, regulation or mass termination of multiemployer plans; and paying dividends or repurchasing stock, subject to limitations under the Amended Credit Agreement, the 5.25% Notes and the 3.625% Notes, as well as suitable cash conservation to withstand adverse commodity cycles. The Company's Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program of up to an aggregate of $200.0 million of the Company's Common Stock depending on market conditions. The repurchases may be made from time to time on the open market at prevailing market prices or in negotiated transactions off the market. The program runs through August 13, 2022, unless further extended or shortened by the Board of Directors. During fiscal year 2020, the Company repurchased approximately $55.0 million of its common stock in the open market. As of January 2, 2021, the Company had approximately $200.0 million remaining in its share repurchase program.
Each of the factors described above has the potential to adversely impact the Company's liquidity in a variety of ways, including through reduced raw materials availability, reduced finished product prices, reduced sales, potential inventory buildup, increased bad debt reserves, potential impairment charges and/or higher operating costs.
Sales prices for the principal products that the Company sells are typically influenced by sales prices for agricultural-based ingredients, the prices of which are based on established commodity markets and are subject to volatile changes. Any decline in these prices has the potential to adversely impact the Company's liquidity. Any of a decline in raw material availability, a decline in agricultural-based alternative ingredients prices, increases in energy prices or the impact of U.S. and foreign regulation (including, without limitation, China), changes in foreign exchange rates, imposition of currency controls and currency devaluations has the potential to adversely impact the Company's liquidity. A decline in commodities prices, a rise in energy prices, a slowdown in the U.S. or international economy or other factors, could cause the Company to fail to meet management's expectations or could cause liquidity concerns.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
The following is a description of the terms and conditions of the guarantees with respect to senior notes for which Darling is an issuer or provides full and unconditional guarantee.
Note Guarantees
The Company's 5.25% Notes and 3.625% Notes (see Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein) are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by the following Notes Guarantors, each of which is a 100% directly or indirectly owned subsidiary of Darling and which constitute all of Darling's existing restricted subsidiaries that are Credit Agreement Guarantors (other than Darling's foreign subsidiaries, Darling Global Finance B.V., which issued the 3.625% Notes and is discussed further below, or any receivables entity): Darling National, Griffin and its subsidiary Craig Protein, DarPro Storage Solutions LLC, Darling Global Holdings Inc., EV Acquisition LLC, Rousselot Inc., Rousselot Dubuque Inc., Sonac USA LLC and Rousselot Peabody Inc. (collectively, the Notes Guarantors). In addition, the 3.625% Notes, which were issued
by Darling Global Finance B.V., a wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of Darling, are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by Darling. The Notes Guarantors, and Darling in the case of the 3.625% Notes, fully and unconditionally guaranteed the 5.25% Notes and 3.625% Notes on a joint and several basis. The following financial tables present summarized financial information for (i) Darling, (ii) the combined Notes Guarantors, (iii) the combined other subsidiaries of the Company that did not guarantee the 5.25% Notes or the 3.625% Notes (the “Non-guarantors”), and (iv) eliminations necessary to arrive at the Company's consolidated summarized financial information, which include summarized condensed consolidated balance sheets as of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, and the summarized condensed consolidating statements of operations for the years ended January 2, 2021, December 28, 2019 and December 29, 2018. Separate financial information is not presented for Darling Global Finance B.V. since it was formed as a special purpose finance subsidiary for the purpose of issuing euro-denominated notes such as the 3.625% Notes and therefore does not have any substantial operations or assets.
Summarized Financial Information
Condensed Balance Sheet Information
(in thousands)
Condensed Statements of Operations Information
(in thousands)
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND OTHER COMMERCIAL COMMITMENTS
The following table summarizes the Company’s expected material contractual payment obligations, including both on- and off-balance sheet arrangements at January 2, 2021 (in thousands):
(a) The above table does not reflect uncertain tax positions at January 2, 2021. The Company's uncertain tax position is approximately $5.0 million.
(b) Represents debt obligations outstanding as of January 2, 2021. See Note 10 to Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
(c) See Note 9 to Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
(d) Interest payable was calculated using the current rate for the debt that was outstanding as of January 2, 2021.
(e) Purchase commitments were determined based on specified contracts for natural gas, diesel fuel and finished product purchases.
(f) Pension funding requirements are determined annually based upon a third party actuarial estimate. The Company expects to make approximately $3.8 million in required contributions to domestic and foreign pension plans in fiscal year 2021. The Company is not able to estimate pension funding requirements beyond the next twelve months. The accrued pension benefit liability was approximately $57.0 million at the end of fiscal year 2020. The Company knows certain of the multiemployer pension plans that have not terminated to which it contributes and which are not administered by the Company were under-funded as of the latest available information, and while the Company has no ability to calculate a possible current liability for the under-funded multiemployer plan to which the Company contributes, the amounts could be material.
The Company's off-balance sheet contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of January 2, 2021 relate to letters of credit, foreign bank guarantees, forward purchase agreements and employment agreements. The Company has excluded these items from the balance sheet in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The following table summarizes the Company’s other commercial commitments, including both on- and off-balance sheet arrangements that are part of the Company's Amended Credit Agreement and other foreign bank guarantees that are not a part of the Company's Amended Credit Agreement at January 2, 2021 (in thousands):
OFF BALANCE SHEET OBLIGATIONS
Based upon the underlying purchase agreements, the Company has commitments to purchase $192.8 million of commodity products, consisting of approximately $77.4 million of finished and raw material products and approximately $84.7 million of natural gas and diesel fuel and approximately $30.7 million of other commitments during the next three years, which are not included in liabilities on the Company’s balance sheet at January 2, 2021. These purchase agreements are entered into in
the normal course of the Company’s business and are not subject to derivative accounting. The commitments will be recorded on the balance sheet of the Company when delivery of these commodities occurs and ownership passes to the Company during the next three years, in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Company follows certain significant accounting policies when preparing its consolidated financial statements. A complete summary of these policies is included in Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
Certain of the policies require management to make significant and subjective estimates or assumptions that may deviate from actual results. In particular, management makes estimates regarding fair value of the Company’s reporting units and future cash flows with respect to assessing potential impairment of both long-lived assets and goodwill and pension liability. Each of these estimates is discussed in greater detail in the following discussion.
Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews the carrying value of long-lived assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset, or related asset group, may not be recoverable from estimated future undiscounted cash flows. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset or asset group to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset or asset group. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. In December 2020, due to unfavorable economics in the biodiesel industry, the Company made the decision to shut down processing operations at its biodiesel facilities located in the United States and Canada, and there are no current plans to resume biodiesel production at these facilities in the future. The Company recorded asset impairment charges related to its long-lived assets of approximately $6.2 million. In fiscal year 2018, the Company shut down operations at its Hurlingham, Argentina plant and recorded asset impairment charges related to its long-lived assets of approximately $2.4 million. In fiscal year 2019, no triggering event occurred requiring that the Company perform testing of its long-lived assets for impairment.
Goodwill Valuation
The Company performed the annual goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment assessments at October 24, 2020, and prior to finalizing the impairment testing a triggering event occurred, where due to unfavorable economics in the biodiesel industry, the Company made the decision to shut down the processing operations at its biodiesel facilities located in the United States and Canada, both of which represent a separate reporting unit. Goodwill and indefinite lived assets are tested annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. The Company uses the quantitative approach to impairment testing by comparing the fair value of the Company's reporting units to their respective carrying amounts and records an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amounts exceeds the fair value; however, the loss recognized if any will not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Based on the Company’s annual impairment testing at October 26, 2019 and October 27, 2018, the fair values of the Company’s reporting units containing goodwill exceeded the related carrying value. During the annual impairment testing at October 24, 2020 and prior to finalizing the impairment testing a triggering event occurred resulting in the Company making the decision to shut down the Company's biodiesel facilities as described above, and recording goodwill impairment charges of approximately $31.6 million. Based on the Company's annual impairment testing at October 24, 2020, the fair value of the remaining six reporting units was greater than 30% in excess of its carrying value. The Company determined the fair value of reporting units with the assistance of a valuation expert who assisted the Company primarily using the Income Approach to determine the fair value of the Company's reporting units. Key assumptions that impacted the discounted cash flow model were raw material volumes, gross margins, terminal growth rates and discount rates. It is possible, depending upon a number of factors that are not determinable at this time or within the control of the Company, that the fair value of these six reporting units could decrease in the future and result in an impairment to goodwill. The Company's management believes the biggest risk to these reporting units is decreasing finished product prices impacting gross margins and an economic slowdown that would impact raw material suppliers. Goodwill was approximately $1,260.2 million and $1,223.3 million at January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively.
Pension Liability
The Company has retirement and pension plans covering a substantial number of its domestic and foreign employees. Major assumptions used in the accounting for these employee benefit plans include the discount rate, expected return on plan
assets, rate of increase in employee compensation levels, mortality rates and trends in health care costs. The actuarial assumptions used may differ materially from actual results due to changing market and economic conditions, higher or lower withdrawal rates or longer or shorter life spans of participants. These differences may result in a significant impact to the amount of net periodic benefit cost recorded in future periods.
The discount rate applied to the Company’s pension liability is the interest rate used to calculate the present value of the pension benefit obligation. The weighted average discount rate was 2.10% at January 2, 2021 and 2.77% at December 28, 2019, respectively. The net periodic benefit cost for fiscal year 2021 would increase by approximately $1.3 million if the discount rate was 0.5% lower at a weighted average of 1.60%. The net periodic benefit cost for fiscal year 2021 would decrease by approximately $1.1 million if the discount rate was 0.5% higher at a weighted average of 2.60%.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
In March 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform Topic 848, Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting. The update provides optional guidance for a limited period of time to ease the potential burden in accounting for (or reorganizing the effects of) contract modifications on financial reporting, caused by reference rate reform. This ASU is effective for all entities as of March 12, 2020 through December 31, 2022. The adoption of this ASU in the first quarter of fiscal 2020 did not have a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. This ASU amends Topic 740 Income Taxes, which eliminates certain exceptions in accounting for income taxes, improves consistency in application and clarifies existing guidance. The standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this standard.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-14, Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Defined Benefit Plans. This ASU amends Subtopic 715-20, Compensation - Retirement Benefits - Defined Benefit Plans - General, which modifies the disclosure requirements for employers that sponsor defined benefit pension or other postretirement plans by removing and adding certain disclosures for these plans. The standard is effective for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurements. This ASU amends Topic 820, Fair Value Measurement, which changes the disclosure requirements for fair value measurements by removing, adding and modifying certain disclosures. The standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 and for interim periods therein, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04 Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. This ASU amends Topic 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, which will simplify the goodwill impairment calculation by eliminating Step 2 from the current goodwill impairment test. Under the new guidance, an entity should perform its annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An entity should recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit's fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. The ASU eliminates existing guidance that requires an entity to determine goodwill impairment by calculating the implied fair value of goodwill by hypothetically assigning the fair value of a reporting unit to all of the assets and liabilities as if that reporting unit had been acquired in a business combination. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 and interim periods within those fiscal years. The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. Under ASU 2016-13, existing guidance on reporting credit losses for trade and other receivables and available for sale debt securities will be replaced with a new forward-looking “expected loss” model that generally will result in the earlier recognition of allowances for losses. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 and interim periods therein. The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes “forward-looking” statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The words such as “estimate,” “project,” “planned,” “contemplate,” “potential,” “possible,” “proposed,” “intend,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “expect,” “may,” “will,” “would,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. All statements other than statements of historical facts included in this report are forward looking statements, including, without limitation, the statements under the sections entitled “Business,” “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and “Legal Proceedings” and located elsewhere herein regarding industry prospects, the Company's financial position and the Company's use of cash. Forward-looking statements are based on the Company's current expectations and assumptions regarding its business, the economy and other future conditions. The Company cautions readers that any such forward-looking statements it makes are not guarantees of future performance and that actual results may differ materially from anticipated results or expectations expressed in its forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of factors, including many that are beyond the Company's control.
In addition to those factors discussed under the heading “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this report and elsewhere in this report, and in the Company's other public filings with the SEC, important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the Company's expectations include: existing and unknown future limitations on the ability of the Company's direct and indirect subsidiaries to make their cash flow available to the Company for payments on the Company's indebtedness or other purposes; global demands for bio-fuels and grain and oilseed commodities, which have exhibited volatility, and can impact the cost of feed for cattle, hogs and poultry, thus affecting available rendering feedstock and selling prices for the Company’s products; reductions in raw material volumes available to the Company due to weak margins in the meat production industry as a result of higher feed costs, reduced consumer demand or other factors, reduced volume from food service establishments, or otherwise; reduced demand for animal feed; reduced finished product prices, including a decline in fat and used cooking oil finished product prices; changes to worldwide government policies relating to renewable fuels and GHG emissions that adversely affect programs like the U.S. government's renewable fuel standard, low carbon fuel standards (“LCFS”) and tax credits for biofuels both in the United States and abroad; possible product recall resulting from developments relating to the discovery of unauthorized adulterations to food or food additives; the occurrence of 2009 H1N1 flu (initially known as Swine Flu), highly pathogenic strains of avian influenza (collectively known as Bird Flu), SARS, BSE, PED or other diseases associated with animal origin in the United States or elsewhere, such as the outbreak of ASF in China and elsewhere; the occurrence of pandemics, epidemics or disease outbreaks, such as the current COVID-19 outbreak; unanticipated costs and/or reductions in raw material volumes related to the Company’s compliance with the existing or unforeseen new U.S. or foreign (including, without limitation, China) regulations (including new or modified animal feed, Bird Flu, SARS, PED, BSE or ASF or similar or unanticipated regulations) affecting the industries in which the Company operates or its value added products; risks associated with the DGD Joint Venture, including possible unanticipated operating disruptions and issues relating to the announced expansion project; risks and uncertainties relating to international sales and operations, including imposition of tariffs, quotas, trade barriers and other trade protections imposed by foreign countries; difficulties or a significant disruption in the Company's information systems or failure to implement new systems and software successfully; risks relating to possible third party claims of intellectual property infringement; increased contributions to the Company’s pension and benefit plans, including multiemployer and employer-sponsored defined benefit pension plans as required by legislation, regulation or other applicable U.S. or foreign law or resulting from a U.S. mass withdrawal event; bad debt writeoffs; loss of or failure to obtain necessary permits and registrations; continued or escalated conflict in the Middle East, North Korea, Ukraine or elsewhere; uncertainty regarding the exit of the U.K. from the European Union; and/or unfavorable export or import markets. These factors, coupled with volatile prices for natural gas and diesel fuel, climate conditions, currency exchange fluctuations, general performance of the U.S. and global economies, disturbances in world financial, credit, commodities and stock markets, and any decline in consumer confidence and discretionary spending, including the inability of consumers and companies to obtain credit due to lack of liquidity in the financial markets, among others, could cause actual results to vary materially from the forward-looking statements included in this report or negatively impact the Company's results of operations. Among other things, future profitability may be affected by the Company’s ability to grow its business, which faces competition from companies that may have substantially greater resources than the Company. The Company's announced share repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time and purchases of shares under the program are subject to market conditions and other factors, which are likely to change from time to time. The Company cautions readers that all forward-looking statements speak only as of the date made, and the Company undertakes no obligation to update any forward looking statements, whether as a result of changes in circumstances, new events or otherwise.