Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” and other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
We have built a technology-enabled local logistics platform that enables local brick-and-mortar businesses to address consumers’ expectations of ease and immediacy and thrive in today’s convenience economy. Our local logistics platform connects over 450,000 merchants, over 20 million consumers, and over 1 million Dashers in the United States, Canada, and Australia every month.
We built our products to serve the needs of these three key constituencies. We do this primarily through our Marketplace, which offers a broad array of services that enable merchants to solve mission-critical challenges such as customer acquisition, delivery, insights and analytics, merchandising, payment processing, and customer support. Our Marketplace enables merchants to establish an online presence and expand their reach. It generates significant demand for merchants by connecting them with millions of consumers. Merchants can fulfill this demand through delivery, facilitated by our local logistics platform, or in-person pickup by consumers.
In addition to our Marketplace, which accounts for the vast majority of our business today, we offer merchants a variety of products, which we refer to as merchant services, to facilitate sales that merchants have originated through their own channels. Drive, our white-label logistics service, enables merchants that have generated consumer demand through their own channels to fulfill this demand using our local logistics platform. Storefront enables merchants to create their own
branded online ordering experience, providing them with a turnkey solution to offer consumers on-demand access to e-commerce without investing in in-house engineering or logistics capabilities.
Initial Public Offering
On December 9, 2020, we completed our IPO in which we issued and sold 33,000,000 shares of Class A common stock at the public offering price of $102.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $3.3 billion from sales of our shares in the IPO, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. For additional information, see Note 1 - Organization and Description of Business included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Business and Non-GAAP Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements, we use the following key business and non-GAAP metrics to help us evaluate our business, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions:
(1)Contribution Profit (Loss), Contribution Margin, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are non-GAAP financial measures. For more information regarding our use of these measures and reconciliations to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, see the section titled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures".
Total Orders. We define Total Orders as all orders completed on the DoorDash platform, including those completed through our Marketplace and our Drive offering, over the period of measurement. Total Orders have increased over time as we have added new consumers, increased retention and engagement of existing consumers, including through the launch of DashPass, expanded into new markets, and increased the number of orders completed through Drive.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, Total Orders increased to 816 million, or 210% growth compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Total Orders was driven by increased retention and engagement of existing consumers, the addition of new consumers, and an increase in the number of orders completed through Drive. These trends accelerated in part due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in in-store dining shutdowns and the adoption of shelter-in-place measures. The circumstances that have accelerated the growth of our business stemming from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are not likely to continue following a widespread rollout of the COVID-19 vaccine, and we expect the growth rate of Total Orders to decline in future periods.
As we continue to increase consumer adoption and make using DoorDash a regular activity, we expect Total Orders to continue to grow.
Marketplace GOV. We define Marketplace GOV as the total dollar value of Marketplace orders completed on our local logistics platform, including taxes, tips,5 and any applicable consumer fees, including membership fees related to DashPass. Marketplace orders include orders completed through Pickup and DoorDash for Work. Marketplace GOV does not include the dollar value of orders, taxes and tips, or fees charged to merchants, for orders fulfilled through Drive because we utilize a per-order fee structure for such orders and typically do not receive information regarding the dollar value of such orders. Marketplace GOV is primarily driven by the volume and dollar value of orders completed on our local logistics platform.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, Marketplace GOV increased to $24.7 billion, or 207% growth compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, based on the growth in Total Orders as well as the increasing size of Marketplace orders in part as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The circumstances that have accelerated the growth of our business stemming from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are not likely to continue following a widespread rollout of the COVID-19 vaccine, and we expect the growth rate in Marketplace GOV to decline in future periods.
We expect that Marketplace GOV will continue to grow as Total Orders grow, though at a slower rate, as Marketplace GOV does not include Drive while Total Orders do include Drive. We further expect that Marketplace GOV will grow at a slower rate than Total Orders as we continue to broaden our selection of merchants at lower price points to increase affordability for consumers. We are purposefully increasing the affordability of the selection of goods offered by merchants on our platform to improve consumer engagement over time.
5 Dashers receive 100% of tips.
Contribution Profit (Loss).6 We define Contribution Profit (Loss) as our gross profit (loss) less sales and marketing expense plus (i) depreciation and amortization expense related to cost of revenue, (ii) stock-based compensation expense and certain payroll tax expense included in cost of revenue and sales and marketing expenses, and (iii) allocated overhead included in cost of revenue and sales and marketing expenses. Gross profit (loss) is defined as revenue less (i) cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization and (ii) depreciation and amortization related to cost of revenue. We define Contribution Margin as Contribution Profit (Loss) as a percentage of revenue for the same period.
We use Contribution Profit (Loss) to evaluate our operating performance and trends. We believe that Contribution Profit (Loss) is a useful indicator of the economic impact of orders fulfilled through DoorDash as it takes into account the direct expenses associated with generating and fulfilling orders.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, Contribution Profit improved to $663 million, compared to a Contribution Loss of $200 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by the growth in Marketplace GOV, increased merchant commissions and fees from our Marketplace as well as Drive, cost structure improvements, and increased operating leverage as a result of scale in our business. In the year ended December 31, 2020, Contribution Margin increased to 23%, compared to negative 23% in the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by cost structure improvements and increased operating leverage as a result of scale in our business.
Our Contribution Profit (Loss) can vary significantly as we invest in enhancing the scale of our local logistics platform, including through investments in sales and marketing and promotions spend and launching new products and geographies. We expect Contribution Profit (Loss) and Contribution Margin to fluctuate in the near term as we continue to invest in the growth of our business, and improve over the long term as we achieve greater scale, increase adoption, and drive efficiency through operational improvements.
Contribution Profit (Loss) is a non-GAAP financial measure with certain limitations regarding its usefulness. It does not reflect our financial results in accordance with GAAP as it does not include the impact of certain expenses that are reflected in our consolidated statements of operations. Accordingly, Contribution Profit (Loss) is not indicative of our overall results or an indicator of past or future financial performance. Further, it is not a financial measure of profitability and it is neither intended to be used as a proxy for the profitability of our business nor does it imply profitability.
6 For more information about Contribution Profit (Loss) and Contribution Margin, including the limitations of such measures, and a reconciliation of Contribution Profit (Loss) to gross profit (loss), the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, see the section titled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Adjusted EBITDA.7 We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss), adjusted to exclude (i) certain legal, tax, and regulatory settlements, reserves, and expenses, (ii) a one-time non-cash change in fair value of a forward contract related to the issuance of our Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock, (iii) loss on disposal of property and equipment, (iv) acquisition-related costs, (v) impairment expenses, (vi) provision for income taxes, (vii) interest income and expense, (viii) foreign exchange gain (loss), (ix) stock-based compensation expense and certain payroll tax expense, and (x) depreciation and amortization expense. Adjusted EBITDA is a performance measure that we use to assess our operating performance and the operating leverage in our business. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is calculated by dividing Adjusted EBITDA by revenue for the same period.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, Adjusted EBITDA improved to $189 million, compared to Adjusted EBITDA of negative $475 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. In the year ended December 31, 2020, Adjusted EBITDA Margin increased to 7%, compared to negative 54% in the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by cost structure improvements and increased operating leverage as a result of scale in our business.
We expect Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin to fluctuate in the near term as we continue to invest in our business and improve over the long term as we achieve greater scale in our business and efficiencies in our operating expenses.
7 For more information about Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, including the limitations of such measures and more detail on the specific adjustments, and a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, as well as a calculation of Adjusted EBITDA Margin, see the section titled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures".
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate a substantial majority of our revenue from orders completed through our Marketplace and the related commissions charged to partner merchants and fees charged to consumers. Commissions from partner merchants are based on an agreed-upon rate applied to the total dollar value of goods ordered in exchange for using our local logistics platform to sell the partner merchants’ products. Fees from consumers are for use of our local logistics platform to arrange for delivery services. We recognize revenue from Marketplace orders on a net basis as we are an agent for both partner merchants and consumers. Our revenue therefore reflects commissions charged to partner merchants and fees charged to consumers less (i) Dasher payout and (ii) refunds, credits, and promotions, which includes certain discounts and incentives provided to consumers, including those for referring a new customer. Revenue from our Marketplace is recognized at the point in time when the consumer obtains control of the merchant’s products.
We also generate revenue from membership fees paid by consumers for DashPass, which is recognized as part of our Marketplace revenue. Revenue generated from our DashPass subscriptions is recognized on a ratable basis over the contractual period, which is generally one month to one year depending on the type of subscription purchased by the consumer.
In addition, we generate revenue from other sources, including from our Drive offering. We generate revenue from Drive by collecting per-order fees from merchants that use our local logistics platform to arrange for delivery services that fulfill demand generated through their own channels. Revenue from Drive is recognized at the point in time when the consumer obtains control of the merchant’s products.
Cost of Revenue, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization
Cost of revenue primarily consists of (i) order management costs, which include payment processing charges, net of rebates issued from payment processors, costs associated with cancelled orders, costs related to placing orders with non-partner merchants, and insurance expenses, (ii) platform costs, which include costs for onboarding merchants and Dashers, costs for providing support for consumers, merchants, and Dashers, and technology platform infrastructure costs, and (iii) personnel costs, which include personnel-related compensation expenses related to our local operations, support, and other teams, and allocated overhead. Personnel-related compensation expenses primarily include salary, bonus, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense. Allocated overhead is determined based on an allocation of shared costs, such as facilities (including rent and utilities) and information technology costs, among all departments based on employee headcount.
We expect that the cost of revenue will increase on an absolute dollar basis as our business grows and as we continue to invest in order management and our platform and hire additional employees for our local operations, support, and other teams to support the growth in our business. As a result, we expect that cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue will vary from period to period over the short term and decrease over the long term as we achieve greater scale and operational efficiency.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of advertising and other ancillary expenses related to merchant, consumer, and Dasher acquisition, including certain consumer referral credits and Dasher referral fees paid to the referrers to the extent they represent fair value of acquiring a new consumer or a new Dasher, brand marketing expenses, personnel-related compensation expenses for sales and marketing employees, and commissions expense including amortization of deferred contract costs, as well as allocated overhead.
We expect that sales and marketing expenses will increase on an absolute dollar basis as we invest to grow our network of merchants, consumers, and Dashers and enhance our brand awareness. We expect sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue will vary from period to period over the short term and decrease over the long term.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel-related compensation expenses related to data analytics and the design of, product development of, and improvements to our platform, as well as expenses associated with the licensing of third-party software and allocated overhead.
We plan to continue to hire employees to support our research and development efforts to expand the capabilities and scope of our platform and offerings. As a result, we expect that research and development expenses will increase on an absolute dollar basis as we continue to invest to support these activities. We expect that research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue will vary from period to period over the short term and decrease over the long term.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of legal, tax, and regulatory expenses, which include litigation settlement expenses and sales and indirect taxes, personnel-related compensation expenses related to administrative employees, which include finance and accounting, human resources and legal, chargebacks associated with fraudulent credit card transactions, professional services fees, acquisition-related expenses, and allocated overhead.
We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase on an absolute dollar basis due to increases in chargebacks associated with fraudulent credit card transactions and legal, tax, and regulatory expenses as we add personnel and enhance our systems, processes, and controls to support the growth in our business as well as our increased compliance and reporting requirements as a public company. We expect general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue will vary from period to period over the short term and decrease over the long term.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses primarily consist of depreciation and amortization expenses associated with our property and equipment and intangible assets. Depreciation includes expenses associated with equipment for merchants, including equipment for merchants under finance leases, computer equipment and software, office equipment, and leasehold improvements. Amortization includes expenses associated with our capitalized software and website development costs, as well as acquired intangible assets.
We expect that depreciation and amortization expenses will increase on an absolute dollar basis as we invest in property and equipment to support the growth in our business. We expect depreciation and amortization expenses as a percentage of revenue over the short term will vary from period to period and decrease over the long term.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest costs related to our revolving credit facility and payment-in-kind interest on our Convertible Notes issued in February 2020.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net primarily consists of a non-cash change in fair value of a forward contract liability in connection with the issuance of shares of our Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock. To accommodate the timing of regulatory approvals required by an existing investor, we committed to sell $100 million of shares of our Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock to this investor in a subsequent closing, which ultimately occurred after we had entered into a non-binding term sheet to sell shares of Series G redeemable convertible preferred stock at a higher price per share than our Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock. We determined that the commitment to defer the sale of shares of Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock to this investor was a forward contract that should be classified as a liability and measured at fair value on a recurring basis, with changes in fair value recognized in other expense, net in the consolidated statements of operations. This forward contract was entered into in February 2019 and settled in May 2019. Other (expense) income, net also includes gains and losses from transactions denominated in a currency other than the functional currency.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes primarily consists of U.S. federal and state income tax and franchise tax, as well as international taxes from foreign operations.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our historical consolidated statements of operations data:
(1)Costs and expenses include stock-based compensation expense as follows:
(2)Depreciation and amortization related to the following:
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated statements of operations data as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of the Years Ended 2018， 2019 and 2020
Revenue
2020 Compared to 2019
Revenue increased by $2.0 billion, or 226%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by a 210% increase in Total Orders to 816 million, which led to a 207% increase in Marketplace GOV to $24.7 billion. The increase in Total Orders was primarily driven by increased retention and engagement of existing consumers, the addition of new consumers, and an increase in the number of orders
completed through Drive. These trends accelerated in part due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in in-store dining shutdowns and shelter-in-place measures. For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue increased at a faster rate than Marketplace GOV, primarily due to increased Dasher efficiency, lower refunds and credits as a percentage of Marketplace GOV, and increased merchant fees from our Marketplace as well as Drive.
2019 Compared to 2018
Revenue increased by $594 million, or 204%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily driven by a 217% increase in Total Orders to 263 million, which led to a 186% increase in Marketplace GOV to $8.0 billion. The increase in Total Orders was primarily driven by an increase in new consumers acquired as a result of our continued expansion in our existing markets and expansion into new markets, as well as increased engagement from existing consumers. For the year ended December 31, 2019, revenue increased at a faster rate than Marketplace GOV primarily due to higher merchant commission rates and growth in orders completed through Drive.
Cost of Revenue, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization
2020 Compared to 2019
Cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, increased by $845 million, or 162%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $508 million in order management costs, driven by significant growth in the number of Total Orders, Marketplace GOV, and the introduction of occupational accident insurance for Dashers in the third quarter of 2019, an increase of $236 million in platform costs, as well as an increase of $58 million in personnel costs driven by increased headcount and an increase in stock-based compensation expense related to RSUs with a performance condition that was satisfied upon our IPO.
As a percentage of revenue, cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, was 47% in the year ended December 31, 2020, decreasing from 59% in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, as a percentage of revenue was primarily driven by product and operational improvements which improved the efficiency of our platform costs, as well as increased operating leverage as a result of increasing scale in our business.
2019 Compared to 2018
Cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, increased by $295 million, or 129%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $138 million in order management costs driven by significant growth in the number of Total Orders, Marketplace GOV, and the introduction of occupational accident insurance for Dashers in the third quarter of 2019, an increase of $103 million in platform costs, as well as an increase of $36 million in personnel costs due to increased headcount.
As a percentage of revenue, cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, was 59% in the year ended December 31, 2019, decreasing from 78% in the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, as a percentage of revenue was primarily driven by product and operational improvements which improved the efficiency of our platform costs, as well as increased operating leverage as a result of increasing scale in our business.
Sales and Marketing
2020 Compared to 2019
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $363 million, or 61%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $252 million in merchant, consumer, and Dasher advertising and brand marketing expenses as we continued our focus on expansion and enhancing consumer adoption and an increase of $100 million in personnel-related compensation expenses and allocated overhead driven by increased headcount and an increase in stock-based compensation expense related to RSUs with a performance condition that was satisfied upon our IPO.
As a percentage of revenue, sales and marketing expenses were 33% in the year ended December 31, 2020, decreasing from 67% in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue was driven by increased operating leverage as existing consumers generated a greater proportion of revenue, as well as increased efficiency in our consumer, merchant, and Dasher acquisition efforts.
2019 Compared to 2018
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $459 million, or 340%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $365 million in merchant, consumer, and Dasher advertising and brand marketing expenses as we continued our focus on expansion and enhancing consumer adoption, and an increase of $42 million in personnel-related compensation expenses and allocated overhead. Additionally, referral expenses for consumers and Dashers increased by $40 million, from $5 million in the year ended December 31, 2018, to $45 million in the year ended December 31, 2019.
As a percentage of revenue, sales and marketing expenses were 67% in the year ended December 31, 2019, increasing from 46% in the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue was driven by greater investments in advertising costs to attract new merchants, consumers, and Dashers.
Research and Development
2020 Compared to 2019
Research and development expenses increased by $214 million, or 200%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $242 million in personnel-related compensation expenses and allocated overhead due to increased headcount and an increase in stock-based compensation expense related to RSUs with a performance condition that was satisfied upon our IPO, partially offset by an increase in capitalized software and website development costs of $44 million.
As a percentage of revenue, research and development expenses were 11% in the year ended December 31, 2020, decreasing from 12% in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue was driven by increased operating leverage as a result of increasing scale in our business.
2019 Compared to 2018
Research and development expenses increased by $56 million, or 110%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $56 million in personnel-related compensation expenses and allocated overhead due to increased headcount.
As a percentage of revenue, research and development expenses were 12% in the year ended December 31, 2019, decreasing from 18% in the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue was driven by increased operating leverage as a result of increasing scale in our business.
General and Administrative
2020 Compared to 2019
General and administrative expenses increased by $311 million, or 127%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $94 million in legal, tax, and regulatory expenses, which include litigation settlement expenses and sales and indirect taxes, an increase of $111 million in personnel-related compensation expenses and allocated overhead due to increased headcount and an increase in stock-based compensation expense related to RSUs with a performance condition that was satisfied upon our IPO, and an increase of $35 million in chargebacks associated with fraudulent credit card transactions.
As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expenses were 20% in the year ended December 31, 2020, decreasing from 28% in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue was driven by increased operating leverage as a result of increasing scale in our business.
2019 Compared to 2018
General and administrative expenses increased by $167 million, or 214%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $91 million in legal, tax, and regulatory expenses, which include litigation settlement expenses and sales and indirect taxes, an increase of $19 million in personnel-related compensation expenses and allocated overhead due to increased headcount, and $14 million in professional services fees and acquisition-related expenses.
As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expenses were 28% in the year ended December 31, 2019, increasing from 27% in the year ended December 31, 2018.
Depreciation and Amortization
2020 Compared to 2019
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased by $88 million, or 275%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $43 million of amortization expenses for acquired intangible assets related to Caviar and an increase of $19 million of depreciation expenses related to equipment for merchants.
2019 Compared to 2018
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased by $23 million, or 256%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily driven by $12 million in depreciation expenses due to an increase in purchases of equipment for merchants as we added new merchants on our platform, as well as $7 million for two months of amortization expenses for acquired intangible assets related to Caviar.
Interest Income
2020 Compared to 2019
Interest income decreased by 11 million, or 61%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a change in our investment strategy to reduce the weighted-average maturity of our investment portfolio to less than one year which reduced the yield on our investment portfolio.
2019 Compared to 2018
Interest income increased by $11 million, or 157%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in interest income was primarily attributable to an increase in our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities.
Interest Expense
2020 Compared to 2019
Interest expense increased by 32 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in interest expense was primarily attributable to the accrued payment-in-kind interest on our Convertible Notes issued in February 2020.
2019 Compared to 2018
Interest expense was not material for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2019.
Other (expense) income, net
2020 Compared to 2019
Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to non-cash changes in fair value of $67 million of a forward contract liability in connection with the issuance of shares of our Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock that was issued in February 2019 and settled in May 2019. Other income, net was not material for the year ended December 31, 2020.
2019 Compared to 2018
Other (expense) income, net increased by $68 million, or 100%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This expense primarily relates to non-cash changes in fair value of $67 million of a forward contract liability in connection with the issuance of shares of our Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated statements of operations data for each of the quarterly periods for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2020. The unaudited quarterly statements of operations data have been prepared on the same basis as our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and includes all adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments that, in our opinion, are necessary to state fairly the results of operations for these periods. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future and the results of a particular quarter or other interim period are not necessarily indicative of the results for a full year. The following unaudited quarterly consolidated results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Quarterly Consolidated Statements of Operations
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
(2)Depreciation and amortization related to the following:
Consolidated Statements of Operations, as a percentage of revenue
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use adjusted cost of revenue, adjusted sales and marketing expense, adjusted research and development expense, adjusted general and administrative expense, Contribution Profit (Loss), Contribution Margin, Adjusted Gross Profit (Loss), Adjusted Gross Margin, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA Margin in conjunction with GAAP measures as part of our overall assessment of our performance, including the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our business and financial performance. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information to investors about our business and financial performance, enhance their overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects, and allow for greater transparency with respect to metrics used by our management in their financial and operational decision making. We are presenting these non-GAAP financial measures to assist investors in seeing our business and financial performance through the eyes of management, and because we believe that these non-GAAP financial measures provide an additional tool for investors to use in comparing results of operations of our business over multiple periods with other companies in our industry.
Our definitions may differ from the definitions used by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. In addition, other companies may not publish these or similar metrics. Further, these metrics have certain limitations in that they do not include the impact of certain expenses that are reflected in our consolidated statements of operations. Thus, our adjusted cost of revenue, adjusted sales and marketing expense, adjusted research and development expense, adjusted general and administrative expense, Contribution Profit (Loss), Contribution Margin, Adjusted Gross Profit, Adjusted Gross Margin, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA Margin should be considered in addition to, not as substitutes for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We compensate for these limitations by providing a reconciliation of adjusted cost of revenue, adjusted sales and marketing expense, adjusted research and development expense, adjusted general and administrative expense, Contribution Profit (Loss), Contribution Margin, Adjusted Gross Profit, Adjusted Gross Margin, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA Margin to their respective related GAAP financial measures. We encourage investors and others to review our business, results of operations, and financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure, and to view adjusted cost of revenue, adjusted sales and marketing expense, adjusted research and development expense, adjusted general and administrative expense, Contribution Profit (Loss), Contribution Margin, Adjusted Gross Profit, Adjusted Gross Margin, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA Margin in conjunction with their respective related GAAP financial measures.
Adjusted Cost of Revenue
We define adjusted cost of revenue as cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, excluding stock-based compensation expense and certain payroll tax expense, and allocated overhead. We exclude stock-based compensation as it is non-cash in nature and we exclude allocated overhead as it is generally a fixed cost and is not directly impacted by Total Orders.
The following table provides a reconciliation of cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, to adjusted cost of revenue:
(1)Represents stock-based compensation expense, as well as payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation expense incurred in connection with our IPO.
Adjusted Sales and Marketing Expense
We define adjusted sales and marketing expense as sales and marketing expenses excluding stock-based compensation expense and certain payroll tax expense, and allocated overhead. We exclude stock-based compensation as it is non-cash in nature and we exclude allocated overhead as it is generally a fixed cost and is not directly impacted by Total Orders.
The following table provides a reconciliation of sales and marketing expense to adjusted sales and marketing expense:
(1)Represents stock-based compensation expense, as well as payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation expense incurred in connection with our IPO.
Adjusted Research and Development Expense
We define adjusted research and development expense as research and development expenses excluding stock-based compensation expense and certain payroll tax expense, and allocated overhead. We exclude stock-based compensation as it is non-cash in nature and we exclude allocated overhead as it is generally a fixed cost and is not directly impacted by Total Orders.
The following table provides a reconciliation of research and development expense to adjusted research and development expense:
(1)Represents stock-based compensation expense, as well as payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation expense incurred in connection with our IPO.
Adjusted General and Administrative Expense
We define adjusted general and administrative expense as general and administrative expenses excluding stock-based compensation expense and certain payroll tax expense, certain legal, tax, and regulatory settlements, reserves, and expenses, acquisition-related costs, impairment expenses, and including allocated overhead from cost of revenue, sales and marketing, and research and development. We exclude stock-based compensation as it is non-cash in nature and we exclude certain legal, tax, and regulatory settlements, reserves, and expenses, acquisition-related costs, as well as impairment expenses, as these costs are not indicative of our operating performance.
The following table provides a reconciliation of general and administrative expense to adjusted general and administrative expense:
(1)Represents stock-based compensation expense, as well as payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation expense incurred in connection with our IPO.
(2)We exclude certain costs and expenses from our calculation of adjusted general and administrative expense because management believes that these costs and expenses are not indicative of our core operating performance, do not reflect the underlying economics of our business, and are not necessary to operate our business. These excluded costs and expenses consist of (i) certain legal, tax, and regulatory settlements, reserves, and expenses related to the following: (a) worker classification matters, which were $13 million, $73 million, and $92 million for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively (b) our historical Dasher pay model prior to the change to such pay model in 2019, which were zero for each of the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2019, respectively, and $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and (c) our September 2019 data breach incident, which were zero, $1 million, and zero for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively, (ii) reserves for the collection of sales and indirect taxes that we do not expect to incur on a recurring basis, which were $6 million, $11 million, and zero for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively, (iii) expenses related to supporting various policy matters, including those related to worker classification and price controls, which were zero, $1 million, and $57 million for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively, and (iv) donations as part of our COVID-19 pandemic relief efforts, which were zero for each of the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2019, respectively, and $7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We believe it is appropriate to exclude legal matter costs related to worker classification matters, our historical Dasher pay model and our September 2019 data breach incident from our calculation of adjusted general and administrative expense because (1) the timing and magnitude of such expenses are unpredictable and thus not part of management’s budgeting or forecasting process, and (2) with respect to worker classification matters, management currently expects such expenses will not be material to our results of operations over the long term as a result of increasing legislative and regulatory certainty in this area, including as a result of Proposition 22.
Contribution Profit (Loss)
We use Contribution Profit (Loss) to evaluate our operating performance and trends. We believe that Contribution Profit (Loss) is a useful indicator of the economic impact of orders fulfilled through DoorDash as it takes into account the direct expenses associated with generating and fulfilling orders. We define Contribution Profit (Loss) as our gross profit (loss) less sales and marketing expense plus (i) depreciation and amortization expense related to cost of revenue, (ii) stock-based compensation expense and certain payroll tax expense included in cost of revenue and sales and marketing expenses, and (iii) allocated overhead included in cost of revenue and sales and marketing expenses. We define gross margin as gross profit (loss) as a percentage of revenue for the same period and we define Contribution Margin as Contribution Profit (Loss) as a percentage of revenue for the same period.
Gross profit (loss) is the most directly comparable financial measure to Contribution Profit (Loss). The following table provides a reconciliation of gross profit (loss) to Contribution Profit (Loss):
Adjusted Gross Profit (Loss)
We define Adjusted Gross Profit (Loss) as gross profit (loss) plus (i) depreciation and amortization expense related to cost of revenue, (ii) stock-based compensation expense and certain payroll tax expense included in cost of revenue, and (iii) allocated overhead included in cost of revenue. Gross profit (loss) is defined as revenue less (i) cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization and (ii) depreciation and amortization related to cost of revenue. Adjusted Gross Margin is defined as Adjusted Gross Profit (Loss) as a percentage of revenue for the same period.
The following table provides a reconciliation of gross profit to adjusted gross profit:
(1)Represents stock-based compensation expense, as well as payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation expense incurred in connection with our IPO.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a measure that we use to assess our operating performance and the operating leverage in our business. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss), adjusted to exclude (i) certain legal, tax, and regulatory settlements, reserves, and expenses, (ii) a one-time non-cash change in fair value of a forward contract related to the issuance of our Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock, (iii) loss on disposal of property and equipment, (iv) acquisition-related costs, (v) impairment expenses, (vi) provision for income taxes, (vii) interest income and expense, (viii) foreign exchange gain (loss), (ix) stock-based compensation expense and certain payroll tax expense, and (x) depreciation and amortization expense. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is calculated by dividing Adjusted EBITDA by revenue for the same period.
The following tables provide a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA and a calculation of net margin and Adjusted EBITDA Margin:
(1)We exclude certain costs and expenses from our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA because management believes that these costs and expenses are not indicative of our core operating performance, do not reflect the underlying economics of our business, and are not necessary to operate our business. These excluded costs and expenses consist of (i) certain legal, tax, and regulatory settlements, reserves, and expenses related to the following: (a) worker classification matters, which were $13 million, $73 million, and $92 million for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively (b) our historical Dasher pay model prior to the change to such pay model in 2019, which were zero for each of the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2019, respectively, and $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and (c) our September 2019 data breach incident, which were zero, $1 million, and zero for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively, (ii) reserves for the collection of sales and indirect taxes that we do not expect to incur on a recurring basis, which were $6 million, $11 million, and zero for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively, (iii) expenses related to supporting various policy matters, including those related to worker classification and price controls, which were zero, $1 million, and $57 million for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively, and (iv) donations as part of our COVID-19 pandemic relief efforts, which were zero for each of the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2019, respectively, and $7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We believe it is appropriate to exclude the foregoing matters from our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA because (1) the timing and magnitude of such expenses are unpredictable and thus not part of management’s budgeting or forecasting process, and (2) with respect to worker classification, management currently expects such expenses will not be material to our results of operations over the long term as a result of increasing legislative and regulatory certainty in this area.
(2)In connection with the issuance of shares of our Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock, we committed to sell an existing investor shares of our Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock in a subsequent closing at the initial issuance price of the Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock. We determined this commitment to be a forward contract, classified as a liability and measured at fair value on a recurring basis, with changes in fair value recognized in other expense, net in the consolidated statements of operations. This forward contract was entered into and settled during the year ended December 31, 2019.
(3)Consists of impairment expense related to an operating lease right-of-use asset associated with our former headquarters, which we assigned to another company. The sublessee of the operating lease right-of-use asset is in default with respect to rental payments as of April 1, 2020 onwards. For more information, see Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(4)Represents stock-based compensation expense, as well as payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation expense incurred in connection with our IPO.
Credit Facilities
On November 19, 2019, we entered into a revolving credit and guaranty agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., an affiliate of J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, and Goldman Sachs Lending Partners LLC, an affiliate of Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, which, as amended and restated on August 7, 2020, provides for a $300 million unsecured revolving credit facility maturing on August 7, 2025, increasing to $400 million in aggregate revolving commitments upon the consummation of an IPO of our common stock on or prior to August 7, 2021. Loans under the credit facility bear interest, at our option, at (i) a base rate equal to the highest of (A) the prime rate, (B) the higher of the federal funds rate or a composite overnight bank borrowing rate plus 0.50%, or (C) an adjusted LIBOR rate for a one-month interest period plus 1.00%, or (ii) an adjusted LIBOR rate plus a margin equal to 1.00%. We are also obligated to pay other customary fees for a credit facility of this size and type, including letter of credit fees, an upfront fee, and an unused commitment fee. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants under the revolving credit and guaranty agreement. As of December 31, 2020, no amounts were drawn and we had $44 million of issued letters of credit outstanding from the revolving credit and guaranty agreement.
Convertible Notes
On February 19, 2020, we issued $340 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes pursuant to the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement, dated February 19, 2020, among us, Caviar, and the investors party thereto, or the Note Investors. We received net proceeds of $333 million, net of $2 million in debt issuance costs and an original issue discount of $5 million. The interest rate under the Convertible Notes was 10.00% per annum, payable quarterly in arrears. In February 2021, we repaid the outstanding principal and accrued interest of the Convertible Notes in full for $375 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In December 2020, we completed our IPO in which we received net proceeds of $3.3 billion from sales of our Class A shares in the IPO, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions.
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $4.9 billion, which consisted of cash and cash equivalents of $4.3 billion, and marketable securities of $514 million. Additionally, funds held at payment processors of $146 million represent cash due from our payment processors for cleared transactions with merchants and consumers, as well as funds remitted to payment processors for Dasher payout. Cash and cash equivalents consisted of cash on deposit with banks as well as institutional money market funds. Marketable securities consisted of commercial paper, corporate bonds, U.S. government agency securities, and U.S. Treasury securities.
We have generated significant operating losses from our operations as reflected in our accumulated deficit of $1.6 billion as of December 31, 2020. To execute on our strategic initiatives to continue to grow our business, we may incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations in the future, and as a result, we may require additional capital resources. We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities, along with the $400 million in available borrowings under our unsecured revolving credit facility, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditures needs for at least the next 12 months.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to our growth, our ability to attract and retain merchants, consumers, and Dashers that utilize our platform, the continuing market acceptance of our offerings, the timing and extent of spending to support our efforts to develop our platform, and the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the timing and extent of spending for policy and worker classification initiatives. Further, we may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in businesses, products, services, and technologies. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, financial condition, and results of operations could be adversely affected.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities was $159 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This consisted of a net loss of $204 million offset by non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $24 million and non-cash depreciation and amortization expense of $9 million. The net changes in operating assets and liabilities was the result of an increase of $30 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets, an increase of $19 million in funds held at payment processors, an increase of $17 million in accounts receivable, net, and an increase of $5 million in other assets due to timing of payments, offset by an increase of $48 million in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, an increase of $25 million in accounts payable, and an increase of $10 million in other liabilities.
Cash used in operating activities was $467 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This consisted of a net loss of $667 million offset by a non-cash change in fair value of a forward contract liability of $67 million, non-cash depreciation and amortization expense of $32 million, non-cash reduction of operating lease right-of-use assets and accretion of operating lease liabilities of $22 million, non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $18 million, and non-cash bad debt expense of $4 million. The net changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of an increase of $88 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets, an increase of $40 million in accounts receivable, net, an increase of $18 million in other assets, an increase of $9 million in funds held at payment processors, a decrease of $23 million in other liabilities due to timing of legal settlements, a decrease of $13 million in accounts payable, and a decrease of $3 million for payments for operating lease liabilities, offset by an increase of $251 million in accrued expenses and other current liabilities primarily related to litigation reserves, sales tax payable and accrued sales and indirect taxes, accrued operations related expenses, and Dasher and merchant payable. The increase in cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year was mainly due to the increase in net loss for the year.
Cash provided by operating activities was $252 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This consisted of a net loss of $461 million, offset by non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $322 million, non-cash depreciation and amortization expense of $120 million, non-cash reduction of operating lease right-of-use assets and accretion of operating lease liabilities of $40 million, non-cash interest expense of $31 million related to the convertible notes, non-cash bad debt expense of $16 million, and other non-cash expenses of $18 million. The net changes in operating assets and liabilities was the result of an increase of $587 million in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, primarily related to litigation reserves, sales tax payable and accrued sales and indirect taxes, accrued operations related expenses, Dasher and merchant payable, and contract liabilities, an increase of $54 million in accounts payable, and an increase of $11 million in other liabilities, offset by an increase of $248 million in accounts receivable, net, an increase of $96 million in funds held at payment processors, an increase of $96 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a decrease of $26 million for payments for operating lease liabilities, and an increase of $20 million in other assets. The increase in cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly due to the decrease in net loss and increases in non-cash expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $357 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, which consisted of purchases of marketable securities of $390 million, purchases of property and equipment of $13 million, and cash outflows for capitalized software and website development costs of $3 million, offset by proceeds from the maturities of marketable securities of $49 million.
Cash used in investing activities was $570 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which primarily consisted of purchases of marketable securities of $762 million, cash paid for acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of $315 million, purchases of property and equipment of $78 million, cash outflows for capitalized software and website development costs of $14 million, offset by proceeds from the sales and maturities of marketable securities of $600 million.
Cash used in investing activities was $192 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily consisted of purchases of marketable securities of $593 million, purchases of property and equipment of $106 million, cash outflows for capitalized software and website development costs of $53 million, and cash paid for acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of $28 million, offset by proceeds from the sales and maturities of marketable securities of $587 million.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $666 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, which consisted of $725 million of net proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock and $5 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, offset by $60 million of cash outflows due to repurchases of common stock and $4 million of cash outflow from other financing activities.
Cash provided by financing activities was $1.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, which primarily consisted of $1.1 billion of net proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock and $3 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $3 million of cash outflows for payment of deferred offering costs.
Cash provided by financing activities was $4.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of $3.3 billion of proceeds from issuance of common stock upon our IPO, net of underwriter discounts, $382 million of net proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock, $333 million of net proceeds from the issuance of convertible promissory notes, and $5 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, offset by $7 million of cash outflows for taxes paid related to net share settlement of equity awards, and $6 million of payment of deferred offering costs.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)The contractual commitment amounts under operating leases in the table above are primarily related to corporate office facility leases. The table above does not reflect obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty, our option to exercise early termination rights, or the payment of related early termination fees.
(2)As of December 31, 2020, our non-cancelable purchase commitments primarily pertained to the purchase of onboarding, technology platform infrastructure services and advertising services. The purchase commitments end on various dates that extend into 2025. These purchase commitments were not recorded as liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020, as we had not yet received the related services.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, including entities sometimes referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make certain estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the related disclosures at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the period presented.. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from our estimates. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows could be affected.
We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a significant degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, we believe these are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. For further information, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606. We generate a substantial majority of our revenue from orders completed through our Marketplace and the related commissions charged to partner merchants and fees charged to consumers. We charge partner merchants commissions at an agreed-upon rate applied to the total dollar value of goods ordered in exchange for the use of our local logistics platform and we charge fees to consumers for use of our platform to arrange for delivery services. We also generate revenue from membership fees paid by consumers for DashPass, which is recognized as part of the DoorDash Marketplace. Revenue generated from DashPass subscriptions is recognized on a ratable basis over the contractual period, which is generally one month to one year depending on the type of subscription purchased by the consumer. In addition, we also generate revenue from our Drive offering by collecting per-order fees from merchants that use our local logistics platform to arrange for delivery services that fulfill demand generated through their own channels. Revenue from Drive is recognized at the point in time when the consumer obtains control of the merchant’s products.
Our local logistics platform facilitates orders between consumers and partner merchants. Separately, the platform arranges for consumers to obtain delivery service from Dashers. We determined that the order facilitation service and the delivery facilitation service are distinct performance obligations and therefore further judgment is required to determine whether we are a principal or agent in transactions with partner merchants, consumers, and Dashers.
Principal vs. Agent Considerations
Judgment is required in determining whether we are the principal or the agent in transactions with partner merchants, consumers, and Dashers. As it relates to the accounting for order facilitation services and delivery facilitation services, we evaluated whether to present revenue on a gross versus net basis based on whether we control each specified good or service before it is provided to the consumer in Marketplace transactions.
With respect to order facilitation services, we have determined that we are an agent for partner merchants in facilitating the sale of products to the consumer through our Marketplace. The consumer accesses our local logistics platform to identify merchants and place an order for merchants’ products. These orders are picked up from partner merchants and delivered to consumers by Dashers. We do not control the products prior to them being transferred to the consumer as we neither have the ability to redirect the products to another consumer nor do we obtain economic benefits from the products.
With respect to delivery facilitation services, we have determined that we are acting as an agent for the consumer in facilitating the delivery of products by connecting consumers with Dashers. As our role with the delivery facilitation service is only to arrange for a delivery opportunity to be offered to prospective Dashers, we do not control how the delivery service is ultimately provided to the consumer.
As we are an agent in facilitating the sale of products and delivery services, we report revenue on a net basis, reflecting amounts collected from consumers, less amounts remitted to merchants and Dashers.
We recognize revenue from both partner merchants and consumers for each successfully completed transaction. We satisfy our performance obligations to a partner merchant when there is a successful sale of the merchant’s products and we meet our performance obligations to a consumer once the Dasher has picked up the products from the merchant for delivery to the consumer.
Gift Cards
We sell gift cards to consumers that can be redeemed through our Marketplace. Proceeds from the sale of gift cards are deferred and recorded as contract liabilities until consumers use the card to place orders on our platform. When gift cards are redeemed, revenue is recognized on a net basis as the difference between the amounts collected from consumers less amounts remitted to merchants and Dashers.
Refunds and Credits
From time to time, we issue credits or refunds to merchants and consumers to ameliorate issues that may arise with orders. We account for such refunds as variable consideration and therefore record the amount of each refund or credit issued as a reduction to revenue.
Incentive Programs
We offer incentives to attract consumers and Dashers to use our local logistics platform. Consumers typically receive credits or discounted delivery fees while Dashers typically receive cash incentives. Each of the incentives are described below:
Consumer Promotions
We use promotions in tandem with sales and marketing spend to attract new consumers to our platform. Promotions offered to consumers are primarily recorded as a reduction of revenue and include the following:
New consumer incentives: We record discounts and incentives provided to new consumers as a promotion and reduce revenue on the date we record the corresponding revenue transaction.
Consumer referrals: We offer referral credits to our existing consumers for referrals of new consumers. These referral credits are paid in exchange for a distinct marketing service and therefore the portion of these credits that is equal to or less than the fair value of acquiring a new consumer are accounted for as a consumer acquisition cost. These new consumer acquisition costs are expensed as incurred and reflected as sales and marketing expenses in our consolidated statements of operations. The portion of these credits in excess of the fair value of acquiring a new consumer is accounted for as a reduction of revenue.
Existing consumer incentives: On occasion, we offer promotional discounts to existing consumers. We record incentives provided to existing consumers as a promotion and reduce revenue on the date we record the corresponding revenue transaction.
Dasher Incentives and Referrals
We offer various incentives to Dashers, which are primarily recorded within Dasher payout and reduce revenue. These are offered in various forms and include:
Peak pay: We make additional payments to Dashers to incentivize them to accept delivery opportunities during peak demand time.
Dasher referrals: We offer referral bonuses to referring Dashers, as well as to referred Dashers, once the new Dasher has met certain qualifying conditions. We expense the fair value of payments made to the referring Dashers as incurred in sales and marketing expenses in our consolidated statements of operations, since the marketing of our platform to acquire new Dashers represents a distinct benefit to us. The portion of these referral bonuses in excess of the fair value of payments made to the referring Dashers is accounted for as a reduction of revenue. Payments made to the referred Dashers are recorded within Dasher payout and reduce revenue at the time we record the corresponding revenue transaction.
Leases
We apply the guidance in ASC 842 and determine if an arrangement is or contains a lease at inception. We adopted ASC 842 on January 1, 2019, using the modified retrospective transition method and used the effective date as the date of initial application. We have elected the practical expedient to not separate lease and non-lease components for all of our leases.
A contract is or contains a lease if it conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration. Our classes of assets that are leased include real estate leases and equipment leases. Operating leases consist of real estate leases and are included in operating lease right-of-use assets and operating lease liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. Finance leases consist of equipment leases and are included in property and equipment, net on our consolidated balance sheets. Additionally, we have elected the short-term lease exception for all classes of assets, and therefore do not apply the recognition requirements for leases of 12 months or less.
We sublease certain portions of buildings subject to operating leases. The terms and conditions of the subleases are commensurate with the terms and conditions within the original operating leases. The term of the subleases generally
range from four to five years, payments are fixed within the contracts, and there are no residual value guarantees or other restrictions or covenants in the leases.
When the discount rate implicit in the lease cannot be readily determined, we use the applicable incremental borrowing rate at lease commencement in order to discount lease payments to present value for purposes of performing lease classification tests and measuring the lease liability. The incremental borrowing rate represents the rate of interest we would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. Because we do not generally borrow on a collateralized basis, we use a derived unsecured synthetic credit rating adjusted for collateralization, current available yield curves, and the lease term as inputs to derive an appropriate incremental borrowing rate.
Stock-Based Compensation
Common Stock Valuations
Prior to our IPO, given the absence of a public trading market for our common stock and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, our board of directors determined the best estimate of fair value of our common stock exercising reasonable judgment and considering numerous objective and subjective factors. These factors included:
•contemporaneous third-party valuations of our common stock;
•the prices at which we or other holders sold our common and redeemable convertible preferred stock to outside investors in arms-length transactions;
•the rights, preferences, and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•the price paid by us to repurchase outstanding shares through tender offer;
•our financial condition, results of operations, and capital resources;
•the industry outlook;
•the fact that option and RSU grants have involved rights in illiquid securities in a private company;
•the valuation of comparable companies;
•the lack of marketability of our common stock;
•the timing and likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or a sale of our company given prevailing market conditions;
•the history and nature of our business, industry trends, and competitive environment; and
•general economic outlook including economic growth, inflation, unemployment, interest rate environment, and global economic trends.
Our board of directors determined the fair value of our common stock by first determining the enterprise value of our business, and then allocating the value among the various classes of our equity securities to derive a per share value of our common stock. This process involved the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impacted our valuations as of each valuation date and could have had a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
For valuations after the completion of the IPO, our board of directors determines the fair value of each share of underlying Class A common stock based on the closing price of our Class A common stock as reported on the date of grant.
Fair Value of Common Stock Underlying Share-Based Payment Awards
The fair value of RSUs is estimated based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. Estimating the grant date fair value of the common stock underlying RSU grants prior to our IPO was highly judgmental due to the lack of an observable market for our common stock. Prior to our IPO, the fair value of the Company’s common stock was determined by considering a number of objective and subjective factors including: contemporaneous third-party valuations of our
common stock, the valuation of comparable companies, sales of the Company’s common and redeemable convertible preferred stock to outside investors in arms-length transactions (including our IPO), the Company’s operating and financial performance, the lack of marketability, and the general and industry-specific economic outlook, amongst other factors. Estimating the grant date fair value of the RSUs, including the CEO Performance Award discussed below, was highly sensitive due to the volume of RSUs granted and increasing common stock value as we approached the IPO. With the exception of the CEO Performance Award discussed below, most of our RSUs granted prior to November 2020 vest upon the satisfaction of both a service-based vesting condition and a liquidity event-related performance vesting condition. The fair value of RSUs is recognized as compensation expense over the requisite service period, using the accelerated attribution method, once the liquidity event-related performance vesting condition becomes probable of being achieved. The service-based vesting condition is generally satisfied by the award holder providing services to us over a four-year period. The liquidity event-related performance vesting condition was satisfied upon the effectiveness of our IPO registration statement. Stock-based compensation expense for RSUs that had not met the service-based vesting condition as of December 31, 2020 will be recorded over the remaining requisite service period. Since November 2020, we have only granted RSUs that vest upon the satisfaction of a service-based vesting condition and the compensation expense for these RSUs is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.
CEO Performance Award
In November 2020, our board of directors granted the CEO Performance Award, an RSU award under our 2014 Stock Plan to Mr. Xu for up to 10,379,000 shares of our Class A common stock. The CEO Performance Award vests upon the satisfaction of a service condition and the achievement of certain stock price goals. We estimated the grant date fair value of the CEO Performance Award using a model based on multiple stock price paths developed through the use of a Monte Carlo simulation that incorporates into the valuation the possibility that the stock price goals may not be satisfied. One of the most judgmental assumptions in the Monte Carlo simulation is the estimated fair value of the common stock underlying the award as discussed above. The average grant date fair value of the CEO Performance Award was estimated to be $39.83 per share, and we will recognize total stock-based compensation expense of approximately $413 million over the derived service period of each of the nine performance tranches. If the stock price goals are met sooner than the derived service period, we will adjust our stock-based compensation expense to reflect the cumulative expense associated with the vested award. Provided that Mr. Xu continues to be our Chief Executive Officer, we will recognize stock-based compensation expense over the requisite service period, regardless of whether the stock price goals are achieved.
Business Combinations
We account for our business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires, among other things, allocation of the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. When determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with a corresponding offset to goodwill if new information is obtained related to facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are reflected in the consolidated statements of operations. Acquisition costs, such as legal and consulting fees, are expensed as incurred.
Insurance Reserves
We utilize a combination of third-party insurance and self-insurance programs to insure costs including auto liability related to both bodily injury and physical damage, and uninsured and underinsured motorists up to a certain dollar retention limit. The recorded self-insurance reserves reflect the estimated cost for claims incurred but not paid and claims that have been incurred but not yet reported. The estimate of our self-insured ultimate obligation utilizes actuarial techniques applied to historical claim and loss experience. We use assumptions based on actuarial judgment with consideration toward relevant industry claim and loss development factors, which includes the development time frame and settlement patterns, and expected loss rates. To limit our exposure to some risks, we maintain additional third-party insurance coverage with varying limits and retentions. We cannot predict whether this third-party insurance will be adequate to cover all potential hazards incidental to our business. Reserves are periodically reviewed and adjusted as necessary as experience develops or new information becomes known. However, ultimate results may differ from our estimates, which could result in losses over our reserved amounts.
Loss Contingencies
We are involved in various lawsuits, claims, investigations, and proceedings that arise in the ordinary course of business. Certain of these matters include speculative claims for substantial or indeterminate amounts of damages. We record a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount or range can be reasonably estimated. We disclose material contingencies when we believe that a loss is not probable but reasonably possible. Significant judgment is required to determine both probability and the estimated amount. We review these provisions on a quarterly basis and adjust these provisions accordingly to reflect the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and updated information.
The outcome of legal matters and litigation is inherently uncertain. Therefore, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against us for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, our results of operations, and financial condition, including in a particular reporting period, could be materially adversely affected.
Sales and Indirect Taxes
We record sales and indirect tax liabilities when they become probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, and such reserve is included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets. We continue to analyze possible sales tax exposure but do not currently believe that any individual claim or aggregate claims that might arise will ultimately have a material effect on our results of operations, financial position, or cash flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information on recently issued accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.