ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the section titled “Selected Consolidated Financial and Other Data” and the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 see Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 21, 2020.
Overview
Our modern economy runs on knowledge. Today, knowledge lives in the cloud as digital content, and Dropbox is where businesses and individuals can create, access, and share this content globally. We serve more than 700 million registered users across 180 countries.
Since our founding in 2007, our market opportunity has grown as we’ve expanded from keeping files in sync to keeping teams in sync. In a world where using technology at work can be fragmented and distracting, Dropbox makes it easy to focus on the work that matters.
By solving these universal problems, we’ve become invaluable to our users. The popularity of our platform drives viral growth, which has allowed us to scale rapidly and efficiently. We’ve built a thriving global business with 15.48 million paying users.
Our Subscription Plans
We generate revenue from individuals, families, teams, and organizations by selling subscriptions to our platform, which serve the varying needs of our diverse customer base. Subscribers can purchase individual licenses through our Plus and Professional plans, or purchase multiple licenses through our Family plan or our Standard, Advanced, and Enterprise team plans. Each team or family represents a separately billed deployment that is managed through a single administrative dashboard. Teams must have a minimum of three users, but can also have more than tens of thousands of users. Families can have up to six users. Customers can choose between an annual or monthly plan, with a small number of large organizations on multi-year plans. A majority of our customers opt for our annual plans, although we have seen and may continue to see an increase in customers opting for our monthly plans. We typically bill our customers at the beginning of their respective terms and recognize revenue ratably over the term of the subscription period. International customers can pay in U.S. dollars or a select number of foreign currencies.
Our premium subscription plans, such as Professional and Advanced, provide more functionality than other subscription plans and have higher per user prices. Our Standard and Advanced subscription plans offer robust capabilities for businesses, and the vast majority of Dropbox Business teams purchase our Standard or Advanced subscription plans. While our Enterprise subscription plan offers more opportunities for customization, companies can subscribe to any of these team plans for their business needs.
In 2019, we acquired HelloSign, an e-signature and document workflow platform. The acquisition of HelloSign expanded our content collaboration capabilities to include additional business-critical workflows. HelloSign has several product lines, and the pricing and revenue generated from each product line varies, with some product lines priced based on the number of licenses purchased (similar to Dropbox plans), while others are priced based on a customer's transaction volume. Depending on the product purchased, teams must have a minimum of a certain number of licenses, but can also have hundreds of users. Customers can choose between an annual or monthly plan, with a small number of large organizations on multi-year plans. We typically bill HelloSign customers at the beginning of their respective terms and recognizes revenue ratably over the subscription period. We sell HelloSign products globally and sell primarily in U.S. dollars.
Our Customers
Our customer base is highly diversified, and in the period presented, no customer accounted for more than 1% of our revenue. Our customers include individuals, families, teams, and organizations of all sizes, from freelancers and small businesses to Fortune 100 companies. They work across a wide range of industries, including professional services, technology, media, education, industrials, consumer and retail, and financial services. Within companies, our platform is used by all types of teams and functions, including sales, marketing, product, design, engineering, finance, legal, and human resources.
Our Business Model
Drive new signups
We acquire users efficiently and at relatively low costs through word-of-mouth referrals, direct in-product referrals, and sharing of content. Anyone can create a Dropbox account for free through our website or app and be up and running in minutes. These users often share and collaborate with other non-registered users, attracting new signups into our network.
Increase conversion of registered users to our paid subscription plans
We generate over 90% of our revenue from self-serve channels-users who purchase a subscription through our app or website. To grow our recurring revenue base, we actively encourage our registered users to convert to one of our paid plans based on the functionality that best suits their needs. We do this via in-product prompts and notifications, time-limited free trials of paid subscription plans, email campaigns, and lifecycle marketing. Together, these enable us to generate increased recurring revenues from our existing user base.
Upgrade and expand existing customers
We offer a range of paid subscription plans, from Plus, Professional, and Family for individuals, to Standard, Advanced, and Enterprise for teams. We analyze usage patterns within our network and run hundreds of targeted marketing campaigns to encourage paying users to upgrade their plans. We prompt individual subscribers who collaborate with others on Dropbox to purchase our Standard or Advanced plans for a better team experience, and we also encourage existing Dropbox Business teams to purchase additional licenses or to upgrade to premium subscription plans.
COVID-19 Update
Although we have seen and may continue to see an impact to our financial condition or results of operations, as described below, the full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, the pace of reopening, impact on our customers and our sales cycles, impact on our business operations, impact on our customer, employee or industry events, and effect on our vendors, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our business, financial condition or results of operations is uncertain, but may include, without limitation, impacts to our current and prospective users' ability to purchase or renew paid licenses for access to our platform, impacts to our paying user growth as well as disruptions to our business operations as a result of travel restrictions, shutdown of workplaces and potential impacts to our vendors.
Additionally, our results of operations and cash flows are subject to fluctuations due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates relative to U.S. dollars, our reporting currency, as well as changes in interest rates. Volatile market conditions arising from the COVID-19 pandemic have and may continue to negatively impact our results of operations and cash flows, due to (i) a weakening of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, which have and may in the future cause our revenues to decline relative to our costs, and (ii) government-initiated reductions in interest rates, which may reduce our interest income. In certain cases, we have provided relief to our customers in the form of extending net payment terms and changing invoice frequency, which may negatively impact our accounts receivable. Conversely, we have seen and may continue to see cost savings from the shift to remote work for all of our employees in areas including events, travel, utilities, and other benefits. Due to our subscription based business model, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods, if at all.
Virtual First
Furthermore, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have led us to reimagine the way we work, resulting in our announcement in October 2020 to shift to a new Virtual First work model pursuant to which remote work will become the primary experience for all of our employees. As a result, we intend for our workforce to become more distributed over time, although we will continue to offer our employees opportunities for in-person collaboration in all locations we currently have offices, either through our existing real-estate, or new on-demand, flexible spaces, which will be known as "Dropbox Studios". Consistent with this strategy, we will retain a portion of our office space and a portion will be marketed for sublease. We engaged a third party to estimate the fair value of the office space to be subleased based on current market conditions. Where the carrying value of the individual asset groups exceeded the fair value, an impairment charge was recognized for the difference. We recorded a corresponding impairment charge of $398.2 million in the period ended December 31, 2020. See Note 9 "Leases" for additional information. We continue to expect to incur additional charges related to certain European leases
over the next twelve months, which could range between $0 and $50 million depending on the then current market and economic conditions.
While we seek to manage the implementation of this new work model carefully and we believe this model will help us reap the benefits of remote work, while maintaining a meaningful in-person experience, there is no guarantee that we will realize any anticipated benefits to our business, including any cost savings, operational efficiencies, increased employee satisfaction or increased productivity. In addition, given that we have a limited history of operating with a Virtual First workforce, the long-term impact on our financial results and business operations is uncertain. Please see Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a complete description of the material risks we currently face, including risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic and our shift to a Virtual First work model.
Reduction in Force
On January 13, 2021, we announced a reduction of our global workforce by approximately 11% to streamline our team structure in support of our business priorities.
Key Business Metrics
We review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions.
Total annual recurring revenue
We primarily focus on total annual recurring revenue (“Total ARR”) as the key indicator of the trajectory of our business performance. Total ARR represents the amount of revenue that we expect to recur annually, enables measurement of the progress of our business initiatives, and serves as an indicator of future growth. In addition, Total ARR is less subject to variations in short-term trends that may not appropriately reflect the health of our business. Total ARR is a performance metric and should be viewed independently of revenue and deferred revenue, and is not intended to be a substitute for, or combined with, any of these items.
Total ARR consists of contributions from all of our revenue streams, including subscriptions and add-ons. We calculate Total ARR as the number of users who have active paid licenses for access to our platform as of the end of the period, multiplied by their annualized subscription price to our platform. We adjust the exchange rates used to calculate Total ARR on an annual basis at the beginning of each fiscal year.
We experienced an increase in ARR during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in ARR was primarily driven by an increase in paying users across our product portfolio, as well as an increased mix of sales going to our higher-priced subscription plans.
The below tables set forth our Total ARR using the exchange rates set at the beginning of each year, as well as on a constant currency basis relative to the exchange rates used in 2020.
Revaluing our ending Total ARR for fiscal 2020 using exchange rates set at the beginning of fiscal 2021, Total ARR at the end of fiscal 2020 would be $2,052 million.
We undertook several business initiatives that positively impacted Total ARR in the periods presented. These initiatives include the renewal of our grandfathered existing Dropbox Business teams into the Dropbox Business Advanced plan in the second quarter of 2018, and the repricing and repackaging of our existing Dropbox Plus plans in the second quarter of 2019. As of the fiscal year ended 2020, all of our existing Dropbox Plus plans have successfully migrated over to our now current pricing and packaging. In addition to these business initiatives, we also acquired HelloSign in the first quarter of 2019, resulting in a benefit to Total ARR in that period. We also undertook several initiatives to improve the conversion rate of our free users to paying users and saw benefits in Total ARR as we continued to expand our user base and saw an increased mix of sales towards our higher-priced subscription plans.
Paying users
We define paying users as the number of users who have active paid licenses for access to our platform as of the end of the period. One person would count as multiple paying users if the person had more than one active license. For example, a 50-person Dropbox Business team would count as 50 paying users, and an individual Dropbox Plus user would count as one paying user. If that individual Dropbox Plus user was also part of the 50-person Dropbox Business team, we would count the individual as two paying users.
We have experienced growth in the number of paying users across our products, with the majority of paying users for the periods presented coming from our self-serve channels.
We acquired HelloSign in the first quarter of fiscal 2019. HelloSign has several product lines and the pricing and revenue generated from each product line varies, with some product lines priced based on the number of licenses purchased (similar to Dropbox plans). For purposes of HelloSign results, we include as paying users either (i) the number of users who have active paid licenses for access to the HelloSign platform as of the period end for those products that are priced based on the number of licenses purchased (which is the same method we use to evaluate existing Dropbox plans) or (ii) the number of customers for those products that are priced based on transaction volumes.
The below table sets forth the number of paying users as of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Average revenue per paying user
We define average revenue per paying user, or ARPU, as our revenue for the period presented divided by the average paying users during the same period. For interim periods, we use annualized revenue, which is calculated by dividing the revenue for the particular period by the number of days in that period and multiplying this value by 365 days. Average paying users are calculated based on adding the number of paying users as of the beginning of the period to the number of paying users as of the end of the period, and then dividing by two.
In the second quarter of 2019, we repackaged our existing Dropbox Plus plans to include additional features and, as a result, increased the price for new and existing users on this plan. For certain existing users at the time of the price change, the increase in price was effective on their next renewal date. As a result of the price increase, and combined with an increased mix of sales towards our higher-priced subscription plans, we experienced an increase in our average revenue per paying user for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. As of the fiscal year ended 2020, all of our existing Dropbox Plus plans have successfully migrated over to our now current pricing and packaging.
The below table sets forth our ARPU for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, we believe that free cash flow, or FCF, a non-GAAP financial measure, is useful in evaluating our liquidity.
Free cash flow
We define FCF as GAAP net cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures. We believe that FCF is a liquidity measure and that it provides useful information regarding cash provided by operating activities and cash used for investments in property and equipment required to maintain and grow our business. FCF is presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. FCF has limitations as an analytical tool, and it should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of other GAAP financial measures, such as net cash provided by operating activities. Some of the limitations of FCF are that FCF does not reflect our future contractual commitments, excludes investments made to acquire assets under finance leases, and may be calculated differently by other companies in our industry, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Our FCF increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in cash provided by operating activities, which was driven by increased subscription sales, as a majority of our paying users are invoiced in advance, and a decrease in capital expenditures, due to decreased spend on office build-outs.
We expect our FCF to generally increase in future periods as we increase subscription sales and reduce our capital expenditures as we shift to a Virtual First environment. We expect to continue to purchase infrastructure equipment to support our user base, however we anticipate our capital expenditures related to our office spaces will decline as the majority of spend related to the build-out of our corporate headquarters is now complete. The timing of our operating expenses as described below, may result in FCF to vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue.
The following is a reconciliation of FCF to the most comparable GAAP measure, net cash provided by operating activities:
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue from sales of subscriptions to our platform.
Revenue is recognized ratably over the related contractual term generally beginning on the date that our platform is made available to a customer. Our subscription agreements typically have monthly or annual contractual terms, although a small percentage have multi-year contractual terms. Our agreements are generally non-cancelable. We typically bill in advance for monthly contracts and annually in advance for contracts with terms of one year or longer. Amounts that have been billed are initially recorded as deferred revenue until the revenue is recognized.
Our revenue is driven primarily by conversions and upsells to our paid plans. We generate over 90% of our revenue from self-serve channels. No customer represented more than 1% of our revenue in the periods presented.
Cost of revenue and gross margin
Cost of revenue. Our cost of revenue consists primarily of expenses associated with the storage, delivery, and distribution of our platform for both paying users and free users, also known as Basic users. These costs, which we refer to as infrastructure
costs, include depreciation of our servers located in co-location facilities that we lease and operate, rent and facilities expense for those datacenters, network and bandwidth costs, support and maintenance costs for our infrastructure equipment, and payments to third-party datacenter service providers. Cost of revenue also includes costs, such as salaries, bonuses, employer payroll taxes and benefits, travel-related expenses, and stock-based compensation, which we refer to as employee-related costs, for employees whose primary responsibilities relate to supporting our infrastructure and delivering user support. Other non-employee costs included in cost of revenue include credit card fees related to processing customer transactions, and allocated overhead, such as facilities, including rent, utilities, depreciation on leasehold improvements and other equipment shared by all departments, and shared information technology costs. In addition, cost of revenue includes amortization of developed technologies, professional fees related to user support initiatives, and property taxes related to the datacenters.
We plan to continue increasing the capacity and enhancing the capability and reliability of our infrastructure to support user growth and increased use of our platform. We expect that cost of revenue will increase in absolute dollars in future periods.
Gross margin. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period based on the timing of additional capital expenditures and the related depreciation expense, or other increases in our infrastructure costs, as well as revenue fluctuations. As we continue to utilize internal infrastructure, we generally expect our gross margin, to remain relatively constant in both the near term and long term.
Operating expenses
Research and development. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs for our engineering, product, and design teams, compensation expenses related to key personnel from acquisitions and allocated overhead. Additionally, research and development expenses include internal development-related third-party hosting fees. We have expensed almost all of our research and development costs as they were incurred.
We plan to continue hiring employees for our engineering, product, and design teams to support our research and development efforts. We expect that research and development costs will increase in absolute dollars in future periods and fluctuate from period to period as a percentage of revenue.
Sales and marketing. Our sales and marketing expenses relate to both self-serve and outbound sales activities, and consist primarily of employee-related costs, brand marketing costs, lead generation costs, sponsorships and allocated overhead. Sales commissions earned by our outbound sales team and the related payroll taxes, as well as commissions earned by third-party resellers that we consider to be incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer, are deferred and are typically amortized over an estimated period of benefit of five years. Additionally, sales and marketing expenses include non-employee costs related to app store fees, fees payable to third-party sales representatives and amortization of acquired customer relationships.
We plan to continue to invest in sales and marketing to grow our user base and increase our brand awareness, including marketing efforts to continue to drive our self-serve business model. We expect that sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods and will fluctuate as a percentage of revenue. The trend and timing of sales and marketing expenses will depend in part on the timing of marketing campaigns.
General and administrative. Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs for our legal, finance, human resources, and other administrative teams, as well as certain executives. In addition, general and administrative expenses include allocated overhead, outside legal, accounting and other professional fees, and non-income based taxes.
We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses to support the growth of the Company. General and administrative expenses include the recognition of stock-based compensation expense related to the grant of restricted stock made to our co-founder. We expect that general and administrative expenses will fluctuate in absolute dollars in future periods and will generally decrease as a percentage of revenue, as a result of lower amortization of the right-of-use assets and depreciation of related property and equipment assets following the impairment charge recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, and our reduction in force.
Interest income (expense), net
Interest income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income earned on our money market funds classified as cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, partially offset by interest expense related to our finance lease obligations for infrastructure.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net consists of other non-operating gains or losses, including those related to equity investments, lease arrangements, which include sublease income, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, and realized gains and losses related to our short-term investments.
Benefit from (provision for) income taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. For the periods presented, the difference between the U.S. statutory rate and our effective tax rate is primarily due to the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets. Our effective tax rate is also impacted by earnings realized in foreign jurisdictions with statutory tax rates lower than the federal statutory tax rate. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets for federal, state, and certain foreign jurisdictions as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred assets will be realized.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our total revenue for those periods:
(1)Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
(2)Includes impairment charges related to certain right-of-use and other lease related assets as a result of our decision to shift to a Virtual First work model. See Note 9 "Leases" for further information.
(3)On March 19, 2020, one of our co-founders resigned as a member of the board and as an officer of the Company, resulting in the reversal of $23.8 million in stock-based compensation expense. Of the total amount reversed, $21.5 million related to expense recognized prior to December 31, 2019. See Note 12 "Stockholders' Equity" for further information.
(4)Upon the effectiveness of the registration statement for our initial public offering, which was March 22, 2018, the liquidity event-related performance vesting condition associated with our two-tier RSUs was satisfied. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized the cumulative unrecognized stock-based compensation of $418.7 million. See "Significant Impacts of Stock Based Compensation" for further information regarding our equity arrangements
The following table sets forth our results of operations for each of the periods presented as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Revenue increased $252.6 million or 15% during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in revenue was driven primarily by an increase in paying users, an increase in the price of our Plus plan, and an increased mix of sales towards our higher-priced subscription plans.
Cost of revenue, gross profit, and gross margin
Cost of revenue increased $3.6 million or 1% during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increases of $6.2 million in employee-related costs due to headcount growth and $5.7 million in credit card transaction fees due to higher sales and professional fees for user support. These increases were offset by a decrease of $8.0 million in infrastructure costs due to unit and storage cost efficiency gains related to our ongoing infrastructure optimization efforts.
Our gross margin increased from 75% during the year ended December 31, 2019 to 78% during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a 15% increase in our revenue during the period offset by a lesser increase in our cost of revenue described above.
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased $65.4 million or 10% during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase of $62.4 million in employee-related costs due to headcount growth in the first half of the fiscal year ended 2020.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $0.5 million or 0% during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to decreases of $13.6 million related to brand marketing expenses driven by a reduction of events due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and $6.4 million in allocated overhead, which includes facilities-related costs for our corporate headquarters. These decreases were offset by increases of $13.2 million in app store fees due to increased sales and $7.8 million in employee-related costs due to headcount growth in the first half of the fiscal year ended 2020.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense decreased $17.6 million or 7% during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a decrease of $29.8 million in stock-based compensation, with the majority of the decrease due to the resignation of one of our co-founders and the forfeiture of his Co-Founder Grant in the first quarter of 2020 as discussed in " --Note 12. Stockholders' Equity." The decrease was offset by increases of $7.3 million in legal fees and insurance premiums and $2.6 million in allocated overhead, which includes facilities-related costs for our corporate headquarters.
Impairment related to real estate assets
Impairment related to real estate assets was $398.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, due to an impairment charge related to the right-of-use and other lease related assets driven by the decision to shift towards a Virtual First work model as discussed in "--Note 9. Leases."
Interest income, net
Interest income, net decreased $10.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a decrease in interest income from our money market funds and short-term investments as a result of government-initiated interest rate reductions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other income, net
Other income, net increased $9.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to $16.0 million in gains related to an equity investment and foreign currency transaction gains. These increases were offset by a decrease of $6.8 million due to the disposal of infrastructure assets in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Benefit from (provision for) income taxes
Provision for income taxes increased by $5.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a one-time tax benefit related to the acquisition of HelloSign in 2019.
Quarterly Results of Operations (Unaudited)
The following table sets forth our unaudited quarterly statements of operations data for each of the last eight quarters ended December 31, 2020. The information for each of these quarters has been prepared on the same basis as the audited annual financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and, in the opinion of management, includes all adjustments, which includes only normal recurring adjustments, necessary for the fair statement of the results of operations for these periods. This data should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These quarterly results of operations are not necessarily indicative of our future results of operations that may be expected for any future period.
(1)Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
(2)Includes impairment charges related to certain right-of-use and other lease related assets as a result of our decision to shift to a Virtual First work model. See Note 9 "Leases" for further information.
(3)On March 19, 2020, one of our co-founders resigned as a member of the board and as an officer of the Company, resulting in the reversal of $23.8 million in stock-based compensation expense. Of the total amount reversed, $21.5 million related to expense recognized prior to December 31, 2019. See Note 12 "Stockholders' Equity" for further information.
(4)Upon the effectiveness of the registration statement for our initial public offering, which was March 22, 2018, the liquidity event-related performance vesting condition associated with our two-tier RSUs was satisfied. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized the cumulative unrecognized stock-based compensation of $418.7 million. See "Significant Impacts of Stock Based Compensation" for further information regarding our equity arrangements.
Quarterly revenue trends
Quarterly revenue increased sequentially in each of the quarters presented primarily due to increases in Total ARR, paying users, and average revenue per paying user. Seasonality in revenue is not material.
Quarterly cost of revenue and gross margin trends
Cost of revenue was relatively constant in each of the quarters presented primarily due to unit and storage cost efficiency gains related to our ongoing infrastructure optimization efforts. In addition, cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue generally decreased in the periods presented, which combined with increases in revenue caused gross margins to increase sequentially.
Quarterly operating expense trends
Excluding the impairment related to real estate assets, except for the three months ended March 31, 2020, total quarterly operating expenses generally increased sequentially in each of the quarters presented primarily due to headcount growth in connection with the expansion of the business and other events that are discussed herein. During the three months ended December 31, 2020, quarterly operating expenses increased as a percentage of revenues due to impairment charges related to the right-of-use and other lease related assets driven by the decision to shift towards a Virtual First work model as discussed in "--Note 9. Leases." Quarterly operating expenses during the three months ended March 31, 2020, was lower than other quarters due to the resignation of one of the co-founders and the forfeiture of his Co-Founder Grant as discussed in "--Note 12. Stockholders' Equity."
Research and development
Research and development expenses have generally increased sequentially in the quarters presented primarily due to employee-related costs due to headcount growth. Research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue during the three months ended December 31, 2020 decreased due to lower allocated overhead, which includes facilities-related costs for our corporate headquarters.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses fluctuated in the quarters presented primarily due to increases in app store fees due to increased sales, and employee-related costs due to headcount growth, which was offset by a reduction in brand marketing expense due to a reduction of events as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, the timing of brand advertising campaigns can impact the trends in sales and marketing expenses.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses fluctuated in the quarters presented primarily due to increases in outside services that includes legal fees and insurance premiums, and allocated overhead, which includes facilities-related costs for our corporate headquarters, offset by decreases in non-income based taxes. General and administrative expenses during the three months ended
March 31, 2020, was lower than the other quarters presented primarily due to a decrease in stock-based compensation due to the resignation of one of our co-founders and the forfeiture of his Co-Founder Grant as discussed in "--Note 12. Stockholders' Equity."
Impairment related to real estate assets
During the three months ended December 31, 2020, we recognized impairment charges related to the right-of-use and other lease related assets driven by the decision to shift towards a Virtual First work model as discussed in "--Note 9. Leases."
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $314.9 million and short-term investments of $806.4 million, which were held for working capital purposes. Our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments consist primarily of cash, money market funds, corporate notes and obligations, U.S. Treasury securities, certificates of deposit, asset-backed securities, commercial paper, foreign government securities, U.S. agency obligations, supranational securities, and municipal securities. As of December 31, 2020, we had $138.1 million of our cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries. We do not expect to incur material taxes in the event we repatriate any of these amounts.
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through equity issuances, cash generated from our operations, and finance leases to finance infrastructure-related assets in co-location facilities that we directly lease and operate. We enter into finance leases in part to better match the timing of payments for infrastructure-related assets with that of cash received from our paying users. In our business model, some of our registered users convert to paying users over time, and consequently there is a lag between initial investment in infrastructure assets and cash received from some of our users.
Our principal uses of cash in recent periods have been funding our operations, purchases of short-term investments, the satisfaction of tax withholdings in connection with the settlement of restricted stock units and awards, making principal payments on our finance lease obligations, and capital expenditures. In February 2020, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program for the repurchase of up to $600 million of the outstanding shares of our Class A common stock. In February 2021 our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to an additional $1 billion of the outstanding shares of our Class A common stock. Share repurchases will be made from time to time in private transactions or open market purchases as permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements and will be subject to a review of the circumstances in place at that time, including prevailing market prices. The program does not obligate us to repurchase any specific number of shares and has no specified time limit; it may be discontinued at any time. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased and subsequently retired 20.2 million shares of our Class A common stock for an aggregate amount of $397.5 million.
In April 2017, we entered into a $600.0 million credit facility with a syndicate of financial institutions. Pursuant to the terms of the revolving credit facility, we may issue letters of credit under the revolving credit facility, which reduce the total amount available for borrowing under such facility. The revolving credit facility terminates on April 4, 2022. In February 2018, we amended our revolving credit facility to, among other things, permit us to make certain investments, enter into an unsecured standby letter of credit facility, and increase our standby letter of credit sublimit to $187.5 million. We also increased our borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility from $600.0 million to $725.0 million. We may from time to time request increases in the borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility of up to $275.0 million, provided no event of default has occurred or is continuing or would result from such increase.
Interest on borrowings under the revolving credit facility accrues at a variable rate tied to the prime rate or the LIBOR rate, at our election. Interest is payable quarterly in arrears. Pursuant to the terms of the revolving credit facility, we are required to pay an annual commitment fee that accrues at a rate of 0.20% per annum on the unused portion of the borrowing commitments under the revolving credit facility. In addition, we are required to pay a fee in connection with letters of credit issued under the revolving credit facility that accrues at a rate of 1.5% per annum on the amount of such letters of credit outstanding. There is an additional fronting fee of 0.125% per annum multiplied by the average aggregate daily maximum amount available under all letters of credit.
The revolving credit facility contains customary conditions to borrowing, events of default, and covenants, including covenants that restrict our ability to incur indebtedness, grant liens, make distributions to our holders or our subsidiaries’ equity interests, make investments, or engage in transactions with our affiliates. In addition, the revolving credit facility contains financial covenants, including a consolidated leverage ratio covenant and a minimum liquidity balance. We were in compliance with all covenants under the revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no amounts outstanding under the revolving credit facility and an aggregate of $45.4 million in letters of credit issued under the revolving credit facility. Our total available borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility was $679.6 million as of December 31, 2020. In anticipation of the termination of the credit facility, we expect to amend or otherwise refinance the credit facility prior to such termination.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with our short-term investments, cash provided by operations and amounts available under the revolving credit facility, will be sufficient to meet our needs for the foreseeable future. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our revenue growth rate, subscription renewal activity, billing frequency, the timing and extent of spending to support further infrastructure development and research and development efforts, the timing and extent of additional capital expenditures to invest in collaboration spaces, our ability to sublease space at certain office locations, such as our corporate headquarters, the satisfaction of tax withholding obligations for the release of restricted stock units and awards, the expansion of sales and marketing and international operation activities, the
introduction of new product capabilities and enhancement of our platform, the continuing market acceptance of our platform, the volume and timing of our share repurchases and any potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. We have and may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations, and financial condition could be materially and adversely affected.
Our cash flow activities were as follows for the periods presented:
Operating activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collections from our paying users for subscriptions to our platform. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for employee-related expenditures, infrastructure-related costs, and marketing expenses. Net cash provided by operating activities is impacted by our net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization expenses and stock-based compensation, as well as the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $570.8 million, which mostly consisted of our net loss of $256.3 million, adjusted for impairment related to real estate assets of $398.2 million, stock-based compensation expense of $261.5 million, depreciation and amortization expenses of $159.3 million, and net cash inflow of $3.8 million from operating assets and liabilities. The inflow from operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in deferred revenue from increased subscription sales, as a majority of our paying users are invoiced in advance, partially offset by the payment of our corporate bonus and key employee holdback payments related to the acquisition of HelloSign.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $528.5 million, which mostly consisted of our net loss of $52.7 million, adjusted for stock-based compensation expense of $261.2 million and depreciation and amortization expenses of $173.5 million, and net cash inflow of $145.6 million from operating assets and liabilities. The inflow from operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase of $68.7 million in deferred revenue from increased subscription sales, as a majority of our paying users are invoiced in advance. Additionally, cash provided by operating activities increased due to an increase in other operating assets and liabilities of $76.9 million. Our net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 also included cash payments of $55.3 million related to tenant improvement reimbursements.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities is primarily impacted by purchases of short-term investments, purchases of property and equipment to make improvements or modifications to existing and new office spaces, and for purchasing infrastructure equipment in co-location facilities that we directly lease and operate.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $233.6 million, which primarily related to $170.6 million in net investment outflows, driven by the purchases of short-term investments, net of sales and maturities and $15.1 million in equipment rebates. Additionally, cash paid for capital expenditures during the period was $80.1 million related to our office and datacenter build-outs.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $320.0 million, which primarily related to purchases of short-term investments of $775.4 million, cash paid for our acquisition of HelloSign, net of cash acquired, of
$171.6 million and capital expenditures of $136.1 million related to our office and datacenter build-outs. These outflows were partially offset by inflows of $750.9 million related to proceeds from maturities and sales of short-term investments.
Financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities is primarily impacted by repurchases of common stock to satisfy the tax withholding obligation for the release of restricted stock units ("RSUs") and restricted stock awards ("RSAs") and principal payments on finance lease obligations for our infrastructure equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $577.7 million, which primarily consisted of $397.5 million for the repurchase of our common stock in relation to current our stock repurchase program, $92.2 million for the satisfaction of tax withholding obligations for the release of restricted stock units and awards, and $89.5 million in principal payments on finance lease obligations.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in financing activities was $176.7 million, which primarily consisted of $92.9 million in principal payments against finance lease obligations and $85.4 million for the satisfaction of tax withholding obligations for the release of restricted stock units and awards.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal commitments consist of obligations under operating leases for office space and datacenter operations, and finance leases for datacenter equipment, furniture and fixtures, and computer equipment. The following table summarizes our commitments to settle contractual obligations in cash as of December 31, 2020, for the periods presented below:
(1)Consists of future non-cancelable minimum rental payments under operating leases for our offices and datacenters, excluding rent payments from our sub-tenants and variable operating expenses. As of December 31, 2020, we are entitled to non-cancelable rent payments from our sub-tenants of $133.8 million, which will be collected over the next 13 years.
(2)Consists of future non-cancelable minimum rental payments under finance leases primarily for our infrastructure.
(3)Consists of commitments to third-party vendors for services related to our infrastructure, infrastructure warranty contracts, and asset retirement obligations for office modifications.
In addition to the contractual obligations set forth above, as of December 31, 2020, we had an aggregate of $45.4 million in letters of credit outstanding under our revolving credit facility.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Significant Impacts of Stock-Based Compensation
Restricted Stock Units
We have granted restricted stock units, or RSUs, to our employees and members of our Board of Directors under our 2008 Equity Incentive Plan, or 2008 Plan, our 2017 Equity Incentive Plan, or 2017 Plan and our 2018 Equity Incentive Plan, or 2018 Plan. While we have previously granted two types of RSUs under the Dropbox Equity Incentive Plans, as of December 31, 2020, only one-tier RSUs were outstanding.
•One-tier RSUs, which have a service-based vesting condition over a four-year period. These awards typically have a cliff vesting period of one year and continue to vest quarterly thereafter. We recognize compensation expense associated with one-tier RSUs ratably on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.
•Two-tier RSUs, which had both a service-based vesting condition and a liquidity event-related performance vesting condition. These awards typically had a service-based vesting period of four years with a cliff vesting period of one year and continued to vest monthly thereafter.
Upon the effectiveness of the registration statement related to our IPO, we recognized stock-based compensation related to our two-tier RSUs using the accelerated attribution method, with a cumulative catch-up in the amount of $418.7 million attributable to service provided prior to such effective date.
Co-Founder Grants
In December 2017, the Board of Directors approved a grant to the Company’s co-founders of non-Plan RSAs with respect to 14.7 million shares of Class A Common Stock in the aggregate (collectively, the “Co-Founder Grants”), of which 10.3 million RSAs were granted to Mr. Houston, the Company’s co-founder and Chief Executive Officer, and 4.4 million RSAs were granted to Mr. Ferdowsi, the Company’s co-founder and former Director. These Co-Founder Grants have service-based, market-based, and performance-based vesting conditions. The Co-Founder Grants are excluded from Class A common stock issued and outstanding until the satisfaction of these vesting conditions. The Co-Founder Grants also provide the holders with certain stockholder rights, such as the right to vote the shares with the other holders of Class A common stock and a right to cumulative declared dividends. However, the Co-Founder Grants are not considered a participating security for purposes of calculating net loss per share attributable to common stockholders in Note 13, "Net Loss Per Share", as the right to the cumulative declared dividends is forfeitable if the service condition is not met.
In March 2020, one of the Company's co-founders, Mr. Ferdowsi, resigned as a member of the Board of Directors and as an officer of the Company. As of the date of Mr. Ferdowsi’s resignation, none of the Stock Price Targets had been met, resulting in the forfeiture of his 4.4 million RSAs. As he did not provide the requisite service associated with the Co-Founder Grants, the Company reversed all stock-based compensation expense that had been recognized from the grant date through March 19, 2020. See Note 12, "Stockholders' Equity" for further information.
The Co-Founder Grants are eligible to vest over the ten-year period following the date the Company’s shares of Class A common stock commenced trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market in connection with the Company’s IPO. The Co-Founder Grants comprise nine tranches that are eligible to vest based on the achievement of stock price goals, each of which are referred to as a Stock Price Target, measured over a consecutive thirty-day trading period during the Performance Period. The Performance Period began on January 1, 2019 and the RSUs expire at the earliest date among the following: the date on which all shares vest, the date the Co-Founder(s) cease to meet their service conditions, or the tenth anniversary of the IPO date.
During the first four years of the Performance Period, no more than 20% of the shares subject to each Co-Founder Grant would be eligible to vest in any calendar year. After the first four years, all shares are eligible to vest based on the achievement of the Stock Price Targets.
The Performance Vesting Condition for the Co-Founder Grants was satisfied on the date the Company’s shares of Class A common stock commenced trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market in connection with the Company’s IPO, which was March 23, 2018.
Critical Accounting Policies and Judgments
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, in the United States. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue recognition
We generate revenue from sales of subscriptions to our platform. Subscription fees exclude sales and other indirect taxes. We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•Determination of the transaction price
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation
Our subscription agreements typically have monthly or annual contractual terms, and a small percentage have multi-year contractual terms. Revenue is recognized ratably over the related contractual term generally beginning on the date that our platform is made available to a customer. Our agreements are generally non-cancelable. We typically bill in advance for monthly contracts and annually in advance for contracts with terms of one year or longer.
Business combinations
Accounting for business combinations requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions. We allocate the purchase consideration to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values, with the excess recorded to goodwill. Critical estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows, expected asset lives, and discount rates. The amounts and useful lives assigned to acquisition-related intangible assets impact the amount and timing of future amortization expense.
During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Deferred commissions
Certain sales commissions and the related payroll taxes earned by our outbound sales team, as well as commissions earned by third-party resellers, are considered to be incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. These costs are deferred and then amortized over a period of benefit that we have determined to be five years. We determined the period of benefit by taking into consideration our historical customer attrition rates, the useful life of our technology, and the impact of competition in our industry.
Impairment related to real estate assets
In accordance with ASC 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment (“ASC 360”), we evaluate our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events and circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired. When the projected undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than their carrying amounts, the assets are adjusted to their estimated fair value and an impairment loss is recorded as a component of operating income.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, as a result of our Virtual First strategy, we reassessed our asset groupings and evaluated the recoverability of our right-of-use and related lease assets, including leasehold improvements, furniture and fixtures, and computer equipment, and determined that the carrying value of the respective asset groups was not fully recoverable. As a result, we utilized discounted cash flow models to estimate the fair value of the asset groups and calculate the corresponding impairment loss.
The development of discounted cash flow models used to estimate the fair value of the asset groups required the application of significant judgement in determining market participant assumptions, including the projected sublease income over the remaining lease terms, expected downtime prior to the commencement of future subleases, expected lease incentives offered to future tenants, and discount rates that reflected the level of risk associated with these future cash flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, “Description of the Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for recently adopted accounting pronouncements as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.