Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overall, total revenues were impacted minimally with 2020 revenues of $3,769,161 compared to $3,836,820 in 2019. The uncertainty of economic conditions caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic was the cause of it and impacted the flip end of our business. However, Daniels’ Payless subsidiary’s long-haul rental business segment is the engine that drove the company forward during fiscal year ending November 30, 2020. Their gross revenues increased 96% year over year for a current run rate of $417,937 and contributed to the collective companies and segments reporting a gross profit of $744,108 for a 19.7% return on Sales.
Hard assets have grown in both business segments of Payless. The flip segment - buy at auction, add electronics for location and added safety, provide cosmetics, advertise and sell - has assets with a purchase price of $204,704. As of November 30, 2020 the rental fleet segment had eighteen trucks with an asset purchase value of $629,164. Based on a balanced approach for expense management among the two Payless business lines and the public company parent, the collective Daniels / Payless Truckers Companies has an EBITDA of $71,471 for the year ended November 30, 2020.
All efforts have and continue to be coordinated in the rapid rise of the heavy long-haul truck rental business. The critical mass and positive cash flow from the rental fleet allowed Daniels to enter negotiations for term loans - longer term debt with a market interest rate but with no equity dilution. The use of convertible debt and callable preferred stock was beneficial in adding to our fleet and allowed us to conserve internally generated cash flows. These financial tools will continue to be used but to a lesser extent. The cash raised from their use and the introduction of private loan investors to the capital mix in fiscal 2020 will continue to be used and now considered as “down payment” cash on trucks with the balance of the purchases coming - on a leveraged basis - from tranches of a Term Loan. The acceleration of asset acquisition and the rental income will allow for monthly payments on larger amounts under the term loan.
During 2020, an additional source of equity funding was created to support larger term loan amounts and reduce the use of merchant finance. The Company issued 115,000,000 shares of stock as compensation at a stated value of $621,250 to our senior oversight financial management team, operating managers and retained consultants. Each can act independently and now - as long-term incentivized investors - participate in the building of the inhouse equity base for supporting leveraged finance. An agreed-upon percentage of their shares - all of which are counted in the total outstanding calculation for 2020 - will be sold under Rule 144 as funds are needed to acquire trucks directly or to accelerate truck additions through providing the equity for term loan leverage. Through this structure and ensuing Regulation A Offering, the Company is attempting to assure that adequate financing will be available to reach the first major milestone for Payless - 100 rental trucks on the road generating Gross Rental Income of $325,000 per month.
During fiscal year 2020, Daniels, as an incubator, marked several important milestones in fulfilling its Corporate Aim (Aim). That Aim is to achieve the forward earnings momentum and critical mass necessary to achieve major stock exchange consideration for listing. Expectations for listing acceptance are for an 18 to 24-month period, based on the development and subsequent results of the most promising of subsidiary candidates. Management believes generic (start-up opportunity) growth to be the catalyst in meeting the net worth and earnings requirements through employment of limited amounts of capital.
Our corporate securities packages (including stock, warrants, rights and debt) should become more acceptable as liquid forms of finance to broker-dealers, investment bankers, private equity firms and the retail investor as meetings and high levels of interest are expressed by the major exchanges and potential outside board candidates are announced. This favorable visibility should take us to the realm of long-term financing of all types, including equity. Longer term finance options should be available at rates that are open market, very competitive and with terms that pose no threat to serious equity dilution. In the majority of cases funds raised will be committed to activities that are expected to be anti-dilutive in nature, and we will be acquiring hard assets and capable of generating immediate positive cash flow and earnings.
While the above aims have been stated before, things do not happen overnight when you are trying to build out a mini-cap public company. The options for financing at this level are limited and extremely expensive.
However, we believe our options may have improved with the launch of our premier subsidiary, Payless Truckers, Inc. We now have a subsidiary with two business segments each of which has significant growth potential. The “flip” segment, which buys, refurbishes, installs location electronics, advertises and the sells the heavy-duty trucks, has generated the positive cash-flows necessary to cover all the start-up expenses and operational overhead during 2018. Now with all that behind this segment, we expect that with the use of floor plan financing to keep the pipeline primed with an adequate supply to accomplish a total sales goal of $100,000 per week with a positive gross profit per truck. To date, most individual sales have been profitable and we have expectations for significant improvement through the use internally generated funds and favorable cost financing to replace our present high-cost floor plan financing.
The “Credit Enhancement” segment of the business rents heavy-duty trucks to independent truckers with good driving records, hauling for major companies. The cash flow is designed to be steady and significant for the driver and ultimately, for Payless. The trucks are acquired at auction or from wholesale buying groups and are rented on a weekly basis under a five-year contract with options to purchase at current retail, every six months.
Forward Looking Statements
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto, included elsewhere within this report. The Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements including statements using terminology such as “can”, “may”, “believe”, “designated to”, “will”, “expect”, “plan”, “anticipate”, “estimate”, “potential” or “continue”, or the negative thereof or other comparable terminology regarding beliefs, plans, expectations or intentions regarding the future. You should read statements that contain these words carefully because they:
● discuss our future expectations;
● contain projections of our future results of operations or of our financial condition; and
● state other “forward-looking” information.
We believe it is important to communicate our expectations. However, forward looking statements involve risks and uncertainties and our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those discussed in forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors,” “Business” and elsewhere in this report. All forward-looking statements and risk factors included in this document are made as of the date hereof, based on information available to us as of the date thereof, and we assume no obligations to update any forward-looking statement or risk factor, unless we are required to do so by law.
Overview
Daniels Corporate Advisory creates and implements corporate strategy alternatives for the mini-cap public or private company client. The addition of new business opportunities and the location of professional talent for implementation is anticipated through the full-time efforts of our senior management. These efforts are to be expanded in the United States and in foreign capitals by an expanding advisory board and through the networks of independent consultants. Principals of the respective client company will open their networks to augment professional access for specialties the Daniels corporate strategy consultants believe are needed in a joint-venture, jointly-controlled undertaking created for the client’s optimum growth.
Daniels may provide the client with multiple corporate strategies/opportunities including joint-ventures, marketing opportunity agreements and/or potential acquisitions structured in leveraged buyout format. One or a combination of these strategies would allow the client to enter new market niches or expand further into existing ones.
Reverse Stock Split
All common share amounts (except par value and par value per share amounts) referred to in this Report prior to September 27, 2019 have been retroactively restated to reflect the Company’s one-for-200 reverse capital stock split effective September 27, 2019.
Recent Business Developments
The Company is operating through the corporate strategy segment of its business. It is attempting to build its own critical mass by creation of start-up subsidiaries it believes have promise/potential. The stated goal is for the parent (DCAC) company to consolidate the critical mass of the subsidiary/start-ups with that of the parent for eventually listing on a major stock exchange. We have continued to focus our efforts on the build out of the Daniels corporate strategy model. We adjusted our strategy as it relates to the development of subsidiary start-ups and potential acquisitions for common stock. We concentrate on identifying projects that have the potential to produce significant earnings on the leveraged capital base of both the parent and the subsidiary/start-up within an expedited time period.
As a result, we formed Payless Truckers, Inc. (“Payless”), a wholly-owned subsidiary which was incorporated in the State of Nevada, on April 11, 2018. Payless is a start-up, service company in the trucking industry. It has two business segments with its launch and current results coming from the “flip” segment, whose principal business is to acquire class 8 heavy duty trucks, refurbish them, add location electronics, advertise and sell to independent drivers and operators. The second segment is the “credit rebuilding segment” where class 8 heavy duty trucks, owned by Daniels/Payless, are rented to experienced independent drivers. These independent drivers rent for a period of up to five years, and have the option to buy the vehicle at retail value every six months. This segment commenced operations subsequent to the close of our fiscal year. In an effort to grow quickly and profitably, Daniels entered into an operating agreement with a senior operating management team in an effort to drive the business and better realize its earnings and growth potential.
The Payless two-segment trucking model represents a streamlined trucking service company; one Daniels believes should survive any potential future slow-downs in the economy. The model was developed to allow for the maximum utilization of each truck. The first phase of operations has already been implemented and has covered all the start-up costs plus its own operating expenses.
We hope to further enhance our plan for growth beginning in our third year by forming joint-ventures and/or partnerships with truck maintenance companies across the United States in key traffic hubs. This will potentially afford independent drivers and operators the opportunity to be serviced by trusted maintenance facilities under our warranty program.
Business Strategy - Current Operational Strategy & Current Client Projects:
Daniels creates and implements corporate strategy alternatives for the mini-cap public or private company client. The addition of new business opportunities and the location of professional talent for implementation is anticipated through the full-time efforts of our senior management. These efforts are to be expanded in the US and in Foreign capitals by an expanding advisory board and through the networks of independent consultants. Principals of the respective client company will open their networks to augment professional access for specialties the Daniels corporate strategy consultants believe are needed in a joint venture, (jointly-controlled) undertaking created for the client’s optimum growth.
Daniels may provide the client with multiple corporate strategies /opportunities including joint-ventures, marketing opportunity agreements and/or potential acquisitions structured in a leveraged buyout format. One or a combination of these strategies would allow the client to enter new market niches or expand further into existing ones.
The Goal: A major exchange listing. Senior management is estimating at least twenty-four months from commencement of a corporate strategy assignment. Financial results, aided by all participating players, should be forthcoming and recorded in SEC filings. At the same time, a senior management team and Board expanded with highly-credible interim (or permanent) professionals (directors) will be organized in order to successfully navigate the listing process of a major stock exchange. While Daniels believes this process should be successful in the above-noted time period, there is some uncertainty in the process which is dependent upon any past issues the listing committee of a specific exchange may deem necessary to be addressed prior to uplifting. In addition, it may take added time to find the appropriate outside directors that can not only satisfy the listing committee of the exchange but who can also provide added networking/services to build the parent’s and subsidiary’s potential for accelerated growth.
A similar effort will be provided to tailor an optimum growth program for the private company client, whether it chooses to remain private or to become a public company through alternative merger opportunities.
OPTIMUM GROWTH STRATEGY:
Twenty-Four Month Horizons for Daniels’ Objectives:
Daniels’ believes that the validity of its corporate strategy model will be proven further through the success of its initial subsidiary incubation, Payless Truckers, Inc. The growing momentum of this cash flow engine should generate the interest of long-term financing sources that will realize upfront that debt service can/ will be covered. This “collective approach” to growth should provide several initial seed capital sources for other startup subsidiaries or the acquisition and joint-development of early-stage companies. Daniels plans to use its publicly traded common stock in a variety of securities packages, including convertible preferred stock, to launch promising subsidiary start-ups, initially for generic sales/profits growth. Subsequent growth options noted above will be applied as external growth becomes a secondary goal. This method of two stage (generic and then external) growth is designed to leave existing client management with commanding equity and operating control positions. Eventually, an optimum exit strategy will be developed for the subsidiary, one that returns a significant return on corporate (parent) capital. The choices of optimum exit strategies could include bringing a subsidiary public, directly through a spin-off strategy, or merging it with an exchange listed public company that requires added critical mass. This infusion of cash flow and profits will allow expansion in one of the more profitable niches of any market designated for expansion. The same corporate strategy model can/will be applied to any independent mini-cap public client.
Senior management believes our corporate strategy business model to be scalable. Based upon the potential success of the initial corporate strategy consulting assignments creating our uplifting to a major stock exchange, Daniels may entertain the creation of a franchising plan for key US cities and foreign capitals or finance centers.
Sales and Marketing
Daniels’ senior management will concentrate its efforts to expand its corporate strategy and financial advisory services and related specialties in the mini-cap segment of the private and public markets, where Daniels believes it will be effective. Marketing efforts will increase through social and print media efforts and will be in addition to those methods already mentioned herein.
Daniels’ objective is to create and help manage implementation of accelerated expansion strategies and in so doing, aid in the creation of financing alternatives to accomplish client goals.
Competition
Existing and new competitors will continue to improve their services and introduce new services with competitive price and performance characteristics.
In periods of reduced demand for our services, we can either choose to maintain market share by reducing our prices to meet competition or maintain prices and choose only those assignments with new clients that have pressing goals to be met that offer Daniels optimum potential for profits and growth.
The “collective” corporate financial services, direct and referral, including merchant banking/private equity, are very competitive and fragmented in the Company’s market niche. There are limited barriers to entry and new competitors frequently enter the market. A significant number of our competitors possess substantially greater resources. We will continue to offer equity compensation to our team in order to keep a stable, cohesive team of professionals, which is necessary and key to the creation of operating and capital solutions in a timely fashion.
General
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our most significant judgments and estimates used in preparation of our financial statements. which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Critical Accounting Policies
Financial Reporting Release No. 60, published by the SEC, recommends that all companies include a discussion of critical accounting policies used in the preparation of their financial statements. While all these significant accounting policies impact our financial condition and results of operations and we view certain of these policies as critical. Policies determined to be critical are those policies that have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements and require management to use a greater degree of judgment and estimates. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
We believe that given current facts and circumstances, it is unlikely that applying any other reasonable judgments or estimate methodologies would cause a material effect on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or liquidity for the periods presented in this report.
The accounting policies identified as critical are as follows:
Revenue and Cost Recognition
We recognize revenue when we satisfy performance obligations by the transfer of control of products or services to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those products or services. We recognize revenue from class 8 heavy duty truck sales to customers when we satisfy our performance obligation, at a point in time, when title to the truck is transferred to the customer. Delivery or shipping charges billed to customers, if applicable, are included in product sales and the related shipping costs are included in cost of goods sold.
Fair Value of Assets
The Company has adopted the standard FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC 820) “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures” which defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date ASC 820 also establishes a fair value hierarchy that distinguishes between (1) market participant assumptions developed based on market data obtained from independent sources (observable inputs) and (2) an entity’s own assumptions about market participant assumptions developed based on the best information available in the circumstances (unobservable inputs). The fair value hierarchy consists of three broad levels, which gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are described below:
● Level 1-Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities.
● Level 2-Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability; either directly or indirectly, including quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active; inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability (e.g. interest rates); and inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data by correlation or other means.
● Level 3-Inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable.
The respective carrying value of certain on-balance-sheet financial instruments approximated their fair values due to the short-term nature of these instruments. These financial instruments include investments in available-for-sale securities and accounts payable and accrued expenses. The Company has also applied ASC 820 for all non-financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a non-recurring basis. The adoption of ASC 820 for non-financial assets and liabilities did not have a significant impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Use of Estimates
In preparing financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
COVID-19
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency in response to a new strain of a coronavirus (the “COVID-19 outbreak”). In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak continues to evolve as of the date of this report. Management is actively monitoring the global situation and its effects on the Company’s industry, financial condition, liquidity, and operations. Given the daily evolution of the COVID-19 outbreak and the global responses to curb its spread, the Company is not able to estimate the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak on its results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity for fiscal year 2020. However, if the pandemic continues, it may have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of future operations, financial position, and liquidity in fiscal year 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of November 30, 2020, we had $200,858 in cash and cash equivalents and a working capital deficit of $4,239,488.
During the year ended November 30, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $239,892 compared to net cash provided of $154,943 in 2019. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities is primarily attributable to the change in our working capital assets, in particular inventory and accounts payable and other accrued liabilities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $459,071 for the year ended November 30, 2020, as compared to $248,525 in 2019. The increase is directly attributable to the purchases of a trucks utilized in our credit rebuilding business.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $352,466 for the year ended November 30, 2020, as compared to net cash provided of $112,500 in 2019. The increase in net cash provided by financing activities is directly related to proceeds received from the issuance of Series B convertible preferred stock. During the year ended November 30, 2020, we received proceeds of $289,000 from the issuance of Series B convertible preferred stock to fund operations. This compares to proceeds of $115,000 received from the issuance of convertible debt received during the year ended November 30, 2019.
Our primary source of liquidity has been proceeds received from the issuance of Series B convertible preferred stock, convertible debt and loans from related parties. Since the creation of our subsidiary, Payless Truckers, Inc., cash flow from the “flip” business of the truck service company has sustained the consolidated group
Financing Activities
We will have to raise capital by means of borrowings or through a private placement or a subsequent registered offering. At present, we do not have any commitments with respect to future financings. If we are unable to raise adequate capital, in the near term, to finance all phases of a client corporate consulting assignment, our proposed business will experience slow growth because it will be very hard to compete for business without a sound capital base to support advisory and implementation efforts on our suggested corporate growth strategies.
At present, we do have sufficient capital on hand to fund operations for the immediate future. Management estimates that it will need up to $2.0 million to fund its PayLess Truckers subsidiary. It is possible that we can still achieve our objectives by use of asset-based lending whereby we can leverage our truck purchases. However, because of the start-up nature of the subsidiary this financing may be harder to achieve than normal. Even if limited funds are raised, PayLess will still be able to register profits from its “flip” program while cost-effective funding for the “credit enhancement” program can be arranged. The Company does have funding available under a commitment letter but these funds are very expensive; management is trying to avoid their use.
It is the Company’s intention to concentrate its efforts on the build-out of its PayLess Truckers, Inc. subsidiary. Once solidly on its growth path, meeting projections and generating positive operating cash flows, additional subsidiary/start-up businesses will be entertained be the parent company.
Senior Management believes it will have sufficient cash flows to continue in business for the foreseeable future. While legal and accounting expenses are significant for a reporting company, we will cover them out of operating cash flows.
Overall, total revenues were impacted minimally with 2020 revenues of $3,769,161 compared to $3,836,820 in 2019. The uncertainty of economic conditions caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic was the cause of it and impacted the flip end of our business. However, Daniels’ Payless subsidiary’s long-haul rental business segment is the engine that drove the company forward during fiscal year ending November 30, 2020. Their gross revenues increased 77.5% year over year for a current run rate of $417,937 and contributed to the collective companies and segments reporting a gross profit of $744,108 for a 19.7% return on Sales.
Hard assets have grown in both business segments of Payless. The flip segment - buy at auction, add electronics for location and added safety, provide cosmetics, advertise and sell - has assets with a purchase price of $204,704. As of November 30, 2020 the rental fleet segment had eighteen trucks with an asset purchase value of $629,164. Based on a balanced approach for expense management among the two Payless business lines and the public company parent, the collective Daniels / Payless Truckers Companies has an EBITDA of $71,471 for the year ended November 30, 2020.
All efforts have and continue to be coordinated in the rapid rise of the heavy long-haul truck rental business. The critical mass and positive cash flow from the rental fleet allowed Daniels to enter negotiations for term loans - longer term debt with a market interest rate but with no equity dilution. The use of convertible debt and callable preferred stock was beneficial in adding to our fleet and allowed us to conserve internally generated cash flows. These financial tools will continue to be used but to a lesser extent. The cash raised from their use and the introduction of private loan investors to the capital mix in fiscal 2020 will continue to be used and now considered as “down payment” cash on trucks with the balance of the purchases coming - on a leveraged basis - from tranches of a Term Loan. The acceleration of asset acquisition and the rental income will allow for monthly payments on larger amounts under the term loan.
During 2020, an additional source of equity funding was created to support larger term loan amounts and reduce the use of merchant finance. The Company issued 115,000,000 shares of stock as compensation at a stated value of $621,250 to our senior oversight financial management team, operating managers and retained consultants. Each can act independently and now - as long-term incentivized investors - participate in the building of the inhouse equity base for supporting leveraged finance. An agreed-upon percentage of their shares - all of which are counted in the total outstanding calculation for 2020 - will be sold under Rule 144 as funds are needed to acquire trucks directly or to accelerate truck additions through providing the equity for term loan leverage. Through this structure and ensuing Regulation A Offering, the Company is attempting to assure that adequate financing will be available to reach the first major milestone for Payless - 100 rental trucks on the road generating Gross Rental Income of $325,000 per month.
Comparison of the Year Ended November 30, 2020 to the Year Ended November 30, 2019 Revenues
Sales
Sales totaled $3,769,161 which were comprised of (i) $3,324,479 from the resale of refurbished trucks, (ii) $417,937 from vehicle rental agreements, and (iii) $26,745 from other miscellaneous sources for the year ended November 30, 2020, compared to sales of $3,836,820 which were comprised of (i) $3,600,119 from the resale of refurbished trucks and (ii) $235,428 from vehicle rental agreements, and (iii) $1,273 from other miscellaneous sources during the year ended November 30, 2019. The decrease in sales is believed to be primarily attributable to the uncertainty of economic conditions caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended November 30, 2020 and 2019 were $744,108 and $363,001, respectively. Gross profit percentage for the year ended November 30, 2020 and 2019 were 19.7% and 9.5%, respectively. The increase in gross profit and gross profit percentage for the current year period is directly attributable to an increase in revenues from truck rental agreements which yield higher profit margins than truck resales.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses are primarily comprised of compensation, facilities costs and outsourced services. Operating expenses totaled $1,746,563 for the year ended November 30, 2020, compared to operating expenses of $681,028 during the year ended November 30, 2019 representing an increase of $1,065,535 or 156.5%. The increase in operating expenses is generally related to the increase in our use of consulting and professional services for corporate matters and financing efforts. Additionally, the Company issued 115,000,000 shares of its common stock valued at $621,250 to employees and advisors as compensation. No such issuances were made during the year ended November 30, 2019.
Other Income and Expenses
Net other income for the year ended November 30, 2020 totaled $198,349, compared to $1,289,402 in net other expense for the year ended November 30, 2019. The increase in net other income is attributable to the following factors: (i) we realized a decrease in interest expense is due to less amortization of debt discounts attributable to our notes payable; (ii) we recorded a gain from the change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $621,557 during the year ended November 30, 2020, compared to a loss from the change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $464,333 during the year ended November 30, 2019; and (iii) we did not recognize any expense for derivative liabilities during the year ended November 30, 2020, compared to expenses of $254,678 for derivative liabilities recorded during the year ended November 30, 2019.
Net Income Attributable to Common Stockholders
The Company incurred a net loss attributable to common stockholders for the year ended November 30, 2020 of $1,406,741, compared to a net loss attributable to common stockholders of $1,607,429 for the year ended November 30, 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Inflation
We believe that inflation has not had a material impact on our results of operations for the two years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, and since inflation rates have generally remained at relatively low levels our operations are not otherwise uniquely affected by inflation concerns.
Going Concern
The accompanying audited condensed consolidated financial statements included in this filing have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles that contemplate our continuance as a going concern. Our auditors, in their report dated March 23, 2021, have expressed substantial doubt about our ability to continue as going concern. Our cash position may be inadequate to pay all of the costs associated with the testing, production and marketing of our products. Management intends to use borrowings and the sale of equity or convertible debt to mitigate the effects of its cash position, however no assurance can be given that debt or equity financing, if and when required will be available. The accompanying audited consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue existence.