Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We consummated our Initial Public Offering on October 19, 2020. We intend to use the cash proceeds from our public offering and private placement of warrants as well as additional issuances, if any, of our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt to complete the business combination.
We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. There can be no assurance that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
Merger Agreement
On March 8, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement with Merger Sub and DocGo, which provides for the Merger of Merger Sub with and into DocGo, with DocGo being the surviving entity of the Merger and becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
Upon consummation of the Merger, the outstanding DocGo common stock will be exchanged for a pro rata portion of an aggregate of 83,600,000 Closing Shares, less the number of Closing Shares reserved for issuance by the Company upon the exercise of outstanding options and warrants of DocGo which will be assumed by the Company.
As part of the aggregate consideration payable to DocGo pursuant to the Merger Agreement, DocGo’s stockholders will also have the right to receive their pro rata portion of up to an aggregate of 5,000,000 Contingent Shares if the following stock price conditions are met: (i) 1,250,000 Contingent Shares if the closing price of our Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.50 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, reorganizations, and recapitalizations) on any twenty (20) trading days in a thirty (30)-trading-day period at any time after the closing date and by the first anniversary of the closing date; (ii) 1,250,000 Contingent Shares if the closing price of our Class A common stock equals or exceeds $15.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, reorganizations, and recapitalizations) on any twenty (20) trading days in a thirty (30)-trading-day period at any time after the closing date and by the third anniversary of the closing date; (iii) 1,250,000 Contingent Shares if the closing price of our Class A common stock equals or exceeds $18.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, reorganizations, and recapitalizations) on any twenty (20) trading days in a thirty (30)-trading-day period at any time after the closing date and by the third anniversary of the closing date; and (iv) 1,250,000 Contingent Shares if the closing price of our Class A common stock equals or exceeds $21.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, reorganizations, and recapitalizations) on any twenty (20) trading days in a thirty (30)-trading-day period at any time after the closing date and by the fifth anniversary of the closing date.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the Sponsor will enter into an escrow agreement and will deposit an aggregate of 575,000 Sponsor Earnout Shares into escrow, which shares will either be released to the Sponsor or forfeited if certain stock price conditions are met or not, as follows: (i) with respect to 287,500 Sponsor Earnout Shares, the closing price of our Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.50 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, reorganizations, and recapitalizations) on any twenty (20) trading days in a thirty (30)-trading-day period at any time after the closing date and by the third anniversary of the closing date, and (ii) with respect to the remaining 287,500 Sponsor Earnout Shares, the closing price of our Class A common stock equals or exceeds $15.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, reorganizations, and recapitalizations) on any twenty (20) trading days in a thirty (30)-trading-day period at any time after the closing date and by the fifth anniversary of the closing date.
Consummation of the Proposed Transaction is subject to customary conditions of the respective parties, including the approval of the Merger Agreement, the Proposed Transaction and certain other actions related thereto by our stockholders and DocGo’s stockholders, the availability of at least $175,000,000 in cash from the Trust Account and from the proceeds of the PIPE (discussed below), after giving effect to redemptions, if any, by the Company’s public stockholders and other permitted disbursements, and DocGo having obtained certain regulatory approvals of the New York Department of Health with respect to the Proposed Transaction. The Merger Agreement may also be terminated by either party under certain circumstances.
PIPE Private Placement
Concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, the Company entered into subscription agreements with PIPE Investors, pursuant to which the Company will, substantially concurrently with, and contingent upon, the consummation of the Merger, issue an aggregate of 12,500,000 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock at a price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds to the Company of $125,000,000.
The Company has agreed that, as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later than 30 calendar days following the closing date of the Merger, it shall file a registration statement with the SEC covering the resale by the Investors of the Class A common stock issued to them in the PIPE and use its best efforts to have such registration statement declared effective as promptly as practicable thereafter, but in no event later than the earlier of 60 calendar days after filing (or 90 calendar days in the event the SEC issues written comments) or the 10th business day after the Company is notified that the registration statement will not be subject to review or further review.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our Chief Executive Officer to fund certain offering costs in exchange for the issuance to the Sponsor of the Founder Shares, and advances to us from our Sponsor of approximately $71,000 under a note payable to pay for other offering costs in connection with the Initial Public Offering. We fully repaid this note payable on October 19, 2020.
Subsequent to the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs have been satisfied from the net sales proceeds of the Private Placement Warrants not held in the Trust Account. At December 31, 2020, we had an unrestricted cash balance of approximately $879,000 and working capital of approximately $888,000. We expect our working capital needs will be satisfied through these funds, which are held outside of the Trust Account. Investment income on funds held in the Trust Account may be used to pay income taxes, if any, and Delaware franchise taxes.
In addition, our Sponsor, officers, directors and their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required in connection with the business combination. Except as may be precluded by the terms of a business combination definitive agreement, up to $1,500,000 of these working capital loans may be converted into warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender, and such warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds to pay existing accounts payable and to consummate our initial business combination.
Results of Operations
To date, we have neither engaged in any significant business operations nor generated any revenues. All activities to date relate to our corporate formation, Initial Public Offering, search for suitable business combination candidates, and negotiations with DocGo. Since consummating our Initial Public Offering on October 19, 2020, we have incurred expenses primarily for legal and audit services, Nasdaq listing fees, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, trust and transfer agent fees, Delaware franchise taxes, diligence-related expenses on our target company, and investor relations.
For the period from August 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $148,751 which was attributable to general and administrative expenses and formation costs. We will not be generating any revenue until the closing and completion of our initial business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any lease obligations or purchase commitments, and we had no long-term liabilities other than the deferred underwriting commission of $4,025,000 that is payable from the Trust Account upon consummating our initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Redeemable Shares
All of the 11,500,000 Public Shares sold as part of our Initial Public Offering contain a redemption feature as described in this Annual Report. In accordance with FASB ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides a minimum net tangible asset threshold of $5,000,001. We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and will adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable shares are effected by recording offsetting adjustments to additional paid-in capital. At December 31, 2020, there were 11,500,000 Public Shares, of which 10,688,275 were recorded as redeemable shares and classified outside of permanent equity, and 811,725 were classified as Class A common stock in stockholders’ equity.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
In accordance with FASB ASC 260, “Earnings Per Share” (“ASC 260”), shares of Class A common stock are treated as participating securities because such shares are entitled to a pro rata share of undistributed trust earnings but do not share in the Company’s net losses. Consequently, net income (loss) per share is calculated using the two-class method prescribed by ASC 260. Pursuant to this method, net income per share for Class A common stock is calculated by dividing the undistributed interest income earned on investments held in the Trust Account by the weighted average number of Class A shares outstanding since original issuance, and net loss per share for Class B common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss, adjusted for income allocated to the Class A shares, by the weighted average number of Class B shares outstanding during the period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.