Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
Ducommun Incorporated (“Ducommun,” “the Company,” “we,” “us” or “our”) is a leading global provider of engineering and manufacturing services for high-performance products and high-cost-of failure applications used primarily in the aerospace, defense, industrial, medical, and other industries. We differentiate ourselves as a full-service solution-based provider, offering a wide range of value-added products and services in our primary businesses of electronics, structures and integrated solutions. We operate through two primary business segments: Electronic Systems and Structural Systems, each of which is a reportable segment.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on our overall business during the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, precautionary measures were instituted by governments and businesses to mitigate its spread, including the imposition of travel restrictions, quarantines, shelter in place directives, and shutting down of non-essential businesses.
We have made the safety of our workforce our top priority by implementing numerous well-being protocols related to health and welfare at all of our facilities. Safety protocols consistent with guidelines provided by state and local governments and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) have been put into practice, including social distancing, provision of personal protective equipment, enhanced cleaning, and flexible work arrangements wherever possible. We have also offered enhanced leave and benefits to our employees and provide frequent updates to ensure our workforce is kept apprised of evolving regulations and safety measures.
On March 27, 2020, the U.S. enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) which provides tax relief to individuals and businesses affected by the coronavirus pandemic. We have not requested or accepted any loans or payments that are available under the CARES Act, however, we have utilized the option to defer payment of the employer portion of payroll taxes (Social Security) that would otherwise be required to be made during the period beginning March 27, 2020 to December 31, 2020. One half of the deferred amount is required to be paid by December 31, 2021, with the remaining 50% to be paid by December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we deferred $6.1 million, which is included as part of accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
The COVID-19 pandemic has and continues to contribute to a general slowdown in the global economy and specifically, the commercial aerospace end-use market. Both major large aircraft manufacturers, The Boeing Company and Airbus SE, have announced lower build rates for the near and medium future. In its 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K, Boeing indicated it expects it will take approximately three years for worldwide travel to return to 2019 levels and a few years beyond that for the industry to return to long-term trend growth of five percent. While the full extent and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic cannot be reasonably estimated with certainty at this time, COVID-19 has had a significant impact on our business, the businesses of our customers and suppliers, as well as our results of operations and financial condition, and may have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition for 2021 and beyond. See Risk Factors included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”).
Recap for the year ended December 31, 2020:
•Net revenues of $628.9 million
•Net income of $29.2 million, or $2.45 per diluted share
•Adjusted EBITDA of $87.9 million
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation expense, restructuring charges, inventory purchase accounting adjustments, and loss on extinguishment of debt (“Adjusted EBITDA”) was $87.9 million and $92.3 million for years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
When viewed with our financial results prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and accompanying reconciliations, we believe Adjusted EBITDA provides additional useful information to clarify and enhance the understanding of the factors and trends affecting our past performance and future prospects. We define these measures, explain how they are calculated, and provide reconciliations of these measures to the most comparable GAAP measure in the table below. Adjusted EBITDA and the related financial ratios, as presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”), are supplemental measures of our performance that are not required by, or presented in
accordance with, GAAP. They are not a measurement of our financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as alternatives to net income or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP, or as an alternative to net cash provided by operating activities as measures of our liquidity. The presentation of these measures should not be interpreted to mean that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or nonrecurring items.
We use Adjusted EBITDA non-GAAP operating performance measures internally as complementary financial measures to evaluate the performance and trends of our businesses. We present Adjusted EBITDA and the related financial ratios, as applicable, because we believe that measures such as these provide useful information with respect to our ability to meet our operating commitments.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•They do not reflect our cash expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•They do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•They do not reflect the significant interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
•They are not adjusted for all non-cash income or expense items that are reflected in our statements of cash flows;
•They do not reflect the impact on earnings of charges resulting from matters unrelated to our ongoing operations; and
•Other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently from us, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA and the related financial ratios should not be considered as measures of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business or as a measure of cash that will be available to us to meet our obligations. You should compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA only as supplemental information. See our consolidated financial statements contained in this Form 10-K.
However, in spite of the above limitations, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA is useful to an investor in evaluating our results of operations because these measures:
•Are widely used by investors to measure a company’s operating performance without regard to items excluded from the calculation of such terms, which can vary substantially from company to company depending upon accounting methods and book value of assets, capital structure and the method by which assets were acquired, among other factors;
•Help investors to evaluate and compare the results of our operations from period to period by removing the effect of our capital structure from our operating performance; and
•Are used by our management team for various other purposes in presentations to our Board of Directors as a basis for strategic planning and forecasting.
The following financial items have been added back to or subtracted from our net income when calculating Adjusted EBITDA:
•Interest expense may be useful to investors for determining current cash flow;
•Income tax expense may be useful to investors because it represents the taxes which may be payable for the period and the change in deferred taxes during the period, and may reduce cash flow available for use in our business;
•Depreciation may be useful to investors because it generally represents the wear and tear on our property and equipment used in our operations;
•Amortization expense may be useful to investors because it represents the estimated attrition of our acquired customer base and the diminishing value of product rights;
•Stock-based compensation expense may be useful to our investors for determining current cash flow;
•Restructuring charges may be useful to our investors in evaluating our core operating performance;
•Guaymas fire related expenses may be useful to our investors in evaluating our core operating performance;
•Purchase accounting inventory step-ups may be useful to our investors as they do not necessarily reflect the current or on-going cash charges related to our core operating performance;
•Loss on extinguishment of debt may be useful to our investors for determining current cash flow; and
•Other debt refinancing costs may be useful to our investors in evaluating our core operating performance.
Reconciliations of net income to Adjusted EBITDA and the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenues were as follows:
(1)2018 included $0.1 million of restructuring charges that were recorded as cost of goods sold.
(2)2019 and 2018 included inventory purchase accounting adjustments of inventory that was stepped up as part of our purchase price allocation from our acquisitions of Nobles Worldwide, Inc. (“Nobles”) and Certified Thermoplastics Co., LLC (“CTP”) in October 2019 and April 2018, respectively, and are both part of our Structural Systems operating segment.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
2020 Compared to 2019
The following table sets forth net revenues, selected financial data, the effective tax rate and diluted earnings per share:
nm = not meaningful
Net Revenues by End-Use Market and Operating Segment
Net revenues by end-use market and operating segment during 2020 and 2019, respectively, were as follows:
Net revenues for 2020 were $628.9 million compared to $721.1 million for 2019. The year-over-year decrease was primarily due to the following:
•$180.4 million lower revenues in our commercial aerospace end-use markets due to lower build rates on large aircraft platforms; partially offset by
•$99.1 million higher revenues in our military and space end-use markets due to higher build rates on military fixed-wing aircraft platforms, additional content and higher build rates on other military and space platforms, and higher build rates on various missile platforms.
Net Revenues by Major Customers
A significant portion of our net revenues are from our top ten customers as follows:
(1) Includes The Boeing Company (“Boeing”), Lockheed Martin Corporation (“Lockheed Martin”), Northrop Grumman Corporation (“Northrop”), Raytheon Technologies Corporation (“Raytheon”), and Spirit AeroSystems Holdings, Inc. (“Spirit”).
The revenues from Boeing, Lockheed Martin, Northrop, Raytheon, and Spirit are diversified over a number of commercial, military and space programs and were generated by both operating segments.
Gross Profit
Gross profit consists of net revenues less cost of sales. Cost of sales includes the cost of production of finished products and other expenses related to inventory management, manufacturing quality, and order fulfillment. Gross profit margin increased to 21.9% in 2020 compared to 21.1% in 2019 primarily due to favorable product mix, partially offset by unfavorable manufacturing volume.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses
SG&A expenses decreased $6.2 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to lower other corporate expenses of $3.0 million, lower professional services fees of $2.6 million, and one-time severance charges of $1.7 million in the prior year, which did not recur in 2020, partially offset by higher amortization of intangibles of $1.8 million.
Restructuring Charges
Restructuring charges increased $2.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to the restructuring plan that began in 2020 that was expected to increase operating efficiencies. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on restructuring activities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to lower interest rates, partially offset by a higher outstanding balance on the Credit Facilities driven by the acquisition of Nobles Worldwide, Inc. (“Nobles”) in October 2019, and higher net draw downs on the Revolving Credit Facility, including $50.0 million during the first quarter of 2020 to hold as cash on hand, $25.0 million of which was repaid during the fourth quarter of 2020. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our long-term debt.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt for 2019 was related to the refinancing of our existing Credit Facilities in December 2019 which resulted in writing off of a portion of the unamortized debt issuance costs associated with the existing Credit Facilities of $0.2 million. The New Credit Facilities were utilized to pay off the existing Revolving Credit Facility and a portion of the existing Term Loan. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our long-term debt.
Income Tax Expense
We recorded an income tax expense of $2.8 million (an effective tax rate of 8.8%) in 2020, compared to $5.3 million (an
effective tax rate of 14.0%) in 2019. The decrease in the effective tax rate for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to higher discrete income tax benefits recognized from releases of uncertain tax positions and additional research and development tax credits related to 2019. The higher discrete income tax benefits were partially offset by a reduction in discrete income tax benefits related to changes in valuation allowance and other deferred tax assets.
Our unrecognized tax benefits were $4.1 million and $5.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. We record interest and penalty charges, if any, related to uncertain tax positions as a component of tax expense and unrecognized tax benefits. The amounts accrued for interest and penalty charges as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were not significant. If recognized, $2.4 million would affect the effective income tax rate. Due to federal and state statute of limitations for tax year 2016 that expired on October 15, 2020, we released uncertain tax positions of $2.2 million and recognized income tax benefits of $2.1 million in 2020. We do not expect the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits to increase or decrease by a material amount in the next twelve months.
We file U.S. Federal and state income tax returns. We are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) for tax years after 2016 and by state taxing authorities for tax years after 2015. While we are no longer subject to examination prior to those periods, carryforwards generated prior to those periods may still be adjusted upon examination by the IRS or state taxing authority if they either have been or will be used in a subsequent period. We believe we have adequately accrued for tax deficiencies or reductions in tax benefits, if any, that could result from the examination and all open audit years.
On March 27, 2020, the U.S. enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) that provides tax relief to individuals and businesses affected by the coronavirus pandemic. We considered the provisions of the CARES Act and determined they do not have a material impact to our overall income taxes. We have utilized the option to defer payment of the employer portion of payroll taxes (Social Security) that would otherwise be required to be made during the period beginning March 27, 2020 to December 31, 2020. See COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on Our Business included in Part II, Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”). As of December 31, 2020, we deferred income tax deductions related to payroll taxes of $6.1 million and a deferred tax asset of $1.4 million is included as part of the net deferred income taxes on the consolidated balance sheet.
On December 27, 2020, the U.S. enacted the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (the “Act”) that provides additional tax relief to individuals and businesses affected by the coronavirus pandemic. We considered the provisions of the Act and determined they do not have a material impact to our overall income taxes.
Net Income and Earnings per Diluted Share
Net income and earnings per diluted share for 2020 were $29.2 million, or $2.45 per diluted share, compared to net income and earnings per diluted share for 2019 of $32.5 million, or $2.75 per diluted share. The decrease in net income in 2020 compared to 2019 was due to a decrease of $14.5 million in gross profit as a result of lower revenues and higher restructuring charges of $2.4 million, partially offset by lower SG&A expenses of $6.2 million, lower interest expense of $4.6 million, and lower income tax expense of $2.5 million.
Business Segment Performance
We report our financial performance based upon the two reportable operating segments: Electronic Systems and Structural Systems. The results of operations differ between our reportable operating segments due to differences in competitors, customers, extent of proprietary deliverables and performance. The following table summarizes our business segment performance for 2020 and 2019:
(1)Includes costs not allocated to either the Electronic Systems or Structural Systems operating segments.
Electronic Systems
Electronic Systems’ net revenues in 2020 compared to 2019 increased $32.3 million primarily due to the following:
•$64.4 million higher revenues in our military and space end-use markets due to higher build rates on military fixed-wing aircraft platforms, other military and space platforms, and various missile platforms; partially offset by
•$21.3 million lower revenues in our commercial aerospace end-use markets due to lower build rates on other commercial aerospace platforms, large aircraft platforms, regional and business aircraft platforms, and commercial rotary-wing aircraft platforms; and
•$10.8 million lower revenues in our industrial end-use markets due to timing of customer requirements.
Electronic Systems segment operating income in 2020 compared to 2019 increased $13.3 million due to favorable manufacturing volume and favorable product mix.
Structural Systems
Structural Systems’ net revenues in 2020 compared to 2019 decreased $124.4 million primarily due to the following:
•$159.0 million lower revenues in commercial aerospace end-use markets due to lower build rates on large aircraft platforms; partially offset by
•$34.6 million higher revenues in military and space end-use markets due to higher build rates on various missile platforms, additional content and higher build rates on other military and space platforms, and higher build rates on military fixed-wing aircraft platforms.
The Structural Systems operating income in 2020 compared to 2019 decreased $27.3 million primarily due to unfavorable manufacturing volume, partially offset by favorable product mix and lower other manufacturing costs.
On June 29, 2020, a fire severely damaged our performance center in Guaymas, Mexico, which is part of our Structural Systems segment. There were no injuries, however, property and equipment, inventory, and tooling in this leased facility were damaged. We have insurance coverage and expect the majority, if not all, of these items will be covered, less our deductible. The full financial impact cannot be estimated at this time as we are currently working with our insurance carriers to determine the cause of the fire. Our Guaymas performance center is comprised of two buildings with an aggregate total of 62,000 square feet. The loss of production from the Guaymas performance center is being absorbed by our other existing performance centers. See Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Corporate General and Administrative (“CG&A”) Expenses
CG&A expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 decreased $3.2 million primarily due to lower professional services fees of $2.2 million and one-time severance charges of $1.7 million in the prior year, which did not recur in 2020.
Backlog
We define backlog as customer placed purchase orders (“POs”) and long-term agreements (“LTAs”) with firm fixed price and expected delivery dates of 24 months or less. The majority of the LTAs do not meet the definition of a contract under ASC 606 and thus, the backlog amount disclosed below is greater than the remaining performance obligations amount disclosed in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Backlog is subject to delivery delays or program cancellations, which are beyond our control. Backlog is affected by timing differences in the placement of customer orders and tends to be concentrated in several programs to a greater extent than our net revenues. Backlog in industrial markets tends to be of a shorter duration and is generally fulfilled within a three month period. As a result of these factors, trends in our overall level of backlog may not be indicative of trends in our future net revenues.
The decrease in backlog was primarily in the commercial aerospace end-use markets, partially offset by an increase in military and space end-use markets. The following table summarizes our backlog for 2020 and 2019:
2019 Compared to 2018
See Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 20, 2020, which is incorporated by reference herein.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Available Liquidity
Total debt, the weighted-average interest rate, cash and cash equivalents and available credit facilities were as follows:
In December 2019, we completed the refinancing of a portion of our existing debt by entering into a new revolving credit facility (“New Revolving Credit Facility”) to replace the existing revolving credit facility that was entered into in November 2018 (“2018 Revolving Credit Facility”) and entering into a new term loan (“New Term Loan”). The New Revolving Credit Facility is a $100.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility that will mature on December 20, 2024 replacing the $100.0 million 2018 Revolving Credit Facility that would have matured on November 21, 2023. The New Term Loan is a $140.0 million senior secured term loan that will mature on December 20, 2024. We also have an existing $240.0 million senior secured term loan that was entered into in November 2018 that will mature on November 21, 2025 (“2018 Term Loan”). The original amounts available under the New Revolving Credit Facility, New Term Loan, and 2018 Term Loan (collectively, the “Credit Facilities”) in aggregate, totaled $480.0 million. We are required to make installment payments of 1.25% of the original outstanding principal balance of the New Term Loan amount on a quarterly basis, on the last day of the calendar quarter. In addition, if we meet the annual excess cash flow threshold, we are required to make an annual additional principal payment
based on the consolidated adjusted leverage ratio. During the first quarter of 2020, we made the required 2019 annual excess cash flow payment of $7.4 million. Further, the undrawn portion of the commitment of the New Revolving Credit Facility is subject to a commitment fee ranging from 0.175% to 0.275%, based upon the consolidated total net adjusted leverage ratio. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants required under the Credit Facilities. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
We drew down $50.0 million on the New Revolving Credit Facility during the first quarter of 2020 to hold as cash on hand, $25.0 million of which was repaid during the fourth quarter of 2020, and thus, we made no net aggregate voluntary prepayments during 2020.
In November 2018, we completed credit facilities to replace the then existing credit facilities. The November 2018 credit facilities consisted of the 2018 Term Loan and the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility (collectively, the “2018 Credit Facilities”). We were required to make installment payments of 0.25% of the outstanding principal balance of the 2018 Term Loan amount on a quarterly basis, however, in conjunction with the 2019 refinancing where we paid down $56.0 million on the 2018 Term Loan, it paid all the required quarterly installment payments on the 2018 Term Loan until maturity.
In October 2015, we entered into interest rate cap hedges designated as cash flow hedges with a portion of these interest rate cap hedges maturing on a quarterly basis, and a final quarterly maturity date of June 2020, in aggregate, totaling $135.0 million of our debt. We paid a total of $1.0 million in connection with entering into the interest rate cap hedges. The interest rate cap hedges matured during our second quarter of 2020 and as such, all remaining amounts related to the interest rate cap hedges were fully amortized and unrealized gains and losses recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income were also realized at that time. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
In October 2019, we acquired Nobles Parent Inc., the parent company of Nobles Worldwide, Inc. (“Nobles”) for an original purchase price of $77.0 million, net of cash acquired, all payable in cash. Upon the closing of the transaction, we paid a gross total aggregate of $77.3 million in cash by drawing down on the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
We expect to spend a total of $16.0 million to $18.0 million for capital expenditures in 2021 (excluding capital expenditures we will spend to restore the manufacturing capabilities related to our Guaymas performance center that was severely damaged by fire on June 29, 2020), financed by cash generated from operations, principally to support new contract awards in Electronic Systems and Structural Systems. As part of our strategic plan to become a supplier of higher-level assemblies and win new contract awards, additional up-front investment in tooling will be required for newer programs which have higher engineering content and higher levels of complexity in assemblies. However, some portion of the expected capital expenditures in 2021 could be delayed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We believe the ongoing aerospace and defense subcontractor consolidation makes acquisitions an increasingly important component of our future growth. We will continue to make prudent acquisitions and capital expenditures for manufacturing equipment and facilities to support long-term contracts for commercial and military aircraft and defense programs.
We continue to depend on operating cash flow and the availability of our Credit Facilities to provide short-term liquidity. Cash generated from operations and bank borrowing capacity is expected to provide sufficient liquidity to meet our obligations during the next twelve months from the date of issuance of these financial statements.
Cash Flow Summary
2020 Compared to 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities during 2020 was $12.6 million, compared to $51.0 million during 2019. The lower cash provided by operating activities during 2020 was primarily due to higher contract assets, higher inventories, and lower accounts payable, partially offset by higher contract liabilities and lower accounts receivable.
Net cash used in investing activities during 2020 was $5.5 million compared to $94.9 million during 2019. The lower cash used in investing activities during 2020 was primarily due to lower payments for acquisitions.
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2020 was $9.7 million compared to $73.2 million during 2019. The lower cash provided by financing activities during 2020 was primarily due to lower net borrowings on the Credit Facilities.
2019 Compared to 2018
See Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 20, 2020, which is incorporated by reference herein.
Contractual Obligations
A summary of our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
(1) Purchase orders include non-cancelable commitments as of December 31, 2020 in which a written purchase order has been issued but the goods have not been received.
(2) As of December 31, 2020, we have recorded $4.1 million in long-term liabilities related to uncertain tax positions. We are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of the long-term payments, or the amount by which our liability may increase or decrease over time, therefore, the liability relate to uncertain tax positions has not been included in the contractual obligations table.
We have estimated that the fair value of our indemnification obligations as insignificant based upon our history with such obligations and insurance coverage and have included no such obligation in the table above.
Our ultimate liability with respect to groundwater contamination at certain Structural Systems facilities will depend upon a number of factors, including changes in existing laws and regulations, the design and cost of construction, operation and maintenance activities, and the allocation of liability among potentially responsible parties. The above table does not include obligations related to these matters. See Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussion of our environmental liabilities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Our off-balance sheet arrangements consist of operating and finance leases not recorded as a result of the practical expedients utilized, right of offset of industrial revenue bonds and associated failed sales-leasebacks on property and equipment, and indemnities, none of which we believe may have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, liquidity, capital resources, or results of operations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Critical accounting policies are those accounting policies that can have a significant impact on the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and that require the use of subjective estimates based upon past experience and management’s judgment. Because of the uncertainty inherent in such estimates, actual results may differ from these estimates. Below are those policies applied in preparing our financial statements that management believes are the most dependent on the application of estimates and assumptions. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Our customers typically engage us to manufacture products based on designs and specifications provided by the end-use customer. This requires the building of tooling and manufacturing first article inspection products (prototypes) before volume manufacturing. Contracts with our customers generally include a termination for convenience clause.
We have a significant number of contracts that are started and completed within the same year, as well as contracts derived from long-term agreements and programs that can span several years. We recognize revenue under ASC 606, which utilizes a five-step model.
The definition of a contract for us is typically defined as a customer purchase order as this is when we achieve an enforceable right to payment. The majority of our contracts are firm fixed-price contracts. The deliverables within a customer purchase order are analyzed to determine the number of performance obligations. In addition, at times, in order to achieve economies of scale and based on our customer’s forecasted demand, we may build in advance of receiving a purchase order from our customer. When that occurs, we would not recognize revenue until we have received the customer purchase order.
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer, and is the unit of account under ASC 606. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, control is transferred and the performance obligation is satisfied. The majority of our contracts have a single performance obligation as the promise to transfer the individual goods or services are highly interrelated or met the series guidance. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract transaction price to each performance obligation using our best estimate of the standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. The primary method used to estimate the standalone selling price is the expected cost plus a margin approach, under which we forecast our expected costs of satisfying a performance obligation and then add an appropriate margin for that distinct good or service.
We manufacture most products to customer specifications and the product cannot be easily modified for another customer. As such, these products are deemed to have no alternative use once the manufacturing process begins. In the event the customer invokes a termination for convenience clause, we would be entitled to costs incurred to date plus a reasonable profit. Contract costs typically include labor, materials, overhead, and when applicable, subcontractor costs. For most of our products, we are building assets with no alternative use and have enforceable right to payment, and thus, we recognize revenue using the over time method.
The majority of our performance obligations are satisfied over time as work progresses. Typically, revenue is recognized over time using an input measure (i.e., costs incurred to date relative to total estimated costs at completion, also known as cost-to-cost plus reasonable profit) to measure progress. Our typical revenue contract is a firm fixed price contract, and the cost of raw materials could make up a significant amount of the total costs incurred. As such, we believe using the total costs incurred input method would be the most appropriate method. While the cost of raw materials could make up a significant amount of the total costs incurred, there is a direct relationship between our inputs and the transfer of control of goods or services to the customer.
Contract estimates are based on various assumptions to project the outcome of future events that can span multiple months or years. These assumptions include labor productivity and availability; the complexity of the work to be performed; the cost and availability of materials; and the performance of subcontractors.
As a significant change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of our contracts, we review and update our contract-related estimates on a regular basis. We recognize adjustments in estimated profit on contracts under the cumulative catch-up method. Under this method, the impact of the adjustment on profit recorded to date is recognized in the period the adjustment is identified. Revenue and profit in future periods of contract performance is recognized using the adjusted estimate. If at any time the estimate of contract profitability indicates an anticipated loss on the contract, we recognize the total loss in the quarter it is identified.
The impact of adjustments in contract estimates on our operating earnings can be reflected in either operating costs and expenses or revenue. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the net impact of these adjustments to our consolidated financial statements for 2020.
Payments under long-term contracts may be received before or after revenue is recognized. When revenue is recognized before we bill our customer, a contract asset is created for the work performed but not yet billed. Similarly, when we receive payment before we ship our products to our customer, a contract liability is created for the advance or progress payment.
We record provisions for the total anticipated losses on contracts, considering total estimated costs to complete the contract compared to total anticipated revenues, in the period in which such losses are identified. The provisions for estimated losses on contracts require us to make certain estimates and assumptions, including those with respect to the future revenue under a contract and the future cost to complete the contract. Our estimate of the future cost to complete a contract may include assumptions as to changes in manufacturing efficiency, operating and material costs, and our ability to resolve claims and assertions with our customers. If any of these or other assumptions and estimates do not materialize in the future, we may be required to adjust the provisions for estimated losses on contracts. The provision for estimated losses on contracts is included as part of contract liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
Production cost of contracts includes non-recurring production costs, such as design and engineering costs, and tooling and other special-purpose machinery necessary to build parts as specified in a contract. Production costs of contracts are recorded to cost of sales using the over time revenue recognition model. We review the value of the production cost of contracts on a quarterly basis to ensure when added to the estimated cost to complete, the value is not greater than the estimated realizable value of the related contracts.
Goodwill
Goodwill is evaluated for impairment on an annual basis on the first day of the fourth fiscal quarter. If certain factors occur, including significant under performance of our business relative to expected operating results, significant adverse economic and industry trends, significant decline in our market capitalization for an extended period of time relative to net book value, a decision to divest individual businesses within a reporting unit, or a decision to group individual businesses differently, we may be required to perform an interim impairment test prior to the fourth quarter.
We may use either a qualitative or quantitative approach when testing a reporting unit’s goodwill for impairment. The qualitative approach for potential impairment analysis to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit was less than its carrying amount includes consideration of 1) margin of passing most recent annual goodwill impairment test or step one analysis, 2) earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization, 3) long-term growth rate, 4) analyzing material adverse factors/changes between valuation dates, 5) general macroeconomic factors, and 6) industry and market conditions.
The quantitative approach for potential impairment analysis is performed by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. Fair value is estimated by management using a combination of the income approach (discounted cash flow model) and the market approach. Management’s cash flow projections include significant judgments and assumptions, including the amount and timing of expected cash flows, long-term growth rates, and discount rates. The cash flows used in the discounted cash flow model are based on our best estimate of future revenues, gross margins, and adjusted after-tax earnings. The market approach also requires significant management judgment in selecting comparable business acquisitions and the transaction values observed and its related control premiums. In addition, we early adopted Accounting Standards Update 2017-04 (“ASU 2017-04”) on January 1, 2019 which simplified our goodwill impairment testing by eliminating step two of the goodwill impairment test.
We acquired Nobles in October 2019 and recorded goodwill of $34.9 million in our Structural Systems segment, which is also our reporting unit. Since a goodwill impairment analysis is required to be performed within one year of the acquisition date or sooner upon a triggering event, we performed a step one goodwill impairment analysis as of the first day of the fourth quarter of 2020 for our Structural Systems segment. The fair value of our Structural Systems segment exceeded its carrying value by 69% and thus, was not deemed impaired.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the carrying amount of goodwill at the date of the most recent annual impairment evaluation for Electronic Systems and Structural Systems was $117.4 million and $53.4 million, respectively.
As of the date of our 2020 annual evaluation for goodwill impairment, for the Electronic Systems segment, we used a qualitative assessment including 1) margin of passing most recent step one analysis, 2) earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization, 3) long-term growth rate, 4) analyzing material adverse factors/changes between valuation dates, 5) general macroeconomic factors, and 6) industry and market conditions. Based upon our qualitative assessment, we concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount and thus, goodwill was not deemed impaired.
Other Intangible Assets
We amortize acquired other intangible assets with finite lives over the estimated economic lives of the assets, ranging from 10 years to 18 years generally using the straight-line method. The value of other intangibles acquired through business combinations has been estimated using present value techniques which involve estimates of future cash flows. We evaluate other intangible assets for recoverability considering undiscounted cash flows, when significant changes in conditions occur, and recognize impairment losses, if any, based upon the estimated fair value of the assets.
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for share-based payment transactions to our employees and non-employees at their estimated fair value. The expense is measured at the grant date, based on the calculated fair value of the share-based award, and is recognized over the requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the equity award). The fair value of stock options are determined using the Black-Scholes-Merton (“Black-Scholes”) valuation model, which requires assumptions and judgments regarding stock price volatility, risk-free interest rates, and expected options terms. Management’s estimates could differ from actual results. The fair value of unvested stock awards is determined based on the closing price of the underlying common stock on the date of grant except for market condition awards for which the fair value was based on a Monte Carlo simulation model.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value with cost being determined using a moving average cost basis for raw materials and actual cost for work-in-process and finished goods. The majority of our inventory is charged to cost of sales as raw materials are placed into production and the related revenue is recognized. Inventoried costs include raw materials, outside processing, direct labor and allocated overhead, adjusted for any abnormal amounts of idle performance center expense, freight, handling costs, and wasted materials (spoilage) incurred. We assess the inventory carrying value and reduce it, if necessary, to its net realizable value based on customer orders on hand, and internal demand forecasts using management’s best estimates given information currently available. The majority of our revenues are recognized over time, however, for revenue contracts where revenue is recognized using the point in time method, inventory is not reduced until it is shipped or transfer of control to the customer has occurred. Our ending inventory consists of raw materials, work-in-process, and finished goods.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for using an asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized, using enacted tax rates, for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the book and tax bases of recorded assets and liabilities, operating losses, and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets are evaluated quarterly and are reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return are recognized when it is more-likely-than-not, based on technical merits, to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. The amount recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement, including resolution of related appeals and/or litigation process, if any.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements.