Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion analyzes our financial condition and results of operations. You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a Delaware limited partnership formed by DCP Midstream, LLC to own, operate, acquire and develop a diversified portfolio of complementary midstream energy assets. Our operations are organized into two reportable segments: (i) Logistics and Marketing and (ii) Gathering and Processing. Our Logistics and Marketing segment includes transporting, trading, marketing and storing natural gas and NGLs, and fractionating NGLs. Our Gathering and Processing segment consists of gathering, compressing, treating, and processing natural gas, producing and fractionating NGLs, and recovering condensate.
General Trends and Outlook
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic, and the U.S. economy began to experience pronounced effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, curtailing global operations and travel, government mandated quarantines and stay at home orders, and an overall substantial slowdown of economic activity. A further downturn in global economic growth, or recessionary conditions in major geographic regions, is expected to lead to continued reduced demand for gas and NGLs, to negatively affect the market prices of our products, and to materially and adversely affecting our business, results of operations and liquidity. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance is anticipated to be temporary, but there is uncertainty around the extent and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its related impact on us. We have experienced a negative effect on our results of operations during 2020 due to industry wide conditions, significantly depressed commodity prices and volumes and the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Management anticipates that our results of operations will continue to be negatively affected by the industry and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021 and beyond, however, the degree to which these factors will impact our business remains uncertain and the related financial impact of any such disruption cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
We have taken proactive measures to address the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic in order to maintain essential business functions at our plants and critical infrastructure with minimal disruptions. Our current continuity plan specifically addresses technology, communications, and remote operations. To protect our workforce, we have encouraged those employees who are able to work from home do so, while implementing additional safety guidelines at our plants for those who cannot. We continue to prioritize safe and reliable operations and have not experienced a disruption to operations or incurred significant additional costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The sustained deterioration in commodity prices and volumes, other market declines or a decline in our unit price, may negatively impact our results of operations, and may increase the likelihood of further non-cash impairment charges or non-cash lower of cost or net realizable value inventory adjustments.
In 2020 we actively responded to the uncertain and volatile commodity and financial market conditions by executing a reduction of costs, capital and distributions. As uncertainty persists we will sustain cost reductions into 2021 and continue to increase efficiency via our transformation efforts. We are maintaining our cost discipline and reduced capital expenditures while optimizing our assets to generate and retain excess free cash flow to fund our business operations, maintain our distribution, and to retire debt and strengthen our balance sheet.
Our business is impacted by commodity prices and volumes. We mitigate a significant portion of commodity price risk on an overall Partnership basis by growing our fee based assets and by executing on our hedging program. Various factors impact both commodity prices and volumes, and as indicated in