ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing at the end of this Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the "Risk Factors" section of this Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering, developing, and delivering important new medicines to patients for the treatment of cancer. We are leveraging our proprietary switch-control kinase inhibitor platform and deep expertise in kinase biology to execute our strategy to develop a broad portfolio of innovative medicines. We have one approved drug, QINLOCK, which was developed through our proprietary platform. Beyond QINLOCK, we are developing three clinical-stage drug candidates and advancing our research-stage programs. We wholly own QINLOCK and all of our drug candidates with the exception of a development and commercialization out-license agreement for QINLOCK in Greater China. We are preparing for a potential launch of QINLOCK in Europe and we have entered, and intend in the future to enter, into select distributor arrangements to offer QINLOCK in geographies where we do not intend to distribute QINLOCK on our own, such as Australia and Canada.
Our Drug and Drug Candidates
QINLOCK
On May 15, 2020, QINLOCK was approved by the FDA for the treatment of adult patients with advanced GIST who have received prior treatment with three or more kinase inhibitors, including imatinib. Following FDA approval of QINLOCK, in May 2020, we launched QINLOCK commercially in the U.S. Additionally, in November 2020, we announced that we had entered into exclusive distribution agreements for QINLOCK in Canada, Israel, Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, Malaysia, and Brunei.
In July 2020, Zai, our licensee for QINLOCK in Greater China, announced that the China NMPA accepted the NDA submission for QINLOCK for the treatment of adult patients with advanced GIST who have received prior treatment with three or more kinase inhibitors, including imatinib.
In October 2020, an EU MAA for QINLOCK in fourth-line GIST was accepted for review by the EMA. In January 2021, we announced that Swissmedic accepted a Swiss MAA for QINLOCK in fourth-line GIST. We also announced plans to file a marketing application in the U.K. for QINLOCK in fourth-line GIST. In preparation for a potential European approval of QINLOCK, we are actively engaged in building a direct commercial presence in key European markets and building a targeted infrastructure to commercialize QINLOCK, if approved. In January 2021, we also announced commencement of planning efforts for a bridging study for QINLOCK in Japan.
In addition, we successfully completed enrollment of our global pivotal Phase 3 study in second-line GIST patients, INTRIGUE, and expect to announce top-line results from INTRIGUE in the second half of 2021. We are also studying QINLOCK in an ongoing Phase 1 study in patients with different stages of GIST following treatment with at least one systemic anticancer therapy, such as imatinib. We believe QINLOCK has the potential to play an even broader role than in the fourth-line setting in the treatment of GIST, and we are planning further clinical development to explore this potential.
Vimseltinib
We are currently studying vimseltinib in an open-label Phase 1/2 study designed to evaluate the safety, efficacy, PK, and PD of vimseltinib in patients with malignant solid tumors as well as patients with TGCT. In November 2020, we announced the selection of a Phase 2 dose and initiated the expansion portion of the study with vimseltinib in patients with symptomatic TGCT not suitable for surgery. We are continuing to enroll TGCT patients in cohort 9 of the dose escalation portion of the study to complete enrollment in this cohort. We expect to present updated data for vimseltinib in the second half of 2021.
Rebastinib
We are currently studying rebastinib in two Phase 1b/2 studies in combination with chemotherapy, one with paclitaxel and one with carboplatin. In October 2018, we initiated an open-label, multicenter, Phase 1b/2 study of rebastinib in combination with paclitaxel to assess safety, tolerability, PK, and efficacy in patients with advanced or metastatic solid tumors. In January 2019, we initiated an open-label, multicenter, Phase 1b/2 study of rebastinib in combination with carboplatin in patients with advanced or metastatic solid tumors. In January 2020, we selected a Phase 2 dose for, and activated, Part 2 of the Phase 1b/2 study of rebastinib in combination with carboplatin. In May 2020, we announced that in Part 2 of the study of rebastinib in combination with paclitaxel, we observed the required number of responses in the first stage in both the endometrial and platinum-resistant ovarian cancer cohorts, triggering the expansion of enrollment in these cohorts. In addition, based on the clinical activity observed in Part 1, we added a cohort for patients with carcinosarcoma in Part 2 of the study of rebastinib in combination with paclitaxel. We expect to present updated data from the study of rebastinib in combination with paclitaxel in patients with endometrial cancer in the second quarter of 2021 and in patients with PROC in the second half of 2021.
DCC-3116
In January 2021, we announced our plans to initiate a Phase 1 study of DCC-3116 in the second quarter of 2021, subject to FDA authorization to proceed under our IND for DCC-3116, submitted in the fourth quarter of 2020 and cleared by the FDA.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic, or the future outbreak of any other highly infectious or contagious diseases, may impact our business, including our preclinical studies, clinical trial operations, or commercialization efforts will depend on continuously changing circumstances, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time, such as the duration of such pandemic including future waves of infection, new strains of the virus that causes COVID-19, or the broad availability of effective vaccines, the actions taken to contain the pandemic or mitigate its impact, and the direct and indirect economic effects of the pandemic and containment measures, among others. The ongoing fluidity of this situation precludes any prediction as to the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic but it could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. The COVID-19 pandemic may also have the effect of heightening the risks to which we are subject, including various aspects of our preclinical studies and ongoing clinical trials, the reliance on third parties in our supply chain for materials and manufacturing of our drug and drug candidates, disruptions in health regulatory agencies' operations globally, the volatility of our common stock, our ability to access capital markets, and our ability to successfully launch, commercialize, and generate revenue from QINLOCK.
We are continuing to assess the long-term impact of COVID-19 on our business operations in an effort to mitigate interruption to our clinical programs, research efforts, commercial launch of QINLOCK, and other business activities and to ensure the safety and well-being of our employees, as well as the physicians and patients participating in our clinical studies. Because COVID-19 infections have been reported throughout the U.S. and worldwide, certain national, state, and local governmental authorities have issued orders, proclamations, and/or directives aimed at minimizing the spread of COVID-19. Although some of these restrictions were eased or lifted, in response to local surges and new waves of infection, some countries, states, and local governments have reinstituted these restrictions, and additional, more restrictive orders, proclamations, and/or directives may be issued in the future. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented precautionary measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, partners, and patients, including encouraging all employees, other than those engaged in laboratory research activities, to work-from-home, and requiring adherence to onsite occupancy limits and appropriate safety measures designed to comply with federal, state, and local guidelines.
Our ability to successfully launch, commercialize, and generate revenue from QINLOCK may be adversely affected by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, limited hospital access for non-patients, social distancing requirements, and precautionary measures due to COVID-19 have impacted the ability of our sales personnel to interact in-person with customers. In response, we have implemented a virtual launch model, which may adversely affect the ability of our sales professionals to effectively market QINLOCK to physicians, which may have a negative impact on our sales and our market penetration. In addition, in the U.S. we are utilizing various programs to help patients afford our products, including patient assistance programs for eligible patients. Market disruption and rising unemployment caused by the COVID-19 pandemic may lead to increased utilization of our patient assistance programs, which could reduce revenues.
In addition, we continue to actively monitor risks associated with potential interruptions to our clinical studies due to the impact of COVID-19 and are in frequent communication with clinical study sites and CROs. Some clinical trial sites have maintained or reinstituted restrictions on site visits by sponsors and CROs, initiation of new trials, patient visits, and new patient enrollment as a result of COVID-19. While all of our studies remain open for enrollment, we have provided guidance to our clinical trial sites that new patient enrollment may occur at sites where resources allow these patients to be safely enrolled and closely monitored and enrollment has slowed at, or has been or may in the future be temporarily paused for new patients in some sites. In addition, we continue to work closely with our study sites and CROs to allow for utilization of remote and local assessments, such as televisits, in accordance with FDA guidance, as well as to ensure availability of study drug for patients. While study activities are continuing in the clinical trials we have underway in sites across the globe, and although some of these restrictions may from time to time be eased or lifted, we cannot guarantee that COVID-19 precautions, either now or in the future, or the impact of the pandemic, will not directly or indirectly affect the expected timelines for some of our clinical trials.
In light of the changing circumstances surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, the operating environment remains fluid and uncertain, and the full significance of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our business and the duration for which it may have an impact cannot be determined at this time.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenues
On May 15, 2020, QINLOCK was approved by the FDA for the treatment of adult patients with advanced GIST who have received prior treatment with three or more kinase inhibitors, including imatinib. Following FDA approval of QINLOCK, in May 2020, we commenced commercial sales of QINLOCK in the U.S. and began generating product revenue. We may generate revenue in the future from a combination of product sales or payments from collaboration, distribution, or any potential additional license agreements that we may enter into with third parties. We expect that our revenue in the foreseeable future will be derived primarily from sales of QINLOCK and, payments, if any, made under the Zai License and Zai Supply Agreements we entered into in June 2019 and February 2020, respectively. We cannot provide assurance as to the timing of future milestone or royalty payments or that we will receive any of these payments at all. We cannot provide assurance as to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization of QINLOCK or if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our drug candidates for which we receive marketing approval, if any. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our drug candidates other than QINLOCK.
Net Product Revenues
Following the FDA approval of QINLOCK in May 2020, we commenced commercial sales of QINLOCK in the U.S. and began generating product revenue. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our only source of product revenues were from the sales of QINLOCK. Product revenues are recorded net of estimates of variable consideration. Please read Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of these consolidated financial statements for further details of the reserves recorded for variable considerations.
Collaboration Revenues
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, collaboration revenues were associated with our license and supply agreements with Zai, as applicable.
Pursuant to the terms of the Zai License Agreement, we received an upfront cash payment of $20.0 million and became eligible to receive up to $185.0 million in potential development and commercial milestone payments, consisting of up to $50.0 million of development milestones and up to $135.0 million of commercial milestones. In addition, during the term of the Zai License Agreement, Zai will be obligated to pay us tiered percentage royalties ranging from low to high teens on potential annual
net sales of the Licensed Products in the Territory, subject to adjustments in specified circumstances. Additionally, certain costs we incur associated with the Zai License Agreement are reimbursed by Zai.
As of December 31, 2020, QINLOCK had not received regulatory approval in the Territory, and it is not possible to estimate when, or if, we may receive royalty payments or commercial milestones under the Zai License Agreement.
Pursuant to the terms of the Zai Supply Agreement, costs we incur for external manufacturing services are reimbursed by Zai.
Cost of Sales
Our cost of sales includes external costs of producing and distributing inventories that are related to product revenue during the respective period of the associated sales. In addition, shipping and handling costs for product shipments are recorded in cost of sales as incurred.
Cost of sales for newly launched products, such as QINLOCK, will not be significant until the initial pre-launch inventory is depleted, and additional inventory is manufactured and sold. As a result, the gross margin on sales of QINLOCK for the year ended December 31, 2020 was enhanced by the use of active pharmaceutical ingredients and components that were previously expensed as research and development expenses prior to the launch of QINLOCK.
Operating Expenses
The successful development and commercialization of our drug and drug candidates is highly uncertain. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties, including the following:
•successful completion of preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•receipt and related terms of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•raising additional funds necessary to complete clinical development of and commercialize QINLOCK and any current or future drug candidates for which we receive approval;
•obtaining and maintaining patent, trade secret and other intellectual property protection, and regulatory exclusivity for our drug and drug candidates;
•making arrangements with third-party manufacturers, or establishing manufacturing capabilities, for both clinical and commercial supplies of our drug and drug candidates;
•developing and implementing marketing and reimbursement strategies;
•continuing to establish sales, marketing, and distribution capabilities to support the commercial launch of QINLOCK or our drug candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others such as Zai, our licensee for QINLOCK in Greater China;
•acceptance of QINLOCK or our drug candidates, if and when approved, by patients, the medical community, and third-party payors;
•effectively competing with other therapies;
•the ability to obtain clearance or approval of companion diagnostic tests, if required, on a timely basis, or at all;
•obtaining and maintaining third-party coverage and adequate reimbursement;
•protecting and enforcing our rights in our intellectual property portfolio; and
•maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of our products following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the commercialization of QINLOCK or the development of any of our drug candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the commercialization of QINLOCK or development of that drug candidate. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our drug candidates other than QINLOCK.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts and the development of our drug and drug candidates, which include:
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits, travel, and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of our drug candidates, including under agreements with CROs;
•the cost of consultants and contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs) that manufacture drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials as well as all expenses associated with the pre-launch manufacturing of commercial inventory of QINLOCK prior to FDA approval; and
•facilities, depreciation, and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance, supplies, and technology-related costs.
We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred. Advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses within our consolidated balance sheets. The prepaid amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis and consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid to consultants, central laboratories, contractors, CMOs, and CROs in connection with our preclinical and clinical development activities. We do not allocate employee costs, costs associated with our proprietary switch-control kinase inhibitor platform technology or facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific drug or drug candidate development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple drug or drug candidate development programs and, as such, are not separately classified.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Drugs and drug candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to increase as our drug and drug candidate development programs progress. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of our drug and any of our drug candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development programs and plans.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, legal, finance, commercial, human resources, and administrative functions. Selling, general, and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility- and technology-related costs as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, accounting, and audit services.
We anticipate that our selling, general, and administrative expenses will increase as we continue to support the commercial launch of QINLOCK in the U.S., the potential launch of QINLOCK in Europe, if approved, and the establishment of a targeted commercial infrastructure in key European markets. We also anticipate that we will continue to incur accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance, and investor and public relations expenses associated with growth of the business and continued operations as a public company.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest and Other Income, net
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities balances. Other income, net, consists of insignificant amounts of miscellaneous income and expenses unrelated to our core operations.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 consisted of interest expense associated with a previously outstanding construction loan from a related party. The outstanding balance of the construction loan from a related party was repaid in December 2019, and there was therefore no interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
On October 2, 2017, immediately prior to the completion of our initial public offering (IPO), we engaged in a series of transactions whereby Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, LLC became a wholly owned subsidiary of Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, Inc., a Delaware corporation (the Conversion). Prior to the Conversion, we were treated as a partnership for tax purposes and had not been subject to U.S. federal or state income taxation. Upon the Conversion, we became subject to typical corporate U.S. federal and state income taxation; however, we do not have net operating loss (NOL) carryforwards from periods prior to October 2, 2017 available to offset taxable income earned in future periods in which we will be treated as a corporation.
Since the Conversion in October 2017, we have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for either the net losses we have incurred or our earned research and orphan drug credits, due to the uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items in the future. As of December 31, 2020, we had NOL carryforwards for federal income tax purposes of $643.6 million, of which $16.6 million begin to expire in 2037 and $627.0 million may be carried forward indefinitely. As of December 31, 2020, we had NOL carryforwards for state income tax purposes of $479.2 million, which begin to expire in 2037. We also had federal and state research and orphan drug credits of $28.8 million and $3.0 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2020, which begin to expire in 2037 and 2032, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (GAAP). The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Product Revenue Reserves
We recognize product revenues, net of variable consideration related to certain allowances and accruals, when the customer takes control of the product, which is typically upon delivery to the customer. Product revenue is recorded at the net sales price, or transaction price. We record product revenue reserves, which are classified as a reduction in product revenues, to account for the components of variable consideration. Variable consideration includes the following components: chargebacks, government rebates, trade discounts and allowances, product returns, and other incentives, which are described below.
These reserves are based on estimates of the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales and are classified as reductions of accounts receivable (if the amount is payable to our customer) or a liability (if the amount is payable to a party other than our customer). Our estimates of reserves established for variable consideration are calculated based upon a consistent application of the expected value method, which is the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible consideration amounts. These estimates reflect our historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data, forecasted customer buying, and payment patterns. The amount of variable consideration that is included in the transaction price may be subject to constraint and is included in net product revenues only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts of consideration received may ultimately differ from our estimates. If actual results vary, we adjust these estimates, which could have an effect on earnings in the period of adjustment.
Chargebacks and administrative fees: Chargebacks for discounts represent our estimated obligations resulting from contractual commitments to sell product to qualified healthcare providers and government agencies at prices lower than the list
prices charged to the customers who directly purchase the product from us. The customers charge us for the difference between what the customers pay us for the product and the customer's ultimate contractually committed or government required lower selling price to the qualified healthcare providers. As part of our contractual commitments to sell product to qualified healthcare providers, we pay fees for administrative services, such as account management and data reporting.
Government rebates: Government rebates consist of Medicare, Tricare, and Medicaid rebates. These reserves are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized. For Medicare, we also estimate the number of patients in the prescription drug coverage gap for whom we will owe a rebate under the Medicare Part D program.
Trade discounts and allowances: We provide customers with discounts that are explicitly stated in contracts and recorded in the period the related product revenue is recognized. In addition, we also receive sales order management, inventory management, and data services from customers in exchange for certain fees.
Product returns: We estimate the amount of our product sales that may be returned by our customers and record this estimate in the period the related product revenue is recognized. We currently estimate product return liabilities based on available industry data and our visibility into the inventory remaining in the distribution channel.
Other incentives: Other incentives include co-payment assistance provided to qualified patients, whereby we may provide financial assistance to patients with prescription drug co-payments required by the patient's insurance provider. Reserves for co-payment assistance are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the associated cost incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•vendors in connection with the preclinical development activities;
•CMOs in connection with the production of preclinical and clinical trial materials;
•CROs in connection with preclinical and clinical studies; and
•investigative sites in connection with clinical trials.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure all stock option awards granted to employees and directors based on the fair value on the date of the grant and recognize compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. The straight-line method of expense recognition is applied to all awards with service-only conditions.
We estimate the fair value of each stock option award using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our
stock-based awards, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock-based awards, and our expected dividend yield. Prior to October 2017, we were a privately-held company and lacked company-specific historical and implied volatility information. Therefore, we estimate our expected volatility based on the historical volatility of a set of our publicly traded peer companies as well as the limited historical volatility of our own traded stock price. We estimate the expected term of our options using the "simplified" method for awards that qualify as "plain-vanilla" options. The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award. Expected dividend yield is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends on common stock and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
The assumptions used in determining the fair value of stock-based awards represent our best estimates, but the estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of our judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Revenues
Net Product Revenues
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our only source of product revenues were from the sales of QINLOCK, which commenced in the U.S. in May 2020 following the FDA approval of QINLOCK on May 15, 2020. For the year December 31, 2020, product revenues were $39.5 million, which consisted of $38.0 million of revenues in the U.S. and $1.5 million of revenues outside of the U.S.
Collaboration Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, collaboration revenues decreased $22.4 million, primarily driven by the recognition of up-front and development milestone payments of $20.0 million and $5.0 million, respectively, associated with the Zai License Agreement, entered into in June 2019, in the second quarter of 2019 as compared to the recognition of a $2.0 million development milestone payment associated with the Zai License Agreement in the second quarter of 2020. The decrease in up-front and milestone payments were partially offset by $0.6 million of revenues recognized associated with reimbursements under the Zai License and Supply Agreements during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales were $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and were primarily related to packaging, labeling, shipping, and distribution costs associated with sales of QINLOCK. External manufacturing costs associated with QINLOCK inventory prior to FDA approval were previously expensed as research and development expenses and, therefore, are not included in cost of sales during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We expect our cost of sales for QINLOCK to increase as a percentage of net sales in future periods as we continue to produce inventory for future sales, which will reflect the full cost of manufacturing, and then sell such inventory.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
QINLOCK
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, research and development expenses related to QINLOCK decreased primarily as a result of a decrease in clinical trial expenses of $6.1 million. The decrease in clinical trial expenses was primarily due to decreased expenses associated with our pivotal Phase 3 study in fourth-line and fourth-line plus GIST, INVICTUS, which we initiated in January 2018 and announced top-line results from in August 2019. In addition, clinical trial expenses decreased due to decreased expenses associated with our ongoing Phase 1 study of QINLOCK and decreased expenses associated with clinical pharmacology studies. These decreases were partially offset by increased expenses related to our pivotal Phase 3 study in second-line GIST, INTRIGUE, which we initiated in December 2018 and completed enrollment of which in December 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018, expenses related to QINLOCK increased primarily as a result of increases in clinical trial expenses of $28.0 million and manufacturing costs of $2.0 million. The increase in clinical trial expenses was due to our pivotal INTRIGUE Phase 3 study in second-line GIST, which we initiated in December 2018, and expenses related to our pivotal INVICTUS Phase 3 study in fourth-line and fourth-line plus GIST, which we initiated in January 2018 and with respect to which we announced top-line results in August 2019. In addition, clinical trial expenses increased due to increased expenses associated with clinical pharmacology studies that commenced in 2019. Manufacturing costs for QINLOCK increased primarily as a result of increased process development activities to support the clinical trials, anticipated drug requirements for commercialization, and the manufacture of registration lots to support the submission of a NDA.
Vimseltinib
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, expenses related to our vimseltinib program increased primarily as a result of increases in clinical trial expenses of $4.1 million, manufacturing costs of $2.7 million, and preclinical costs of $0.8 million. The increase in clinical trial expenses was primarily due to increased activities associated with the dose escalation portion of our ongoing Phase 1/2 study of vimseltinib to assess the safety, tolerability, PK, and PD in patients with TGCT. Manufacturing costs for the vimseltinib program increased as a result of increased activities to support clinical trials. The increase in preclinical costs was primarily due to increased ongoing studies.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018, expenses related to our vimseltinib program increased primarily as a result of an increase in preclinical costs of $2.5 million and clinical trial expenses of $1.8 million. The increase in preclinical costs was primarily due to additional studies and the increase in clinical trial expenses was primarily due to increased activities associated with the dose escalation portion of our ongoing Phase 1/2 study of vimseltinib to assess the safety, tolerability, PK, and PD in patients with malignant solid tumors and TGCT.
Rebastinib
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, expenses related to our rebastinib program increased primarily as a result of increases in manufacturing costs of $1.9 million and clinical trial expenses of $1.7 million. Manufacturing costs for the rebastinib program increased as a result of increased activities to support clinical trials. The increases in clinical trial expenses were due to our Phase 1b/2 study of rebastinib in combination with paclitaxel, which we initiated in October 2018 and moved to Part 2 of the Phase 1b/2 study in the second quarter of 2019, and our second Phase 1b/2 study of rebastinib in combination with carboplatin, which we initiated in January 2019 and moved to Part 2 of the Phase 1b/2 study in January 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018, expenses related to our rebastinib program increased primarily as a result of increases in clinical trial expenses of $9.3 million. The increases in clinical trial expenses were due to our Phase 1b/2 study of rebastinib in combination with paclitaxel, which we initiated in October 2018 and moved to Part 2 of the Phase 1b/2 study in the second quarter of 2019, and our second Phase 1b/2 clinical study of rebastinib in combination with carboplatin, which we initiated in January 2019.
DCC-3116
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, expenses related to our DCC-3116 program increased primarily as a result of an increase in preclinical activities of $1.4 million, including IND-enabling studies, associated with a full year of activities for this drug candidate, which we announced as an addition to our pipeline in June 2019, and increased manufacturing costs of $1.1 million to support our Phase 1 study of DCC-3116, which we expect to initiate in the second quarter of 2021. This addition of DCC-3116 to our pipeline in June 2019 also resulted in increased research and development expenses during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018.
Unallocated expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, the increase in unallocated research and development expenses was related to personnel-related costs and preclinical and other costs. The increase in personnel-related costs was primarily due to an increase in headcount and stock-based compensation expense in our research and development functions. Personnel-related costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included stock-based compensation expense of $17.4 million and $7.9 million, respectively. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was primarily related to headcount increases, a higher value of our common stock resulting in increased valuations of share-based awards granted to our employees, and $1.9 million of expenses related to the achievement of vesting events associated with performance-based restricted stock units during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in preclinical and other costs was primarily due to increased costs of $3.3 million in connection with increased activities for our early-stage drug discovery programs and increased costs for temporary staffing of $2.5 million to support our research and development functions.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018, the increase in unallocated research and development expenses was related to personnel-related costs and preclinical and other costs. The increase in personnel-related costs was primarily due to an increase in headcount and stock-based compensation expense in our research and development functions. Personnel-related costs for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 included stock-based compensation expense of $7.9 million and $4.0 million, respectively. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was primarily related to additional employee stock options associated with headcount increases and a higher value of our common stock resulting in increased valuations of share-based awards granted to our employees. The increase in preclinical and other costs was primarily due to increased consultant fees of $2.5 million and increased costs of $0.5 million in connection with our early-stage drug discovery programs.
We expect research and development expenses will increase in 2021 as compared to 2020 as we continue to invest in the development of our clinical pipeline.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, the increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses was related to personnel-related costs, professional and consultant fees, and facility related and other costs. The increase in personnel-related costs was primarily a result of an increase in headcount and an increase in stock-based compensation expense in our selling, general, and administrative functions. Personnel-related costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included stock-based compensation expense of $19.7 million and $12.5 million, respectively. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was primarily related to increased headcount and a higher value of our common stock resulting in increased valuations of share-based awards granted to our employees, partially offset by the modification of stock options pursuant to the transition agreement with our former President and Chief Executive Officer resulting in $2.4 million of expenses during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in professional and consultant fees was primarily due to an increase in various advisory fees, including those related to commercialization preparedness and the launch of QINLOCK. The increase in facility related and other costs was primarily due to a full year of expenses, including those related to rent and depreciation expenses, associated with our new headquarters (the Premises) that commenced in October 2019 (the Initial Space) and rent, depreciation, and moving expenses associated with our lease at the Premises that commenced in July 2020 (the Additional Space) as well as technology-related costs to support the growth of the business. For additional information on our leases at the Premises, please read Note 7, Leases, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018, the increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses was related to personnel-related costs, professional and consultant fees, and facility related and other costs. The increase in personnel-related costs was primarily a result of an increase in headcount and an increase in stock-based compensation expense in our selling, general, and administrative functions. Personnel-related costs for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 included stock-based compensation expense of $12.5 million and $5.7 million, respectively. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was primarily related to an increase in headcount, a higher value of our common stock resulting in increased valuations of share-based awards granted to our employees, and the modification of stock options pursuant to the transition agreement with our former President and Chief Executive Officer resulting in $2.4 million of expenses during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in professional and consultant fees was primarily due to an increase in various advisory fees, including those related to commercialization preparedness. The increase in facility related and other costs was primarily due to expenses incurred in connection with the move to the Initial Space in October 2019 as well as technology-related costs to support the growth of the business. For additional information on our leases at the Premises, please read Note 7, Leases, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein.
We expect selling, general, and administrative expenses will increase in 2021 as compared to 2020 as we continue to execute on the commercial launch of QINLOCK in the U.S. and prepare for a potential commercial launch in Europe, if approved.
Interest and Other Income, Net
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, the decrease in interest and other income, net, was primarily due to decreases in interest income earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities associated with our holdings of lower yield investments during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018, the increase in interest and other income, net, was primarily due to increases in interest income earned on our invested cash equivalents and marketable securities balances resulting from our follow-on public offerings in June 2018 and the third quarter of 2019. For additional information on our public offerings, please read Note 9, Common Stock, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein.
Inflation
Inflation generally affects us by increasing our cost of labor. We do not believe that inflation had a material effect on our business, financial condition, or results of operations during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception in 2003, we have focused substantially all of our efforts and financial resources on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, developing product and technology rights, conducting research and development activities for our drug candidates, building a commercial and marketing organization, and commercializing our first approved product, QINLOCK. Our only product approved for sale is QINLOCK, which only recently received approval, and we have not generated substantial revenue from product sales.
As a result, we have incurred significant operating losses since our inception. We have generated limited revenue to date primarily from our product sales and license and supply agreements with Zai. On May 15, 2020, QINLOCK was approved by the FDA for the treatment of adult patients with advanced GIST who have received prior treatment with three or more kinase inhibitors, including imatinib. Following the FDA approval of QINLOCK, in May 2020, we commenced commercial sales of QINLOCK in the U.S. and began generating product revenue. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our product revenues were primarily derived from sales of QINLOCK in the U.S. We have also entered into exclusive distributor arrangements to facilitate product sales of QINLOCK in select geographies where we do not currently intend to distribute QINLOCK on our own. We do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any drug candidates in the near future, if at all, unless and until we obtain marketing approval for, and begin to sell, such drug candidates.
On October 2, 2017, we completed the IPO of our common stock. Since October 2017, we have primarily supported our operations by completing public issuances of our common stock through our IPO, subsequent follow-on offerings, and an Open Market Sale Agreement℠ (the Sales Agreement) with Jefferies LLC (Jefferies). Through such issuances, we have sold and issued 29,497,292 shares of our common stock resulting in net proceeds of $948.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
In August 2020, we entered into the Sales Agreement with Jefferies, pursuant to which we may issue and sell shares of our common stock having aggregate offering proceeds of up to $200.0 million (the Shares) from time to time through Jefferies as our sales agent. Upon delivery of a placement notice and subject to the terms and conditions of the Sales Agreement, Jefferies may sell the Shares by any method permitted by law deemed to be an "at the market offering" as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. We may sell the Shares in amounts and at times to be determined by us from time to time subject to the terms and conditions of the Sales Agreement, but we have no obligation to sell any Shares under the Sales Agreement. We or Jefferies may suspend or terminate the offering of Shares upon notice to the other party and subject to other conditions. As of December 31, 2020, there was $181.3 million available for future issuance under the Sales Agreement.
Public issuances of our common stock and shares issued pursuant to the underwriters' partial or full exercises of options to purchase additional shares of common stock, if applicable, associated with our IPO, subsequent follow-on offerings, and issuances of shares pursuant to the Sales Agreement have been summarized in the following table:
1.The price per share presented above represents the price per share at which shares were sold for both the public offering of shares and the underwriters' exercise of options to purchase additional shares, if applicable.
2.Proceeds are presented net of underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
3.Shares issued pursuant to the Sales Agreement were sold in multiple lots at varying prices over the course of several days during the quarter indicated in the table above.
Cash Flows
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $561.3 million, which consisted of cash, money market funds, U.S. government securities, commercial paper, corporate debt securities, and certificates of deposit. The primary objectives of our investment activities are to preserve principal, provide liquidity, and maximize income without significantly increasing risk. Given the nature of these investments, we believe that the market for these instruments is not illiquid.
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, net cash used by operating activities increased $90.4 million, primarily resulting from an increase in our net loss of $74.2 million and increases in net cash outflows related to changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $38.6 million, partially offset by increases in net non-cash charges of $22.5 million. The increase in net cash outflows related to changes in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in accounts receivable of $13.9 million and an increase in inventory of $3.2 million. The increases in accounts receivable and inventory were primarily associated with sales of QINLOCK and the commencement of the capitalization of QINLOCK inventory, respectively, following the FDA approval of QINLOCK in May 2020. Other net cash outflows related to changes in our operating assets and liabilities were generally due to the timing of vendor invoicing and payments. Net non-cash charges increased primarily due to an increase in share-based compensation of $16.7 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018, net cash used by operating activities increased $62.5 million, primarily resulting from an increase in our net loss of $92.4 million, partially offset by increases in non-
cash charges of $8.2 million and cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $21.7 million. Net non-cash charges increased primarily due to an increase in share-based compensation of $10.7 million. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities increased primarily due to increases of $26.6 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities, partially offset by an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $4.6 million. Changes in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, and prepaid expenses and other current assets were generally due to growth in our business.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, net cash flows from investing activities increased $489.0 million, resulting from an increase in proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $770.1 million, partially offset by an increase in purchases of marketable securities of $279.6 million. The increase in net sales and maturities of marketable securities was partially offset by increases in our restricted investments of $1.2 million, which was made up of a $1.0 million increase to the letter of credit for our leases at the Premises associated with the commencement of the Additional Space and a $0.6 million increase to our Company credit card limit to support the growth of our business during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an increase of $0.4 million to secure a Company credit card during the same period in 2019, and an increase in purchases of property and equipment of $0.4 million primarily associated with moving into the Additional Space.
During the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018, net cash flows from investing activities decreased $458.3 million, resulting from the net purchases of marketable securities of $455.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 to build our initial marketable securities portfolio, an increase in purchases of property and equipment of $3.8 million, primarily associated with moving to the Premises, partially offset by a decrease in the amount that we increased our restricted investments of $0.6 million, which was due to an increase of $0.4 million to secure a Company credit card during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to an increase of $1.1 million to secure a letter of credit associated with our lease of the Initial Space at the Premises during the same period in 2018.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, net cash flows from financing activities decreased $209.6 million, primarily resulting from a decrease in net proceeds from public offerings of our common stock of $225.2 million, partially offset by an increase in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plans of $14.5 million, which was primarily due to increased stock option exercises associated with vesting of increased share-based awards as a result of headcount growth, and a $1.3 million decrease in repayments associated with a previous note payable to a related party, which was not outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the early repayment of the outstanding balance of the note payable to a related party in December 2019. Net of underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering costs, the decrease in proceeds from our public offerings was due our issuance in the third quarter of 2019 of $431.8 million as compared to our issuance in February 2020 of $188.4 million and our issuance in the fourth quarter of 2020 under the Sales Agreement of $17.9 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018, net cash flows from financing activities increased $250.4 million, primarily resulting from an increase in net proceeds from public offerings of our common stock of $246.5 million and an increase in proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $5.0 million, which was primarily due to vesting of increased share-based awards associated with headcount growth, partially offset by an increase of $1.1 million in repayments associated with a previous note payable to a related party, primarily due to the early repayment of the outstanding balance of the note payable to a related party in December 2019. Net of underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering costs, the increase in proceeds from our public offerings was due our issuance in the third quarter of 2019 of $431.8 million as compared to our issuance in June 2018 of $185.3 million.
Funding Requirements
Our ability to generate product revenues sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful commercialization of QINLOCK and the development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our drug candidates. Our net loss was $266.5 million, $192.3 million, and $99.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $754.5 million. We expect to continue to incur
significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. We expect that our expenses and capital requirements will increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we:
•continue to commercialize QINLOCK in the U.S., and continue to build our global commercial capability as we actively prepare to bring QINLOCK to eligible patients around the world, including in Europe, if approved;
•continue with our ongoing pivotal Phase 3 study of QINLOCK in second-line GIST and potentially other areas of GIST treatment;
•continue with our ongoing and planned clinical programs for vimseltinib as a potential single agent therapy for the treatment of TGCT and rebastinib as a combination therapy in solid tumor cancers;
•develop DCC-3116, our ULK kinase inhibitor, for the potential treatment of RAS or RAF mutant cancers;
•continue research and development and drug discovery activities and initiate additional clinical trials;
•seek marketing approval for our drug or any of our drug candidates that successfully complete clinical development;
•develop and scale up our capabilities to support our ongoing preclinical activities and clinical trials for our drug candidates and commercialization of any of our drug candidates for which we obtain marketing approval;
•maintain, expand, protect, and enforce our intellectual property portfolio; and
•expand our operational, financial, and management systems and increase personnel, including to support our clinical development and commercialization efforts and our operations as a public company, including international operations in Europe and other potential geographies.
As we continue to seek regulatory approval for our drug and drug candidates, including QINLOCK for the treatment of second-line GIST patients, we expect to incur significant expenses related to our ongoing clinical development efforts and activities related to maintaining and expanding our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing, and distribution except to the extent we enter into a commercialization partnership that covers such expenses. Further, we expect to continue to incur costs associated with operating as a public company.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. We may not be successful in our commercialization of QINLOCK. Even if we are able to generate substantial product sales of QINLOCK, we may not become profitable. Until we become profitable, if ever, we expect to finance our operations primarily through a combination of equity, debt, or other financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, and marketing, distribution, or additional licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back, or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our drug candidates.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of existing equity holders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures, or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution, or licensing arrangements with third parties (such as our license agreement with Zai), we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs, drugs, or drug candidates, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. Market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors could also adversely impact our ability to access capital as and when needed. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce, or terminate our research, product development, or commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market drugs and drug candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with pharmaceutical product development and commercialization, we are unable to accurately predict the timing or amount of increased expenses and capital requirements or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations. The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend largely on:
•the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities;
•successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
•the success of our commercialization efforts and market acceptance for QINLOCK or any of our future approved drugs;
•the timing and outcome of regulatory review of our drug and drug candidates;
•the cost to develop companion diagnostics as needed for each of our drug candidates;
•our ability to establish and manage agreements with third-party manufacturers for clinical supply for our clinical trials and commercial manufacturing;
•addition and retention of key research and development and commercial, including sales and marketing, personnel;
•our efforts to enhance operational, financial, and information management systems and hire additional personnel, including personnel to support the business;
•the costs and timing of commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales, and distribution, for QINLOCK, including our planned commercial launch of QINLOCK in Europe, if approved, and any of our drug candidates for which we obtain marketing approval;
•the legal and patent costs involved in prosecuting patent applications and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property claims; and
•the terms and timing of any collaboration, license, distribution, or other arrangement, including the terms and timing of any upfront, milestone, and/or royalty payments thereunder.
We believe that our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020 of $561.3 million, together with anticipated product revenues, but excluding any potential future milestone payments or other payments under our collaboration or license agreements, if any, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second half of 2022. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effects that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods:
(1)Lease commitments reflect payments due for our lease agreements at the Premises in Waltham, Massachusetts that expire in November 2029 and our lease agreements in Lawrence, Kansas that expire in December 2030.
(2)In addition, lease commitments reflect payments due for leases in Lawrence, Kansas that had not commenced under ASC 842 as of December 31, 2020, and as a result, these leases are not reflected within the consolidated balance sheets. We expect these leases to commence in 2021.
(3)We have entered into commercial supply agreements related to the supply of QINLOCK that require us to make binding forecasts for a certain amount of purchases. The related cancellation clauses would as a general matter require us to pay the full amount of these binding forecasts.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with various third parties for clinical trials, preclinical research studies, and testing, manufacturing, and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts provide for termination upon notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancellable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in the table of contractual obligations above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Polices, to our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.