Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the forward-looking statements included herein. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are the leading SaaS provider of core systems for the P&C insurance industry. We have achieved our leadership position by combining over twenty years of deep domain expertise with the differentiated SaaS capabilities and low-code configurability of our technology platform. We believe we are the first company to provide carriers with an end-to-end suite of enterprise-scale core system software that is purpose-built as a SaaS solution. Our product portfolio is built on our modern technology foundation, the Duck Creek Platform, and works cohesively to improve the operational efficiency of carriers’ core processes (policy administration, claims management and billing) as well as other critical functions. The Duck Creek Platform enables our customers to be agile and rapidly capitalize on market opportunities, while reducing their total cost of technology ownership.
Our deep understanding of the P&C insurance industry has enabled us to develop a single, unified suite of insurance software products that is tailored to address the key challenges faced by carriers. Our solutions promote carriers’ nimbleness by enabling rapid integration and streamlining the ability to capture, access and utilize data more effectively. The Duck Creek Suite includes several products that support the P&C insurance process lifecycle, such as:
•
Duck Creek Policy: enables carriers to develop and launch new insurance products and manage all aspects of policy administration, from product definition to quoting, binding and servicing
•
Duck Creek Billing: supports fundamental payment and invoicing capabilities (such as billing and collections, commission processing, disbursement management and general ledger capabilities) for all insurance lines and bill types
•
Duck Creek Claims: supports the entire claims lifecycle from first notice of loss through investigation, payments, negotiations, reporting and closure
In addition, we offer other innovative solutions, such as Duck Creek Rating, Duck Creek Insights, Duck Creek Digital Engagement, Duck Creek Distribution Management, Duck Creek Reinsurance Management, Duck Creek Anywhere Managed Integrations and Duck Creek Industry Content, which provide additional features and functionalities that further help our customers meet the increasing and evolving demands of the P&C industry. Our customers purchase and deploy Duck Creek OnDemand, our SaaS solution, either individually or as a suite.
We sell our SaaS solutions through recurring fee arrangements where revenue is recognized on a monthly basis following deployment to the customer, which we refer to as subscription revenue. Substantially all of our new bookings come from the sale of SaaS subscriptions of Duck Creek OnDemand. For the years ended August 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, SaaS ACV bookings represented 97%, 96% and 86% of our total ACV bookings, respectively. Historically, we have also sold our products through perpetual and term license arrangements, most commonly installed on-premise, where license revenue is typically recognized in full upon delivery of the software to the customer. We generally price our SaaS and license arrangements at individually negotiated rates based on the amount of a customer’s DWP that will be managed by our solutions with pre-determined fee adjustments as the customer’s DWP increases over the term of the contract, which typically ranges from three to seven years for our SaaS arrangements. We typically invoice our customers monthly, in advance, for SaaS fees whereas our term licenses are typically invoiced annually, in advance. The total cost of a perpetual license is billed in full upon contract signing.
We also derive revenue from maintenance and support services on our perpetual and term license products (primarily software updates, rights to unspecified software upgrades on a when-and-if-available basis and remote support services). We recognize revenue on a monthly basis as maintenance and support services are provided to customers. We generate revenue by providing professional services for both our SaaS solutions and perpetual and term license products (primarily related to implementation services) to the extent requested by our customers. The vast majority of our professional services revenue is recognized on a time and materials basis as the work is delivered to our customers. Our customers may also choose to obtain implementation services through our network of third-party SI partners who provide implementation and other related services to our customers. Our partnerships with leading SIs allow us to grow our business more efficiently by giving us scale to service our growing customer base. We continue to grow our services organization, including increasing the number of qualified consultants we employ and investing time and resources to develop relationships with new SI partners in existing and new markets.
We sell our products and services to a wide variety of carriers, including many of the largest and most recognizable brands in the P&C insurance industry, as well as smaller national and regional carriers. Our direct sales team focuses on obtaining new customers, which includes carriers that currently operate internally developed or competing systems, as well as selling into our existing customer base, which includes marketing our SaaS solutions to our term and perpetual license customers to drive adoption of our SaaS solutions and cross-selling additional applications. We are committed to continued training and development in order to increase the productivity of our sales team, with regional sales centers in North America, Europe and Australia. Our sales team is complemented by our partnerships with third-party partners, including leading SIs and solution partners. These partners provide additional market validation to our offerings, enhance our sales force through co-marketing efforts and offer greater speed and efficiency of implementation capabilities and related services to our customers. We also engage in a variety of traditional and online marketing activities designed to provide sales support and build brand recognition and enhance our reputation as an industry leader.
We believe our strong customer relationships are a result of our ability to develop innovative technology and incorporate our deep domain expertise into products that serve mission critical functions in our customers’ day-to-day operations. We have over 150 insurance customers, of which approximately 70 have purchased one or more of our SaaS solutions. For customer concentration purposes, customers are assessed two ways: individual entities (customers) and combining customers that are under common control (consolidated entities). We had no single customer that accounted for over 10% of our total revenue in fiscal 2021 or fiscal 2020 but one consolidated entity that represented approximately 11% of our total revenue for fiscal 2020. This consolidated entity is a large multinational corporation that does business with us through multiple subsidiaries. In fiscal 2019, a single customer, State Farm, accounted for 10% of our total revenue and the same multinational corporation was the one consolidated entity that represented approximately 13% of our total revenue in fiscal 2019.
Key Factors and Trends Affecting Our Results of Operations
Increased focus on the sale of our SaaS solutions and resulting changing revenue mix. A central part of our strategy is to continue to grow our subscription revenue by signing new SaaS customers and increasing sales to our existing SaaS customers. Additionally, over time we also expect to migrate existing term and perpetual license customers to our SaaS solutions. As a result, our software revenue mix will continue to change over time as the portion of license revenue (primarily recognized up-front) decreases and the portion of subscription revenue (recognized monthly) increases, which may make our results in any one period difficult to compare to any other period. For the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, subscription revenue was 77%, 71% and 60% of software revenue, respectively.
Continued and increased adoption of our solutions by customers. Strong customer relationships are a key driver of our success given the importance of customer references for new sales. Our long-term relationships with existing customers provide us with significant opportunities to reach customer decision-makers and sell our product offerings that address the specific customer’s needs, allowing us to recognize incremental sales with lower sales and marketing spend than for a new customer. With the continued launch of new functionality for the Duck Creek Suite, we have the opportunity to realize incremental value by selling additional functionality to customers that do not currently utilize our full product portfolio and by encouraging existing term and perpetual license customers to adopt our SaaS solutions. As we demonstrate our value to customers, we believe we will have the opportunity to sell them additional solutions. Moreover, because our products are priced on the basis of the amount of DWP generated by our customers, we expect our revenue will grow as our customers grow their businesses.
Timing of license revenue recognition and changing contract terms. Because our offerings are typically priced based on a customer’s DWP, and our business relies on a relatively small number of high-value contracts, the license revenues recognized in any fiscal period in which we sign a term license with a large global carrier may be disproportionally higher than revenues recognized in a period in which we only sign term licenses with smaller carriers. We generally experience lengthy sales cycles because potential customers typically undertake a rigorous pre-purchase decision-making and evaluation process. Additionally, our license revenue may significantly increase in any given period in which a new license contract is signed. In fiscal 2018, we revised our contracting practices and began to sell our term licenses with an initial two-year committed term and optional annual renewals instead of our historical three to six year committed terms. This contracting change has impacted historical period-over-period revenue comparisons. However, because of our revenue mix shift to subscription and since our contracts going forward are expected to have initial two-year committed terms, this change is not expected to have a material impact on the comparability of our results in future periods. Our term license revenue accounted for 8%, 8%, and 13% of software revenue during fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Investment in sales and marketing organization. We plan to continue to invest in our sales and marketing efforts to grow our customer base, increase sales of additional functionality to existing customers and encourage carriers who currently operate legacy systems or use one or more of our competitor’s applications to adopt our SaaS solutions. We expect to add sales personnel and expand our marketing activities. We also intend to continue to expand our international sales and marketing organization, which we believe will be an important factor in our continued growth. Our sales and marketing expenses totaled $54.1 million, $50.3 million, and $40.2 million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future.
Investment in SaaS operations. We will continue to invest in Duck Creek OnDemand, including through our new SaaS operations center and continued growth in the number of our cloud and SaaS operations experts, to further our goal of delivering the best experience for our SaaS customers. Personnel related costs of our SaaS operations team is the fastest growing component of our cost of subscription revenue. Our cost of subscription revenue totaled $47.3 million, $34.9 million, and $24.2 million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Investment in technology and research and development efforts. We are committed to continuing to deliver market-leading software to carriers and believe that maintaining our product leadership is critical to driving further revenue growth. As a result, we intend to continue to make significant investments in our research and development efforts to extend the functionality and breadth of our current solutions as well as develop and launch new products and tools to address the evolving needs of the P&C insurance industry. Our research and development expenses totaled $48.5 million, $44.1 million, and $35.9 million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future.
Pursuing acquisitions. We have acquired and successfully integrated several businesses complementary to our own to enhance our software and technology capabilities. We intend to continue to pursue targeted acquisitions that further complement our product portfolio or provide us access to new markets. For example, in August 2016, we acquired Agencyport Software, a provider of intuitive, digital experiences between carriers and their agents, brokers, consumers and policyholders; in January 2017, we acquired Yodil, LLC, a pioneer in insurance data management solutions; in October 2018, we acquired Outline Systems LLC, a provider of P&C distribution channel management software and longstanding member of our partner ecosystem; and in June 2019, we acquired the CedeRight Products business, a provider of reinsurance management software, from DataCede LLC. As a result of the contributions of these businesses and any future businesses we may acquire, our results of operations may not be comparable between periods. For fiscal 2021 and 2020, we did not engage in any acquisition activity. In fiscal 2019 cash consideration for acquisitions was $11.6 million.
Mix of Professional Services Revenue. Our professional services teams ensure the successful configuration and integration of our solutions, and provide continuous support to our customers. We recognize most of our professional services revenue during initial deployment, and recognize additional revenue for services provided over the lifetime of a customer’s use of our software. Over time, a customer’s spend on professional services decreases as a percentage of their overall spend with us. In addition, although we plan on increasing our professional services headcount in the long-term, we expect to shift an increasing percentage of implementation work to our network of third-party SIs to better enable us to meet growing market demand. As a result, we expect our overall professional services revenue to increase in absolute dollars due to the growth in the number of our SaaS customers, but to decrease as a percentage of total revenue. For the fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, our professional services revenue was $98.6 million, or 38% of total revenue, $94.1 million, 44% of total revenue, and $77.7 million, 45% of total revenue respectively.
COVID-19 Expenses. In March 2020, we implemented various measures in response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic to ensure the safety of our employees. Over a two-day period, we shifted 100% of our employee base to work from home and suspended international and domestic travel. This policy remained largely in place throughout fiscal year 2021, with only certain exceptions being made on a case-by-case basis. As a result, our travel-related expenses decreased from fiscal year 2020 to 2021.
Due to the success of our work from home program, we have established a remote-first policy for all employees. Under this policy, employees can work from home but have the option to work out of physical office locations when they would like.
Share-based Compensation. In fiscal 2020, we had a high level of share-based compensation expense that was primarily driven by our IPO. For fiscal 2021, share-based compensation decreased due to the normalization of expense commensurate with employees continuing to vest in their awards over requisite service periods.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate our revenue from selling subscriptions to our SaaS solutions, licensing our term and perpetual software applications, providing maintenance and support services (primarily software updates, rights to unspecified software upgrades on a when-and-if-available basis and remote support services) to our term and perpetual license customers and providing professional services (primarily related to implementation services) to the extent requested by either our SaaS or term and perpetual license customers. We generally price our SaaS and licenses arrangements based on the amount of a customer’s DWP that will be managed by our software solutions and may include volume-based pricing for customers managing a higher amount of DWP with our solutions. Our SaaS and license contracts generally include provisions for additional fees when the amount of the customer’s DWP managed by our software solutions exceed agreed-upon caps within defined reporting periods, which are recognized on an as incurred basis. Software revenue is comprised of subscription revenue and revenue from licenses and maintenance and support services. Total revenue is comprised of software revenue plus revenue from our professional services.
Subscription
Our subscription revenue is comprised of fees from customers accessing our Duck Creek OnDemand platform and other SaaS solutions. Revenue for a reporting period is generally recognized ratably in proportion to the total contractual DWP, beginning when the service has been made available to the customer. Our subscription revenue accounted for 77%, 71% and 60% of software revenue during fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Licenses
On an increasingly limited basis, we sell licenses for our solutions on either a renewable term basis or a perpetual basis. The total contractual consideration allocated to the license is recognized as revenue upon delivery of the software to a customer, assuming all other revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. We sell our term licenses with an initial two-year committed term and optional annual renewals, with the revenue allocated to the initial two-year license period recognized in full upon delivery of the license. We expect volatility across reporting periods for
our license revenue due to the timing of license renewals and sales. Our license revenue accounted for 8%, 8% and 15% of software revenue during fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Maintenance and Support
In connection with our term and perpetual license arrangements, we offer maintenance and support under renewable, fee-based contracts that include unspecified software updates and upgrades released when and if available, software patches and fixes and email and phone support. Our maintenance and support fees are typically priced as a fixed percentage of the associated license fees. We recognize maintenance and support revenue from customers ratably over the committed term of the contract. Substantially all term and perpetual license customers purchase an agreement for maintenance and support. We expect to continue to generate a relatively consistent stream of revenue from the maintenance and support services we provide to our existing license customers. However, we expect revenue from maintenance and support services to decrease as a percentage of software revenue as we continue to deemphasize license sales in favor of our SaaS solutions. Our maintenance and support revenue accounted for 15%, 20% and 26% of software revenue during fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Professional Services
We offer professional services, primarily related to implementation of our products, in connection with both our SaaS solutions and software license products. The vast majority of professional services engagements are billed to customers on a time and materials basis and revenue is generally recognized upon delivery of our services. We expect our professional services revenue to grow over time in absolute dollars due to customer growth and an increasing need for implementation services, but decrease as a percentage of total revenue. We believe the rate at which we sell our software will drive a greater need for implementation services that will support both an increase in our professional services revenue and an increase in demand for the services provided by our third-party SIs. Our professional services revenue generates lower gross margins than our software revenue and accounted for 38%, 44% and 45% of our total revenue during fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cost of Revenue
Our cost of revenue has fixed and variable components and depends on the type of revenue earned in each period. Cost of revenue includes amortization expense associated with acquired technology and other operating expenses directly related to the cost of products and services, including depreciation expense. We expect our cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to hire personnel, to provide hosting services, technical support and consulting services to our growing customer base.
Cost of Subscriptions
Our cost of subscription revenue is primarily comprised of cloud infrastructure costs, royalty fees paid to third parties, amortization of acquired technology intangible assets and personnel-related expenses for our SaaS operations teams, including salaries and other direct personnel-related costs.
Cost of Licenses
Our cost of license revenue is primarily comprised of royalty fees paid to third parties and amortization of acquired technology intangible assets.
Cost of Maintenance and Support
Our cost of maintenance and support revenue is comprised of personnel-related expenses for our technical support team, including salaries and other direct personnel-related costs. While we expect the cost of maintenance and support revenue will increase in the near term, it may decrease in the future if we successfully transition our term and perpetual license customers to our SaaS solutions.
Cost of Professional Services
Our cost of professional services revenue is primarily comprised of personnel-related expenses for our professional service employees and contractors, including salaries and other direct personnel-related costs.
Gross Margins
Gross margins have been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, including the average sales price of our products and services, DWP volume growth, the mix of revenue between SaaS solutions, software licenses, maintenance and support and professional services and changes in cloud infrastructure and personnel costs. As we transition our product mix to include more SaaS customers, we expect our overall gross margin percentages to decrease in the near term due to our SaaS gross margin percentages being lower than our license gross margin percentages. Over time, we expect gross margins to increase as we onboard additional customers, achieve growth within existing customers and realize greater economies of scale.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for personnel-related expenses for our technical staff, including salaries and other direct personnel-related costs. Additional expenses include consulting and professional fees for third-party development resources. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to dedicate substantial resources to develop, improve and expand the functionality of our solutions. Costs incurred in the preliminary design and development stages of our SaaS projects are generally expensed as incurred in accordance with FASB ASC 350-40, Internal-Use Software. Once a SaaS project has reached the application development stage, certain internal, external, direct and indirect costs may be subject to capitalization. Generally, costs are capitalized until the technology is available for its intended use. Subsequent costs incurred for the development of future upgrades and enhancements, which are expected to result in additional functionality, follow the same protocol for capitalization.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel related costs for our sales and marketing functions, including salaries and other direct personnel-related costs. Additional expenses include marketing program costs, including costs related to our Formation conference (held annually, when possible) and amortization of acquired intangible assets related to customer relationships. Due to COVID-19, we did not hold our annual Formation conference in person during fiscal years 2020 or 2021; however, we developed a virtual customer conference model (called vFormation) that allowed us to effectively engage with customers online. While we expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase on an absolute dollar basis in the near term as we continue to increase investments to support our growth, we also anticipate that sales and marketing expenses will remain relatively consistent as a percentage of total revenue.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs for our executive, finance, human resources, information technology and legal functions, including salaries and other direct personnel-related costs. Additional expenses include professional fees, amortization of acquired trademarks, tradenames and domain name intangible assets, insurance and acquisition-related costs. While we expect other general and administrative expense to increase on an absolute dollar basis in the near term as we continue to increase investments to support our growth and as a result of our becoming a public company, we also anticipate that general and administrative expenses will decrease as a percentage of total revenue over time.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
Certain of our acquisitions have included a component of contingent consideration to be paid to the sellers if certain performance levels are achieved by the acquired entity over a specific period of time. Contingent
consideration is initially recorded at fair value on the acquisition date based, in part, on a range of estimated probabilities for achievement of these performance levels. The fair value is periodically adjusted as actual performance levels become known and updates are made to the estimated probabilities for future performance. A gain or loss is recognized in the income statement for fair value adjustments. As a result of additional acquisitions, it is possible that we will incur gains or losses in the future due to the change in the fair value of contingent consideration.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from fluctuations in foreign exchange rates on receivables and payables denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net comprise interest expense accrued or paid on our indebtedness, net of interest income earned on our cash balances. We expect interest income (expense) to vary each reporting period depending on the amount of outstanding indebtedness, cash, cash equivalents, and investment balances, and prevailing interest rates.
Provision for Income Taxes
We are subject to taxes in the United States as well as other tax jurisdictions or countries in which we conduct business. Earnings from our non-U.S. activities are subject to local country income tax and may be subject to current U.S. income tax. Due to cumulative losses, we maintain a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets, except in certain foreign subsidiaries that generate income. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, in assessing the extent to which a valuation allowance should be applied against our deferred tax assets. Realization of our U.S. deferred tax assets depends upon future earnings, the timing and amount of which are uncertain.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended August 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated, expressed in total dollar terms and as a percentage of total revenue:
Revenue
Subscription
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Subscription revenue increased $41.3 million, or 49%, in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 due to a combination of sales to new customers and increased revenue generated from existing customers. This increase includes the full year impact of prior year sales, sales of new services to existing customers and contractual growth.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Subscription revenue increased $28.1 million, or 50%, in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 due to a combination of sales to new customers and increased revenue generated from existing customers, which includes full year impact of prior year sales, sales of new services to existing customers and contractual growth.
License
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. License revenue increased $2.3 million, or 23%, in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in new product licenses and license renewals for existing customers.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. License revenue decreased $3.9 million, or (28%), in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 primarily due to a decrease in multi-year license deals and fees related to growth in DWP for license customers as a result of our shift to selling our SaaS solutions to new customers.
Maintenance and Support
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Maintenance and support revenue increased $0.6 million, or 3%, in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to a decrease in backlog revenue amortization, a contra-revenue purchase accounting adjustment.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Maintenance and support revenue decreased $0.2 million, or (1%), in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 primarily due to the conversion of license contract customers to SaaS customers in the previous fiscal year.
Professional services
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Professional services revenue increased $4.5 million, or 5%, in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to growth of our existing software customer base and new customer implementations.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Professional services revenue increased $16.4 million, or 21%, in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 primarily due to growth of our existing software customer base and new customer implementations.
Cost of Revenue
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Cost of revenue increased $12.9 million, or 13%, in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Cost of revenue increased $25.0 million, or 35%, in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019.
Cost of Subscriptions
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Cost of subscription revenue increased $12.4 million, or 35%, in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in SaaS customers, and is primarily comprised of a $4.9 million increase in hosting costs, a $4.3 million increase in payroll and related costs as we added employees to build out the SaaS operations team, a $1.4 million increase in amortization expense associated with capitalized internal-use software costs, a $1.3 million increase in professional service fees, and a $1.0 million increase in computer hardware and software costs. These increases were offset by a $0.4 million decrease in recruiting expenses and a $0.2 million decrease in contingent labor.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Cost of subscription revenue increased $10.7 million, or 44%, in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 primarily due to an increase in SaaS customers, and is primarily comprised of a $5.1 million increase in hosting costs, a $3.9 million increase in payroll and related costs as we added employees to build out the SaaS operations team, a $0.7 million increase in computer hardware and software costs and a $0.1 million increase in professional service fees. Share-based compensation increased $0.4 million in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 due to incremental charges related to employee stock options and Phantom Unit settlements as part of the Reorganization Transactions in conjunction with the IPO. Beginning in fiscal 2020, the Company recorded $0.7 million of amortization expense associated with capitalized internal-use software costs. These increases were offset by a $0.2 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses.
Cost of License
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Cost of license revenue increased 2% in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in royalties paid to third parties resulting from the increase in license revenue.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Cost of license revenue decreased $0.1 million, or (6%), in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 primarily due to a decrease in royalties paid to third-parties resulting from an increase in license revenue.
Cost of Maintenance and Support
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Cost of maintenance and support revenue increased 2% in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in personnel-related costs supporting our term and perpetual license customers.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Cost of maintenance and support revenue increased $0.6 million or 20% in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 primarily due to a shift in the mix of personnel (onshore resources versus offshore resources) supporting our term and perpetual license customers.
Cost of Professional Services
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Cost of professional services revenue increased $0.4 million, or 1%, in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to a $4.6 million increase in salaries and other payroll related costs resulting from increased professional services headcount, partially offset by a $1.4 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses and a $0.8 million decrease in contingent labor. Share-based compensation decreased $2.0 million in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Cost of professional services revenue increased $13.9 million, or 32%, in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 primarily due to a $5.5 million increase in salaries and other payroll related costs resulting from increased professional services headcount, a $2.5 million increase in bonus expense and a $2.1 million increase in personnel-related costs due to the internal transfer of professional services headcount back to professional services from a research and development project completed in late 2019. In addition, share-based compensation increased $4.6 million in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 due to incremental charges related to employee stock options and Phantom Unit settlements as part of the Reorganization Transactions in conjunction with the IPO. These increases were partially offset by a $1.1 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses.
Gross Margins
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Gross margins increased $35.8 million, or 31%, in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020, primarily due to a $28.9 million increase in subscription gross margin and a $4.1 million increase in professional services margin, an increase of $2.2 million in license gross margin and a $0.5 million increase in maintenance and support gross margin. Our gross margin percentage increased from 54% in fiscal 2020 to 58% in fiscal 2021 due to increases in gross margin percentages across all our revenue categories.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Gross margins increased $15.4 million, or 16%, in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019, primarily due to a $17.4 million increase in subscription gross margin and a $2.5 million increase in professional services margin, partially offset by a $3.7 million decrease in license gross margin and a $0.8 million decrease in maintenance and support gross margin. Our gross margin percentage decreased from 58% in fiscal 2019 to 54% in fiscal 2020. This is primarily due to decreases in license gross margin percentage, professional services gross margin percentage, and maintenance and support gross margin percentage, partially offset by an increase in subscription gross margin percentage.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expense
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Research and development expense increased $4.5 million, or 10%, in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to a $4.3 million increase in salaries and salary-related costs from increased headcount, a $2.0 million decrease in capitalized internal-use software costs, a $0.5 million increase in hosting costs, and a $0.2 million increase in contingent labor. These increases were partially offset by a $2.1 million decrease in share-based compensation expense, a $0.3 million reduction in travel and entertainment expenses after the start of COVID-19 pandemic, and a $0.1 million reduction in recruiting expenses.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Research and development expense increased $8.1 million, or 23%, in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 primarily due to a $3.7 million increase in share-based compensation expense related to employee stock options and Phantom Unit settlements as part of the Company’s Reorganization Transactions in conjunction with the IPO, a $1.9 million increase in bonus expense and a $3.6 decrease in cost reimbursements received by a third party due to the completion of a research and development project in late 2019. These increases were partially offset by a $0.7 million reduction in consulting fees and a $0.3 million reduction in travel and entertainment expenses.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Sales and marketing expense increased $3.8 million, or 8%, in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to a $5.2 million increase in salaries and payroll-related costs from increased headcount, a $1.7 million increase in marketing programs, and a $0.6 million increase in sales commissions, partially offset by a $2.4 million decrease in share-based compensation, and a $1.3 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Sales and marketing expense increased $10.1 million, or 25%, in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 primarily due to a $5.2 million increase in share-based compensation expense related to employee stock options and Phantom Unit settlements as part of the Reorganization Transactions in conjunction with the IPO, a $4.6 million increase in salaries and payroll-related costs, including bonuses, from increased headcount, a $0.5 million increase in sales commissions and a $0.5 million increase in marketing programs, partially offset by a $0.7 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses.
General and Administrative Expense
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. General and administrative expense increased $14.0 million, or 29%, in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to a $5.5 million increase in insurance expense as a result of becoming a public company, a $4.1 million increase in professional fees, due in part to costs associated with becoming a public company, a $2.4 million increase in salaries and payroll-related costs, $1.5 million in legal and audit fees related to the secondary offering of our common stock in the first quarter, a $1.0 million increase in bad debt expense, a $0.4 million increase in computer software costs, a $0.4 million increase in facilities cost mainly due to an increase in property taxes, a $0.4 million increase in recruiting expenses, a $0.3 million increase in business taxes and licenses, and a $0.2 million increase in contingent labor. These increases were offset by a $1.8 million decrease in share-based compensation, and a $0.4 million reduction in travel and entertainment expenses.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. General and administrative expense increased $12.2 million, or 33%, in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 primarily due to $5.2 million increase in share-based compensation expense related
to employee stock options and Phantom Unit settlements as part of the Reorganization Transactions in conjunction with the IPO, a $3.6 million increase in salaries and payroll-related costs, a $2.8 million increase in facilities cost due to the impairment of right of use assets and leasehold improvements associated with the closure or downsizing of two of our offices in the U.S., a $0.6 million increase in insurance, and a $0.5 million increase in computer software costs. These increases were offset by a $0.6 million decrease in contingent labor.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021, a $0.2 million loss was recognized primarily due to the change in fair value of contingent consideration as well as present value calculations related to the contingent consideration estimates of the acquisition of Outline Systems LLC, a provider of P&C distribution channel management software and longstanding member of our partner ecosystem (now Duck Creek Distribution Management).
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. In fiscal 2020, a $0.1 million gain was recognized primarily due to the change in fair value of contingent consideration related to the acquisition of Outline Systems (now Duck Creek Distribution Management).
Other Income (Expense), Net
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Other income (expense) decreased $0.2 million in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020, primarily due to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates on receivables and payables denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, partially offset by a $0.5 million gain on the derecognition of a lease liability resulting from a sublease transaction.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Other income (expense) grew $1.2 million in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019, primarily due to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates on receivables and payables denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar.
Interest Expense, Net
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Interest expense, net decreased $0.3 million in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to no outstanding net revolver borrowings during fiscal 2021. In fiscal 2021, interest expense consists of fees paid to maintain the revolving credit facility. These expenses were partially offset by interest income received from cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, not present in prior year.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Interest expense, net decreased $0.7 million in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 primarily due to lower net revolver borrowing costs.
Provision for Income Taxes
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020. Provision for income taxes increased by $0.3 million in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 primarily due to due to the impact of higher profits in foreign subsidiaries.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019. Provision for income taxes increased by $0.4 million in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 primarily due to an increase in the deferred tax benefit in foreign entities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through cash provided by operating activities and our revolving credit facility. As of August 31, 2021, we had $185.7 million in cash and cash equivalents, $192.0 million of short-term investments, no outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility and $0.9 million of outstanding letters of credit. We had $29.1 million of principal borrowing availability under our revolving credit facility. While we believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with cash provided by operating activities and amounts available under our revolving credit facility, will be sufficient to meet our operating working capital and capital expenditure requirements over at least the next twelve months, the extent to which COVID-19 could
impact our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows in the short- and medium-term cannot be predicted with certainty. Although we did not experience significant disruptions to our business in 2020 and 2021 from COVID-19, we and our industry as a whole may experience a greater impact going forward. To the extent COVID-19 has resulted in any increase to our cash and cash equivalents, including as a result of any decreases in sales and market expenses described above, such increase could be temporary. Additionally, on a longer term basis, we may not be able to accurately predict the effect of COVID-19 on our future financing requirements, which will depend on our primary cash needs that could be affected by many factors, including the number of new customers that we obtain, the renewal activity of our existing customers and our ability to both cross-sell additional functionality to our existing customers and to encourage our existing customers to adopt our SaaS solutions, the timing and extent of our research and development spending and the expansion of our sales and marketing activities. We may also face unexpected costs in connection with our business operations, including in connection with the ongoing implementation of our COVID-19 related policies and procedures. Any of the above could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows and require us to seek additional sources of liquidity and capital resources. For additional information regarding the impact of COVID-19 on the Company, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Public health outbreaks, epidemics or pandemics, including the global COVID-19 outbreak, could harm our business, results of operations, and financial condition”. In addition, at any given time, we may be evaluating one or more potential investments in, or acquisitions of, businesses or technologies, which could also require us to seek additional equity or debt financing. Additional sources of liquidity and capital resources, including equity or debt financing, may not be available on terms favorable to us or at all.
As of August 31, 2021, $25.2 million of cash was held by our foreign subsidiaries. We currently do not anticipate a need to repatriate these funds to finance our U.S. operations and it is our intention to indefinitely reinvest these funds outside the United States.
Summary of Cash Flows for the Fiscal Years Ended August 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
The following summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
We used $8.7 million of cash in operating activities during fiscal 2021, resulting from our net income, after excluding the impact of non-cash charges, of $20.8 million and $29.5 million of cash used in working capital activities. Cash used in working capital activities during fiscal 2021 was primarily due to an increase in accounts receivable and unbilled revenue of $10.8 million, a decrease in accrued liabilities of $3.2 million, and $9.2 million of accrued Phantom Unit settlements.
We generated $25.7 million of cash from operating activities during fiscal 2020, primarily resulting from our net income, after excluding the impact of non-cash charges, of $14.6 million and $11.2 million of cash generated by working capital activities. Cash generated by working capital activities during fiscal 2020 was primarily due to an increase in accrued liabilities with third-party software vendors, accrued annual bonuses and accrued Phantom Unit settlements.
We generated $14.8 million of cash from operating activities during fiscal 2019, primarily resulting from our net income, after excluding the impact of non-cash charges, of $3.9 million, and $10.9 million of cash generated by
working capital activities. Cash generated by working capital activities during fiscal 2019 was primarily due to an increase in accrued liabilities with third-party software vendors.
Non-cash charges in all periods include depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation expense, deferred taxes, and change in fair value of contingent earn-out liability.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities consists of business acquisitions, purchases of property and equipment, capitalization of internal use software costs, and investments in short-term, government-backed securities.
We used $194.2 million of cash in investing activities during fiscal 2021. During the second quarter of 2021, we invested $287.9 million of the cash received in the IPO in short-term, government-backed securities. Of these investments, $95.9 million matured during the year ended August 31, 2021. Such investing and maturities did not occur in the prior year period. In the year ended August 31, 2021, we spent approximately $1.4 million on purchases of property, plant and equipment, compared to $3.9 million during the year ended August 31, 2020. Additionally, our capitalized costs for internal use software were $1.9 million less during the year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior year period.
We used $6.7 million of cash in investing activities during fiscal 2020 primarily related to purchases of property and equipment of $3.9 million and capitalized internal use-software costs of $2.9 million.
We used $19.9 million of cash in investing activities during fiscal 2019 primarily related to our acquisition of Outline Systems LLC for cash consideration of $9.8 million, our acquisition of the CedeRight Products business for cash consideration of $1.8 million, purchases of property and equipment of $5.3 million and capitalized internal-use software costs of $3.0 million.
Financing Activities
We used $1.3 million in financing activities during fiscal 2021, compared to cash generated from financing activities of $358.9 million during the year ended August 31, 2020. Cash used in financing activities during the year ended August 31, 2021 primarily related to $3.7 million in payments of deferred IPO costs, $3.1 million to repurchase treasury stock in settlement of employee tax liabilities resulting from the vesting of Restricted Stock Awards, a $1.9 million payment of contingent earnout liability and a $0.2 million payment for deferred Class E units offering costs. These payments were offset by net proceeds of $3.5 million from the February 2021 follow-on offering and $4.1 million received from stock option exercises.
We generated $358.9 million of cash in financing activities during fiscal 2020, primarily related to the net proceeds of $433.7 million from the IPO and $438.8 million from the issuance of Class E units prior to the IPO, partially offset by $505.8 million in redemption costs. Other financing activities consisted of borrowings under our revolving credit facility of $5.0 million offset by payments of principal on our revolving credit facility of $9.0 million.
We generated $3.2 million of cash in financing activities during fiscal 2019, primarily related to borrowings under our revolving credit facility of $12.0 million offset by payments of principal on our revolving credit facility of $8.0 million and costs of $0.8 million relating to proceeding with the IPO.
Other Financial Data and Key Metrics
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We report our financial results in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”); however, management believes evaluating the Company’s ongoing operating results may be enhanced if investors have additional non-GAAP financial measures. Specifically, management reviews Adjusted EBITDA, Free Cash Flow, Non-GAAP Gross Margin, Non-GAAP Income from Operations and Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss), each of which is a non-GAAP financial measure, to manage our business, make planning decisions,
evaluate our performance and allocate resources and, for the reasons described below, considers them to be effective indicators, for both management and investors, of our financial performance over time.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA, Free Cash Flow, Non-GAAP Gross Margin, Non-GAAP Income from Operations and Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) help investors and analysts in comparing our results across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. These non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, the analysis of other GAAP financial measures, including net income and cash flows from operating activities. For example, with respect to Adjusted EBITDA, some of these limitations include:
• it does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements, for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
• it does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
• it does not reflect interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our indebtedness;
• it does not reflect our income tax expense or the cash requirements to pay our taxes; and
• although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements.
These non-GAAP financial measures are not universally consistent calculations, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures. Other companies may calculate similarly titled financial measures differently than we do or may not calculate them at all. Additionally, these non-GAAP financial measures are not measurements of financial performance or liquidity under GAAP. In order to facilitate a clear understanding of our consolidated historical operating results, you should examine our non-GAAP financial measures in conjunction with our historical combined financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this prospectus.
The non-GAAP financial measures and principal metrics we use in managing our business are set forth below:
Adjusted EBITDA. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss before interest expense, net; other income (expense), net; provision for income taxes; depreciation of property and equipment; amortization of intangible assets; share-based compensation expense; and the change in fair value of contingent consideration. We believe Adjusted EBITDA provides investors and other users of our financial information consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of operations. Adjusted EBITDA was $16.9 million, $11.7 million, and $6.8 million for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, is presented below for the periods indicated.
Free Cash Flow. We define Free Cash Flow as net cash provided by operating activities, less purchases of property and equipment and capitalized internal use software. We consider Free Cash Flow to be an important
measure in facilitating period-to-period comparisons of liquidity. We use Free Cash Flow in conjunction with traditional GAAP measures as part of our overall assessment of liquidity. Free Cash Flow was $(11.0) million, $19.0 million, and $6.6 million for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. A reconciliation of Free Cash Flow to net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, is presented below for the periods indicated.
Non-GAAP Gross Margin. We define Non-GAAP Gross Margin as GAAP gross margin before the portion of share-based compensation expense; amortization of intangible assets; and amortization of capitalized internal-use software that is included in cost of revenue. We believe Non-GAAP Gross Margin provides investors and other users of our financial information consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of gross margin. Non-GAAP Gross Margin was $160.2 million, $125.1 million, and $103.9 million for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. A reconciliation of Non-GAAP Gross Margin to gross margin, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, is presented below for the periods indicated.
Non-GAAP Income from Operations. We define Non-GAAP Income from Operations as GAAP loss from operations before share-based compensation expense; amortization of intangible assets; and the change in fair value of contingent consideration. We believe Non-GAAP Income from Operations provides investors and other users of our financial information consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of operations. Non-GAAP Income from Operations was 13.8 million, $8.6 million, and $4.4 million for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. A reconciliations of Non-GAAP Income from Operations to loss from operations, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, is presented below for the periods indicated.
Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss). We define Non-GAAP Net Income as GAAP net loss before amortization of share-based compensation expense; amortization of intangible assets; and change in fair value of contingent earnout liability. We believe Non-GAAP Net Income provides investors and other users of our financial information consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of operations. Non-GAAP Net Income was $10.7 million, $6.7 million, and $2.2 million for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. A reconciliation of Non-GAAP Net Income to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, is presented below for the periods indicated.
1)
Prior to the Company’s initial public offering in August 2020, there were no shares of common stock outstanding, and the membership structure of the Company consisted of limited partnership units. GAAP and Non-GAAP earnings per share for fiscal year 2020 has not been presented as it resulted in a value that would not be meaningful to the users of these financial statements because it only reflected the operations of the Company for the 17-day period subsequent to the IPO.
2)
Our GAAP tax provision is primarily related to state taxes and income taxes in profitable foreign jurisdictions. We maintain a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets in the U.S. For purposes of determining our Non-GAAP Net Income, we have applied a tax rate of 24% which represents our estimated effective tax rate once we are profitable on a GAAP basis.
SaaS Net Dollar Retention Rate. We calculate SaaS Net Dollar Retention Rate by annualizing SaaS revenue recorded in the last month of the measurement period for those revenue-generating customers in place throughout the entire measurement period (the latest twelve-month period). We divide the result by annualized SaaS revenue from the month that is immediately prior to the beginning of the measurement period, for all revenue-generating customers in place at the beginning of the measurement period. Our SaaS Net Dollar Retention Rate was 120%, 117%, and 114% for fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Our calculation excludes one existing contract for a service no longer offered on a standalone basis by the Company. We believe SaaS Net Dollar Retention Rate is an important metric for the Company because, in addition to providing a measure of retention, it indicates our ability to grow revenue within existing customer accounts. SaaS Net Dollar Retention Rate is included in a set of metrics that we calculate quarterly to review with management as well as periodically with members of our board of directors.
SaaS Annual Recurring Revenue (“SaaS ARR”). We calculate SaaS ARR by annualizing the recurring subscription revenue recognized in the last month of the measurement period (the latest twelve-month period). Our SaaS ARR was $135.3 million, $95.6 million, and $51.7 million, for fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Our calculation excludes one existing contract for a service no longer offered on a standalone basis by the Company. We believe SaaS ARR provides important information about our ability to acquire new subscription SaaS customers and to maintain and expand our relationship with existing subscription SaaS customers. SaaS ARR is included in a set of metrics that we calculate quarterly to review with management as well as periodically with members of our board of directors.
Contractual Obligations
The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of August 31, 2021:
(1)
We lease our facilities under operating lease agreements that expire at various dates through 2028. Rent expenses for leased facilities of $4.8 million, $4.9 million, and $4.4 million were recognized for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2)
Our debt consists of borrowings under our revolving credit facility, and two irrevocable standby letters of credit against our revolving credit facility. As of August 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowing under our revolving credit facility and had $29.1 million principal amount of availability under our revolving credit facility.
(3)
Our contingent earn-out was due to an obligation to make additional payments to the sellers in connection with the achievement of performance levels over the three years subsequent to our acquisition of Outline Systems LLC in October 2018.
(4)
Our purchase obligations comprise non-cancelable agreements for cloud infrastructure services with Microsoft and software subscriptions with third-party vendors.
Indebtedness
On October 4, 2016, we entered into a credit agreement with a group of lenders for a revolving credit facility with a maximum borrowing capacity of $30.0 million that was originally scheduled to mature on October 4, 2019. On October 2, 2019, we amended certain of the financial covenants and extended our credit agreement for two years to a maturity date of October 2, 2021. Our revolving credit facility is guaranteed by the Operating Partnership and certain of its domestic subsidiaries and secured by substantially all of our tangible and intangible assets. Interest accrues on our revolving credit facility at a variable rate based upon the type of borrowing made by us. Loans under our revolving credit facility bear interest at a rate of LIBOR plus an applicable margin, or incur interest at the higher of: (i) the Prime Rate, (2) the Fed Funds Rate plus 0.5%, or (3) LIBOR plus 1.0%, plus an applicable margin. The applicable margin ranges from 2.0% to 3.0% depending on the interest rate basis and type of borrowing elected (eurocurrency rate loan, base rate loan, swing rate loan or letter of credit). For the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, the effective interest rate under our revolving credit agreement was 6.9%. In addition to interest on our revolving credit facility, we pay a commitment fee of 0.5% per annum on the unused portion of our revolving credit facility, as well as customary letter of credit fees. Repayment of any amounts borrowed are not required until maturity of our revolving credit facility, however we may repay any amounts borrowed at any time, without premium or penalty.
The credit agreement contains a number of customary restrictive covenants, including limits on additional indebtedness, the creation of liens and limits on making certain investments. Limits on our revolving credit facility also require compliance with the following ratios: maintaining a minimum level of consolidated EBITDA (ranging from $5.0 million to $12.0 million depending on the applicable four quarter period), and maintaining a leverage ratio that does not exceed 3.25:1.00. We were in compliance with these financial and nonfinancial covenants as of August 31, 2021.
We incurred $0.3 million of costs directly related to obtaining our revolving credit facility which have been recorded as deferred financing fees and are amortized to interest expense on a straight-line basis over the term of our revolving credit facility. During fiscal 2017, we executed an irrevocable standby letter of credit totaling $0.8 million against our revolving credit facility in lieu of a cash security deposit for one of our office leases. Two additional irrevocable standby letters of credit were executed during fiscal 2019 for $0.2 million and $0.1 million, respectively, against our revolving credit facility in lieu of cash deposits for two of our office leases. In fiscal 2020, the $0.2 million letter of credit was reduced by $0.1 million. Apart from the letters of credit, we did not have any borrowings outstanding on our revolving credit facility as of August 31, 2021 or 2020.
On October 22, 2021, the revolving credit facility was amended resulting in an extension of the maturity date to October 22, 2026, an increase in the borrowing capacity from $30.0 million to $45.0 million and the removal of the financial covenant relating to consolidated EBITDA.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Regulation S-K, Item 303(a)(4)(ii) promulgated by the SEC under the Securities Act, in fiscal 2021, 2020 or 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The process of preparing our financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires the use of estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. These estimates and judgments are based on historical experience, future expectations and other factors and assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. The most significant estimates and judgments are reviewed on an ongoing basis and are revised when necessary. Actual amounts may differ from these estimates and judgments. A summary of our significant accounting policies is contained in Note 2 of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue recognition requires judgment and the use of estimates, especially in evaluating non-standard terms related to subscription arrangements with customers and their effect on recorded revenue.
We derive revenues primarily from four sources:
•
selling subscriptions to our SaaS solutions;
•
licensing our on-premise software applications;
•
providing maintenance and support services; and
•
providing professional services.
The estimates and assumptions requiring significant judgment under our revenue recognition policy in accordance with FASB ASC 606 are as follows:
Determine the transaction price
The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring products or services to the customer. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that no significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will occur. The sale of our software and SaaS solutions may include variable consideration relating to changes in a customer’s DWP managed by these solutions. We estimate variable consideration based on historical DWP usage to the extent that a significant revenue reversal is not probable to occur.
In instances where the timing of revenue recognition differs from the timing of invoicing, we have determined that our contracts generally do not include a significant financing component. The primary purpose of our invoicing terms is to provide customers with simplified and predictable ways of purchasing our products and services, not to receive financing from customers or to provide customers with financing.
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”).
The determination of SSP involves judgment. It is typically based on the observable prices of the promised goods or services charged when sold separately to customers, which are determined using contractually stated prices. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, we determine SSP based on our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration market conditions and other factors, including customer size and geography. The various products and services comprising contracts with multiple performance obligations are typically capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. We allocate revenue to each of the performance obligations included in a contract with multiple performance obligations at the inception of the contract.
The SSP for perpetual or term-based software licenses sold in contracts with multiple performance obligations is determined using the residual approach. We utilize the residual approach because the selling prices for software licenses is highly variable and a SSP is generally not discernible from past transactions or other observable evidence. Periodically, we evaluate whether the use of the residual approach remains appropriate for performance obligations associated with software licenses when sold as part of contracts with multiple performance obligations. As a result, if the SSP analysis illustrates that the selling prices for software licenses are no longer highly variable, we utilize the relative allocation method for such arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A summary of recent accounting pronouncements and our assessment of any expected impact of these pronouncements if known is included in Note 2 of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.