Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are an interventional oncology company focused on the treatment of primary and metastatic liver cancers. Our lead product candidate, the HEPZATO™ KIT (melphalan hydrochloride for injection/hepatic delivery system), or HEPZATO™, is a drug/device combination product designed to administer high-dose chemotherapy to the liver while controlling systemic exposure and associated side effects. HEPZATO has not been approved for sale in the United States. In Europe, HEPZATO is a stand-alone medical device and is approved for sale under the trade name CHEMOSAT® Hepatic Delivery System for Melphalan, or CHEMOSAT, where it has been used at major medical centers to treat a wide range of cancers of the liver.
In the United States, HEPZATO is considered a combination drug and device product and is regulated as a drug by the United States Food and Drug Administration, or the FDA. The FDA has granted the active moiety melphalan hydrochloride five orphan drug designations for the treatment of patients with ocular (uveal) melanoma, cutaneous melanoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, and neuroendocrine tumors. The FDA has granted the active moiety doxorubicin one orphan drug designation for the treatment of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. In Europe CHEMOSAT is regulated as a Class IIb medical device and received its CE Mark in 2012.
Our most advanced development program is the treatment of ocular melanoma liver metastases, or mOM, a type of primary liver cancer. We are currently reviewing the incidence, unmet need, available efficacy data and development requirements for a broad set of liver cancers in order to select a portfolio of indications which will maximize the value of the HEPZATO platform. We believe that the disease states we are investigating and intend to investigate are unmet medical needs that represent significant market opportunities.
We are investigating the objective response rate of HEPZATO in patients with mOM in our FOCUS Clinical Trial for Patients with Hepatic Dominant Ocular Melanoma, or the FOCUS Trial, a global registration clinical trial. For information on the FOCUS Trial, see “Part I, Item 1. Business-Clinical Development Program-The FOCUS Trial” above. We have paused the ALIGN Trial, a global Phase 3 clinical trial of HEPZATO in patients with intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, or the ALIGN Trial, due to difficulties in enrollment. For information on the ALIGN Trial, see “Part I, Item 1. Business-Clinical Development Program-The ALIGN Trial” above. In addition to the FOCUS Trial and the ALIGN Trial, our commercial development plan also includes a registry for CHEMOSAT cases performed in Europe and support of select investigator-initiated trials, or IITs.
Due to the global outbreak of SARS-CoV-2, a novel strain of coronavirus that causes Coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the Company experienced an impact on certain areas of its business. These effects included a slowing of patient recruitment in the FOCUS Trial and a reduction in the pace at which we can monitor data at our clinical trial sites. The resulting delay in completing enrollment and additional time required to monitor data caused our planned announcement for the top-line data from our FOCUS Trial to shift to early 2021. We intend to submit a new drug application, or NDA, to the FDA in the first quarter of 2022 for the treatment of mOM once the FOCUS Trial has been completed. The ability to achieve this goal is contingent on our ability to monitor data at our clinical sites and therefore the timeline may shift as access to the clinical sites changes in response to the rapidly evolving situation. COVID-19 has caused us to experience a decline in EU commercial product revenue. The results of the FOCUS Trial should also support securing reimbursement coverage for the use of CHEMOSAT in Europe. Additional impacts of COVID-19 on our business may arise that we are not aware of currently. The ultimate impact of the pandemic on the Company’s results of operations, financial position, liquidity, or capital resources cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We will need to raise additional capital under structures available to us including debt and/or equity offerings. If these sources do not provide the capital necessary to fund our operations, we will need to curtail certain aspects of our operations or consider other means of obtaining additional financing, although there is no guarantee that we could obtain the financing necessary to continue our operations.
Our future results are subject to substantial risks and uncertainties. We have operated at a loss for our entire history and anticipate that losses will continue over the coming years. There can be no assurance that we will ever generate significant revenues or achieve profitability. We expect to use cash, cash equivalents and investment proceeds to fund our clinical research and operating activities. Our future liquidity and capital requirements will depend on numerous factors, including the initiation and progress of clinical trials and research and product development programs; obtaining regulatory approvals and complying with applicable laws and regulations; the timing and effectiveness of product commercialization activities, including marketing arrangements; the timing and costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing intellectual property rights; and the effect of competing technological and market developments.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash totaling $28.8 million, as compared to cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash totaling $10.2 million at December 31, 2019. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company used $22.9 million and $23.7 million respectively, of cash in our operating activities.
Our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020 have been prepared under the assumption that we will continue as a going concern for the next twelve months. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We have historically funded our operations through a combination of private placements and public offerings of our securities.
Future Capital Needs; Additional Future Funding
Our future results are subject to substantial risks and uncertainties. We have operated at a loss for our entire history and there can be no assurance that we will ever achieve consistent profitability. These circumstances raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. Additional working capital will be required to continue operations. There can be no assurance that such working capital will be available on acceptable terms, if at all.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020; Comparisons of Results of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
We recorded approximately $1.2 million in product revenue and $0.5 million in other revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the same period in 2019, we recorded $1.1 million in product revenue and $0.5 million in other revenue. Our sales in both 2020 and 2019 were primarily generated through our license agreement with medac, pursuant to which medac serves as our exclusive distributor of CHEMOSTAT in the EU and certain other European nations.
Cost of Goods Sold
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized cost of goods sold of approximately $0.6 million related to product revenue of $1.2 million as compared to cost of goods sold of approximately $0.7 million related to product revenue of $1.1 million in the prior year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, selling, general and administrative expenses decreased to $11.1 million from $11.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily related to $0.2 million in settlement expenses paid in 2019, which was a non-cash expense and $0.8 million in expenses related to litigation that was settled in July and August 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expenses increased to $11.2 million from $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increased rate of enrollment and related professional services for the FOCUS Trial as a result of the alleviated cash constraints we experienced during the first half of 2019.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liability
For the year ended December 31, 2020, non-cash derivative instrument expense was $2.8 million compared to the non-cash derivative instrument income of $17.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In 2019, the Company issued warrants with an initial fair value of $20.8 million. At December 31, 2019, the fair value of the 2019 warrants was $3.4 million, resulting in a $17.5 million change in the fair value. In February 2020, the fair value of the warrant increased to $6.2 million, resulting in expense of $2.8 million. The entire $6.2 million warrant liability was reclassified to equity at March 31, 2020.
Loss on issuance of financial instrument
For the year ended December 31, 2020, there was no non-cash loss on issuance of financial instrument recorded, resulting in an increase of $1.7 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. In 2019, the $1.7 million loss is related to the issuance of the $2.0 million convertible note which was issued in exchange for the cancellation of the Series D and Pre-Funded Series D Warrants as discussed further in Notes 10 and 11 to the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Other Income/Expense and Interest Expense
Other expense and interest expense are primarily related to the amortization of debt discounts, as well as foreign currency exchange gains and losses.
Interest income is from a money market account and interest earned on operating accounts.
Net Loss
We had a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $24.2 million, an increase of $15.3 million, as compared to a $8.9 million net loss for the same period in 2019. This increase is due in part to a $1.5 million increase in operating expenses and a $0.1 million increase in gross profits, as well as a $6.2 million decrease in various non-cash expense items primarily related to the amortization of debt discounts and other costs related to convertible notes and other instruments issued in 2018 and 2019, offset by a $20.3 million increase in derivative instrument expense, also a non-cash item.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Certain accounting policies have a significant impact on amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. A summary of those significant accounting policies can be found in Note 3 to the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.