Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read together with the selected consolidated financial data and our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Certain statements contained in this discussion may constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those reflected in any forward-looking statements, as discussed more fully in this Form 10-K. See “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A.
For discussion related to the results of operations and changes in financial condition for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our fiscal 2019 Form 10-K, which was filed with the SEC on February 26, 2020.
Overview and Strategy
We combine customer collaboration and innovation with the expertise of our people to execute on a strategy of providing digital manufacturing solutions. These ongoing efforts resulted in the creation of nearly 130 million production parts by our customers in 2020.
We architect solutions specific to customers’ needs through a combination of materials, hardware platforms, software and professional services - creating a path to integrating additive into traditional production environments. As a result, manufacturers achieve design freedom, increase agility, scale production and improve overall total cost of operation.
Digital Manufacturing Solutions for a Breadth of Industries
Our digital manufacturing solutions customers span a range of industries including Aerospace and Defense, Automotive, Dental, Durable Goods and Healthcare.
•Industrial Solutions
◦Aerospace and Defense: Aerospace and defense customers use our solutions to achieve manufacturing productivity improvements such as increased speed and reliability of quality assurance and validation processes, lowered fuel costs through lightweighting and parts consolidation, increased manufacturing productivity through innovative 3D printed casting patterns, 3D data recovery, injection-mold design and direct metal printing of airworthy parts.
◦Automotive: Our production solutions are used by automotive manufacturers to develop lighter weight parts to drive down manufacturing costs, design and produce innovative assemblies that reduce part counts, provide greater strength and efficiency and create realistic prototypes that reduce time from the product development process.
◦Durable Goods: Manufacturers of durable goods use our solutions to increase factory automation and connectivity, create greater product personalization and achieve just-in-time manufacturing. Our products and services help reduce mass production, one-size-fits-all manufacturing, long lead time and large inventories for our durable goods customers.
•Healthcare Solutions
◦Dental: We offer a broad range of clinically validated digital dentistry technologies and materials that allow dental labs to access advanced digital workflows, driving speed, efficiency and precision of a range of indications delivered to patients.
◦Healthcare: We partner with surgeons, healthcare professionals and medical device manufacturers to offer a range of precision healthcare solutions, including 3D printed anatomical models, VSP and patient-specific surgical guides, instrumentation and implants.
Accelerating Additive Manufacturing Adoption
We partner with our customers in their progression in the use of additive manufacturing to help accelerate the adoption of additive manufacturing within their existing production environments. This process focuses on the customer’s desired application in order to design the solutions to achieve their needs and address challenges. Customers regularly engage with one of our Customer Innovation Centers (CIC), where a customized production workflow solution is designed to accelerate the development of advanced applications by providing customers with access to solutions, domain expertise and state-of-the-art technology. The process often includes our software as the core to the overall solution. Customers are able to scan and digitize solutions when digital files do not exist, and then prepare their CAD file for 3D printing. This preparation includes importing part data, orienting the part on the build plate, optimizing the geometry and creating supports to ensure the final part matches the design intent. The part is then created using our additive manufacturing hardware platforms. After printing, the part is post-processed and our software provides inspection capabilities.
On Demand Solutions Provide Supply Chain Flexibility
Our On Demand solutions facilitate supply chain flexibility by leveraging the same production solutions available direct to customers. Our On Demand solutions can provide single part production, or hundreds of parts, within days. Customers have access to a global network of facilities and nearly four decades of experience in 3D printing and advanced manufacturing solutions.
Digital Factory Software
Our extensive software portfolio allows manufacturers to deliver physical products with digital precision and speed. We provide manufacturers with access to additive technologies to create their products, streamlining manufacturing processes from digitization and design to manufacturing, inspection and production management.
Integrated Production Solutions
Our additive manufacturing solutions can complement our customers’ traditional workflows to create a competitive advantage. Our strategic partnership with GF Machining Solutions is designed to help more manufacturers take advantage of additive technology. This partnership combines our innovation and expertise in additive manufacturing with GF Machining Solutions’ leadership in precision machining, enabling manufacturers to combine additive and subtractive technologies to more efficiently produce complex metal parts within tight tolerances, and reduce total cost of operation.
COVID-19 Pandemic Response
We continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and our top priority remains the health and safety of our employees and their families and communities. Our Crisis Response Steering Committee regularly reviews and adapts our protocols based on evolving research and guidance related to the virus. While essential operations continue, we continue to restrict travel and meetings, publish pertinent information, and adapt to a world where many in our workforce are remote and those coming on-site are following new safety measures. We have a multi-phase plan to return to working on-site, and remain committed to protecting our employees, delivering for our customers and supporting our communities.
2020 Summary
Consolidated revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 12.4%, or $79.1 million, to $557.2 million, compared to $636.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Current year revenue was adversely impacted by COVID-19, the effects of which occurred most severely at the onset of the pandemic, in the latter part of the first quarter and into the second quarter, as many of our customers were shutdown or on a significantly reduced level of activity. The third quarter experienced a partial return in activity, though levels remained lower than that of prior year. The fourth quarter experienced a stronger return in activity, with results surpassing that of the prior year quarter by 2.6%.
Revenue from Healthcare increased 9.1% to $245.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $224.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by stronger sales to the dental market. Industrial sales decreased 24.2% to $311.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $411.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019; decreases were in all products and services across all geographies.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total software revenue from products and services decreased by 12.7% to $86.0 million, 15.4% of total revenue, compared to $98.5 million, 15.5% of total revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 20.4%, or $57.2 million, to $223.4 million, compared to $280.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Gross profit margin for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 40.1% and 44.1%, respectively. Gross profit margin decreased primarily due to lower sales volume and the under absorption of supply chain overhead resulting from lower production.
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 1.4%, or $4.7 million, to $342.3 million, compared to $337.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 13.5%, or $34.5 million, to $219.9 million, compared to $254.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 11.0%, or $9.1 million, to $74.1 million, compared to $83.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In the third quarter of 2020, we recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $48.3 million. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional discussion. No similar charge was recorded in the prior year. Excluding the goodwill impairment charge, our lower operating expenses reflect reduced hiring and lower travel expenses incurred in the current year, resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as savings achieved in the current year from cost restructuring activities, including personnel and marketing activities; partially offset by costs associated with restructuring efforts including employee severance and facility closings and related impairment charges.
Our operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $119.0 million, compared to an operating loss of $57.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $20.1 million of cash from operations. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we generated $31.6 million of cash from operations. In total, our unrestricted cash balance at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, was $75.0 million and $133.7 million, respectively. The lower cash balance primarily resulted from $20.1 million for operations, $26.8 million for repayments of debt, $12.5 million for payments to purchase noncontrolling interests and $13.6 million for capital expenditures, offset by net proceeds of $24.7 million from third quarter common stock issuances under our At-the-Market equity offering program ("ATM Program") pursuant to which we could issue and sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock up to an aggregate gross sales price of $150 million. See Note 18 and Note 26 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional discussion.
On August 5, 2020, we announced, in connection with the new strategic focus and organizational realignment, a restructuring plan intended to align our operating costs with current revenue levels and better position the Company for future sustainable and profitable growth. See Note 24 in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Results of Operations for 2020 and 2019
Comparison of revenue
Current year revenue was adversely impacted by COVID-19, as many of our customers were shutdown or on a significantly reduced level of activity for a portion of the year. Excluding impacts due to the pandemic, due to the relatively high price of certain 3D printers and a corresponding lengthy selling cycle as well as relatively low unit volume of the higher priced printers in any particular period, a shift in the timing and concentration of orders and shipments from one period to another can affect reported revenue in any given period.
In addition to changes in sales volumes, there are two other primary drivers of changes in revenue from one period to another: (1) the combined effect of changes in product mix and average selling prices and (2) the impact of fluctuations in foreign currencies. As used in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis, the price and mix effects relate to changes in revenue that are not able to be specifically related to changes in unit volume.
We earn revenue from the sale of products and services. The products category includes 3D printers and corresponding materials, healthcare simulators and digitizers, software licenses, 3D scanners and haptic devices. The majority of materials used in our 3D printers are proprietary. The services category includes maintenance contracts and services on 3D printers and simulators, software maintenance, on demand solutions and healthcare services.
The following table sets forth changes in revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Table 1
Consolidated revenue decreased 12.4%, predominantly due to lower products volume, driven by decreased sales of printers and corresponding materials, and lower on demand volume. The lower demand was due to COVID-19, as many of our customers were shutdown or on a significantly reduced level of activity starting in the latter part of the first quarter.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, revenue from printers contributed $99.2 million and $123.9 million, respectively. Software revenue included in the products category contributed $43.7 million and $53.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Materials revenue included in the products category contributed $157.1 million and $169.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Revenue from services decreased 9.1%, or $22.6 million, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily comprised of a 20.3%, or $18.8 million, decline in our on demand manufacturing services. The remaining decrease resulted from maintenance contracts and services on printers and simulators, software maintenance and healthcare services.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, revenue from operations outside the U.S. was 50.6% and 51.3% of total revenue, respectively.
Gross profit and gross profit margins
The following table sets forth gross profit and gross profit margins for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Table 2
The decrease in total consolidated gross profit was predominantly due to the lower sales volume as previously discussed, as well as end-of-life inventory charges of $12.4 million. Excluding the end-of-life inventory charge, total gross profit margin would have been 42.3%. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional discussion.
Products gross profit decreased primarily due to the lower sales volume, as previously discussed, and the under absorption of supply chain overhead resulting from lower production, as well as an end-of-life inventory charge of $12.4 million, partially offset by savings achieved in the current year from cost restructuring activities. Excluding the end-of-life inventory charge, products gross profit margin would have been 35.3%. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional discussion.
Operating expenses
The following table sets forth the components of operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Table 3
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased due to an employee furlough program in the second quarter of 2020; reduced hiring and lower travel expenses incurred in the current year, resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic; savings achieved in the current year from cost restructuring activities, including personnel and marketing activities; reduced litigation and legal fees incurred in the current year; and the run-out of certain intangible amortization. These savings were partially offset by restructuring efforts, predominantly employee severance and facility closings, and related impairment charges. See Note 24 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional discussion regarding restructuring charges. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional discussion regarding facility closings and related impairment charges.
Research and development expenses decreased due to an employee furlough program in the second quarter of 2020, current year savings achieved from cost restructuring activities, including personnel, originating in 2019, as well as lower overall program spend; partially offset by an increase in materials spend.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $48.3 million, related to the EMEA reporting unit, that was ultimately due to the negative impact on the business environment as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional discussion.
Loss from operations
The following table sets forth loss from operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019.
Table 4
See “Revenue,” “Gross profit and gross profit margins” and “Operating expenses” above.
Interest and other expense, net
The following table sets forth the components of interest and other expense, net, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Table 5
Total interest and other expense, net, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted in additional expense due to withholding taxes related to the Cimatron divestiture, loss on the divestiture of our Australia ODM and Wuxi Easyway businesses, as well as amounts previously recognized in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss ("AOCL") were released in the second quarter of 2020 and reclassified to "Interest and other expense, net," as a result of the reduction in the interest rate swap. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional discussion. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, losses on equity investments were recorded in both periods to "Other expense, net".
Benefit and provision for income taxes
We recorded a $6.2 million and a $4.5 million provision for income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In 2020, our provision reflected $1.8 million in U.S. tax expense and $4.4 million of tax expense in foreign jurisdictions. In 2019, our provision reflected $0.3 million in U.S. tax benefit and $4.9 million of tax expense in foreign jurisdictions.
During 2020 and 2019, we concluded that it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will not be realized in certain jurisdictions, including the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions; therefore, we have a valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets on our consolidated balance sheets totaling $123.1 million and $109.6 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
For further discussion, see Note 2 and Note 21 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Net loss attributable to 3D Systems
The following table sets forth the primary components of net loss attributable to 3D Systems for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Table 6
The increase in net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily driven by an increase in loss from operations. See “Gross profit and gross profit margins” and “Operating expenses” above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Table 7
We assess our liquidity in terms of our ability to generate cash to fund our operating, investing and financing activities. In doing so, we review and analyze our current cash on hand, the number of days our sales are outstanding, inventory turns, capital expenditure commitments and accounts payable turns. Our cash requirements primarily consist of funding working capital and capital expenditures.
Cash flow from operations, cash and cash equivalents, and other sources of liquidity such as bank credit facilities and issuing equity or debt securities, are expected to be available and sufficient to meet foreseeable cash requirements. We hold a 5-year $100.0 million senior secured term loan facility (the “Term Facility”) and a 5-year $100.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility,” and, together with the Term Facility, the “Senior Credit Facility”) to support working capital and general corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2020, we have availability under the Revolving Facility of $62.0 million, and an outstanding balance on the Term Facility of $21.4 million. For additional information on the Senior Credit Facility, see Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
On January 1, 2021, the Company completed the sale of 100% of the issued and outstanding equity interests of Cimatron Ltd., the subsidiary that operated the Company’s Cimatron integrated CAD/CAM software for tooling business and its GibbsCAM CNC programming software business, for approximately $64.2 million, after certain adjustments and excluding $9.2 million of cash amounts transferred to the purchaser. See Note 26 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. A portion of the proceeds from the sale were used to repay the outstanding balance on the Term Facility
Cash held outside the U.S. at December 31, 2020 was $49.7 million, or 66.2% of total cash and cash equivalents, compared to $75.7 million, or 56.5% of total cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2019. As our previously unremitted earnings have been subjected to U.S. federal income tax, we expect any repatriation of these earnings to the U.S. would not incur significant federal and state taxes. However, these dividends are subject to foreign withholding taxes that are estimated to result in the Company incurring tax costs in excess of the cost to obtain cash through other means. Cash equivalents are comprised of funds held in money market instruments and are reported at their current carrying value, which approximates fair value due to the short term nature of these instruments. We strive to minimize our credit risk by investing primarily in investment grade, liquid instruments and limit exposure to any one issuer depending upon credit quality. See “Cash flow” discussion below.
Days sales outstanding (DSO) was 69 at December 31, 2020, compared to 67 days for the year at December 31, 2019. Accounts receivable more than 90 days past due decreased to 6.9% of gross receivables at December 31, 2020, from 12.1% at December 31, 2019. We review specific receivables periodically to determine the appropriate reserve for accounts receivable.
The majority of our inventory consists of finished goods, including products, materials and service parts. Inventory also consists of raw materials for certain printers and service products. Inventory balances may fluctuate during cycles of new product launch, commercialization and timing of ramp up of production and sales of products.
The changes that make up the other components of working capital not discussed above resulted from the ordinary course of business. Differences between the amounts of working capital item changes in the cash flow statement and the balance sheet changes for the corresponding items are primarily the result of foreign currency translation adjustments.
Cash flow
Cash flow from operations
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $20.1 million and cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $31.6 million. Excluding non-cash charges from depreciation and amortization of $44.6 million, stock-based compensation of $17.7 million and other expenses of $73.6 million, the net loss used cash of $13.7 million and provided cash of $6.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Non-cash charges generally consist of depreciation, amortization, inventory obsolescence, stock-based compensation and goodwill impairment.
Working capital requirements used cash of $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and working capital improvements provided cash of $25.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, drivers of working capital related to cash outflows were an increase in inventory and prepaid expenses and other current assets and a decrease in accounts payable; partially offset by an increase in accrued and other liabilities and deferred revenue and customer deposits.
Cash flow from investing activities
The primary outflow of cash from investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 relate to purchases of noncontrolling interests and capital expenditures. Purchases of noncontrolling interests were $10.0 million, related to Robtec, and $2.5 million, related to Wuxi Easyway, for the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional discussion. Capital expenditures were $13.6 million and $24.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The lower expenditures in 2020 reflect the reduced spending due to the lower revenue volume because of the pandemic.
Cash flow from financing activities
Cash used in financing activities was $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, while cash provided by financing activities was $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary outflow of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to repayment of the Term Facility and settlements of stock-based compensation, partially offset by net proceeds from issuances of common stock under our ATM Program and proceeds from an inventory financing agreement. The primary source of cash for the year ended December 31, 2019 relates to borrowing on the Term Facility, partially offset by repayments under the Prior Credit Agreement and Term Facility and settlement of stock-based compensation.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements and do not utilize any “structured debt,” “special purpose” or similar unconsolidated entities for liquidity or financing purposes.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The table below summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
Table 9
a.We lease certain facilities under non-cancelable operating and finance agreements. The leases are generally on a net-rent basis, under which we pay taxes, maintenance and insurance. For further discussion, see Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
b.Includes amounts committed under legally enforceable agreements for goods and services with defined terms as to quantity, price and timing of delivery. For further discussion, see Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Other Contractual Commitments
Credit facilities
On February 27, 2019, we entered into the Senior Credit Facility, which replaced the Prior Credit Agreement. Borrowings under the Senior Credit Facility were used to refinance the existing indebtedness under the Prior Credit Agreement and were used to support working capital and for general corporate purposes. For further discussion of the Senior Credit Facility, see Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
We were in compliance with all covenants as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Indemnification
In the normal course of business we periodically enter into agreements to indemnify customers or suppliers against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our products. Historically, costs related to these indemnification provisions have not been significant. We are unable to estimate the maximum potential impact of these indemnification provisions on our future results of operations.
To the extent permitted under Delaware law, we indemnify our directors and officers for certain events or occurrences while the director or officer is, or was, serving at our request in such capacity, subject to limited exceptions. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification obligations is unlimited; however, we have directors’ and officers’ insurance coverage that may enable us to recover future amounts paid, subject to a deductible and to the policy limits.
Financial Instruments
We conduct business in various countries using both the functional currencies of those countries and other currencies to effect cross border transactions. As a result, we are subject to the risk that fluctuations in foreign exchange rates between the dates that those transactions are entered into and their respective settlement dates will result in a foreign exchange gain or loss. When practicable, we endeavor to match assets and liabilities in the same currency on our balance sheet and those of our subsidiaries in order to reduce these risks. We also, when we consider it to be appropriate, enter into foreign currency contracts to hedge exposures arising from those transactions. We had $101.8 million and $102.4 million in notional foreign exchange contracts outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The fair value of these contracts was not material. For our hedges of foreign exchange rates, we have elected to not prepare and maintain the documentation to qualify for hedge accounting treatment under ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging,” and therefore, changes in fair value are recognized in interest and other expense, net in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss and, depending on the fair value at the end of the reporting period, derivatives are recorded either in prepaid and other current assets or in accrued liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets.
We use derivative financial instruments to manage our exposure to changes in interest rates on outstanding debt instruments. For those instruments that qualify and where we elect to prepare and maintain the documentation to qualify for hedge accounting treatment under ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging,” related gains and losses (realized or unrealized) related to derivative instruments are recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and are reclassified into earnings when the underlying transaction is recognized in net earnings and, depending on the fair value at the end of the reporting period, derivatives are recorded either in prepaid and other current assets or in accrued liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets.
We do not hedge for trading or speculative purposes, and our foreign currency contracts are generally short-term in nature, typically maturing in 90 days or less.
See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). In doing so, we have to make estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, gains and losses, as well as related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. In some cases, we could reasonably have used different accounting policies and estimates. In some cases, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results could differ materially from our estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition or results of operations will be affected. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. We refer to accounting estimates of this type as critical accounting policies and estimates, which we discuss further below. We have reviewed our critical accounting policies and estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors.
Please see Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a summary of significant accounting policies and the effect on our financial statements.
Revenue recognition
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised products or services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. A majority of our revenue is recognized at the point in time when products are shipped or services are delivered to customers.
We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of products and services, which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. Many of its contracts with customers include multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, we allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price (“SSP”). Judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation in a contract. For the majority of items, we estimate SSP using historical transaction data. We use a range of amounts to estimate SSP when we sell each of the products and services separately and need to determine whether there is a discount to be allocated based on the relative SSP of the various products and services. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as when the product or service is not sold separately, we determine the SSP using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs.
In some circumstances, we have more than one SSP for individual products and services due to the stratification of those products and services by customers, geographic region or other factors. In these instances, we may use information such as the size of the customer and geographic region in determining the SSP.
The determination of SSP is an ongoing process and information is reviewed regularly in order to ensure SSP reflects the most current information or trends.
The nature of our marketing incentives may lead to consideration that is variable. Judgment is exercised at contract inception to determine the expected value of the contract and resulting transaction price. Ongoing assessments are performed to determine if updates are needed to the original estimates.
See Note 2 and Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion.
Allowance for doubtful accounts
In evaluating the collectability of our accounts receivable, we assess a number of factors, including specific customers’ abilities to meet their financial obligations to us, the length of time receivables are past due and historical collection experience. Based on these assessments, we may record a reserve for specific customers, as well as a general reserve and allowance for returns and discounts. If circumstances related to specific customers change, or economic conditions deteriorate such that our past collection experience is no longer relevant, our estimate of the recoverability of our accounts receivable could be further reduced from the levels provided for in the consolidated financial statements.
We evaluate specific accounts for which we believe a customer may have an inability to meet their financial obligations (for example, aging over 90 days past due or bankruptcy). In these cases, we use our judgment, based on available facts and circumstances, and record a specific reserve for that customer to reduce the receivable to an amount we expect to collect. These specific reserves are re-evaluated and adjusted as additional information is received that impacts the amount reserved.
Income taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes.
Although we believe we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes and the effective tax rate in the period in which such determination is made.
The provision for income taxes includes the effect of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate as well as the related net interest and penalties. In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Services (“IRS”) and other tax authorities which may assert assessments against us. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations and assessments to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost being determined using the first-in, first-out method.
The inventory reserve is a critical estimate as there is rapid technological change in our industry impacting the market for our products and there is significant judgment in estimating the amount of spare parts to keep on hand to service previously sold printers for periods of up 10 or more years.
See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion.
Goodwill
We review long-lived assets, including intangible assets subject to amortization, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable. We assess the recoverability of the carrying value of assets held for use based on a review of undiscounted projected cash flows. Impairment losses, where identified, are measured as the excess of the carrying value of the long-lived asset over its estimated fair value as determined by discounted projected cash flows.
Goodwill represents the purchase price paid in excess of the fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired in a business combination. We review goodwill for impairment annually or when circumstances indicate that the likelihood of an impairment is greater than 50%. Such circumstances include a significant adverse change in the business climate for one of our reporting units or a decision to dispose of a reporting unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit. The test for goodwill impairment compares the fair value of each of reporting unit to its respective carrying value. The process requires a significant level of estimation and use of judgment by management, particularly the estimate of the fair value of our reporting units. Our reporting units are Americas, EMEA and APAC.
We estimate the fair value of our reporting units based primarily on the discounted projected cash flows of the underlying operations, which requires us to make assumptions about estimated cash flows, including profit margins, long-term forecasts, discount rates and terminal growth rates. We developed these assumptions based on the market and geographic risks unique to each reporting unit.
Our EMEA, APAC and Americas reporting units carry approximately $127.6 million, $34.2 million and zero of goodwill, respectively, as of December 31, 2020. Goodwill in the Americas region was written off in 2015. The net carrying values of our long-lived assets in the EMEA, APAC, and Americas regions are approximately $49.2 million, $5.5 million, and $48.8 million, respectively.
As of September 30, 2020, we experienced a triggering event due to a drop in our stock price, which ultimately had been negatively impacted by the business environment as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and performed a quantitative analysis for potential impairment of our goodwill and long-lived asset balances. Based on available information and analysis as of September 30, 2020, we determined the carrying value of the EMEA reporting unit exceeded its fair value and recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $48.3 million. We determined the fair value of the Americas and APAC reporting units exceeded their carrying values and the carrying value of our long-lived assets is recoverable for all reporting units.
Fair value was determined using a combination of an income approach, which estimates fair value based upon projections of future revenues, expenses, and cash flows discounted to its present value, and a market approach. The valuation methodology and underlying financial information included in the Company's determination of fair value required significant judgments by management. The principal assumptions used in the Company's discounted cash flow analysis consisted of (a) the long-term projections of future financial performance and (b) the weighted-average cost of capital of market participants, adjusted for the risk attributable to the Company and the industry in which it operates. Under the market approach, the principal assumption included an estimate for a control premium.
We conducted our annual impairment testing for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as of November 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. There was no additional goodwill impairment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Contingencies
We record an estimated loss from a contingency when information indicates that it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred at the date of the financial statements and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Accounting for contingencies requires us to use our judgment and the ultimate resolution of our exposure related to these matters may change as further facts and circumstances become known.
See Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for recently issued accounting standards, including the expected dates of adoption and expected impact to the consolidated financial statements upon adoption.