ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Dillard's, Inc. operates 282 retail department stores spanning 29 states and an Internet store. The Company also operates a general contractor, CDI, a portion of whose business includes constructing and remodeling stores for the Company, which is a reportable segment separate from our retail operations.
In accordance with the National Retail Federation fiscal reporting calendar and our bylaws, the fiscal 2020 reporting period presented and discussed below ended January 30, 2021 and contained 52 weeks. The fiscal 2019 reporting period presented and discussed below ended February 1, 2020 and contained 52 weeks. The fiscal 2018 reporting period presented below ended February 2, 2019 and contained 52 weeks.
A discussion regarding results of operations and analysis of financial condition for the year ended February 1, 2020, as compared to the year ended February 2, 2019 is included in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended February 1, 2020.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Fiscal 2020
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a novel coronavirus (COVID-19) as a pandemic, which continues to impact the United States and global economies. The COVID-19 pandemic has had and may continue to have a significant impact on the Company's business and results of operations. The Company began closing stores on March 19, 2020 as mandated by state and local governments, and by April 9, 2020, all brick-and-mortar store locations were temporarily closed to the public. Our eCommerce capabilities allowed us to use our closed store locations (with limited staffing) to fill orders from our Internet store.
During the month ended May 30, 2020 (fiscal May), we re-opened most of our full-line stores, and by June 2, 2020, all Dillard’s store locations had been re-opened using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ("CDC") guidelines to promote a safe environment for our customers and employees. Following our re-opening, a very small number of our locations were temporarily closed again to in-store shopping due to government mandate. Other local mandates throughout the country require occupancy limits with which we are required to comply. We continue to monitor additional local government orders that may affect our operations. All stores are currently open and operating at reduced hours.
During fiscal 2020, total retail sales decreased approximately 31%. The Company reported no comparable store sales data for the fiscal year due to the temporary COVID-19-related closures of its brick-and-mortar stores during the first and second quarters as well as the interdependence between in-store and online sales. Consolidated gross margin for fiscal 2020 decreased 308 basis points of sales compared to fiscal 2019. Retail gross margin decreased 319 basis points of sales to 29.4% during fiscal 2020 compared to 32.6% during fiscal 2019, primarily due to increased markdowns. The Company was able to reduce inventory by approximately 26% compared to the prior year end, primarily by reducing purchases approximately 37%.
Consolidated selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses decreased to $1.2 billion compared to $1.7 billion from the prior year primarily due to decreases in payroll expense partially as a result of the Company's reduced operating hours. SG&A expenses increased 91 basis points of sales in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. Net loss totaled $71.7 million, or $3.16 per share, during fiscal 2020 compared to net income of $111.1 million, or $4.38 per share, in the prior year.
Included in net loss for the 2020 fiscal year is a pretax loss of $2.2 million ($1.4 million after tax or $0.06 per share) primarily related to the sale of a store property and $10.7 million ($8.4 million after tax or $0.37 per share) in asset impairment charges related to certain clearance store locations. Also included in net loss for fiscal year 2020 is a net tax benefit of $45.2 million ($1.99 per share) related to The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act, signed into law on March 27, 2020, which allows for net operating loss carryback to years in which the federal income tax rate was 35%.
Included in net income for fiscal 2019 is a pretax gain of $20.3 million ($15.8 million after tax or $0.62 per share) primarily related to the sale of six store properties. Also included is $5.1 million ($0.20 per share) in tax benefits related to amended state tax return filings and the Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2019.
During fiscal 2020, the Company repurchased $95.6 million, or 2.2 million shares, of Class A Common Stock under the Company's stock repurchase plan, with $173.1 million in authorization remaining under the March 2018 Stock Plan at January 30, 2021.
As of January 30, 2021, we had working capital of $889.1 million (including cash and cash equivalents of $360.3 million) and $565.8 million of total debt outstanding, excluding finance lease liabilities and operating lease liabilities, with no scheduled maturities until the end of fiscal 2022. Cash flows provided by operating activities were $252.9 million in fiscal 2020.
Key Performance Indicators
We use a number of key indicators of financial condition and operating performance to evaluate the performance of our business, including the following:
* Based upon the 52 weeks ended February 2, 2019 and the 52 weeks ended February 3, 2018.
** The Company reported no comparable store sales data for the fiscal year due to the temporary COVID-19-related closures of its brick-and-mortar stores during the first and second quarters as well as the interdependence between in-store and online sales.
Trends and Uncertainties
Fluctuations in the following key trends and uncertainties may have a material effect on our operating results.
•Cash flow-Cash from operating activities is a primary source of our liquidity that is adversely affected when the retail industry faces economic challenges. Furthermore, operating cash flow can be negatively affected by competitive factors.
•Pricing-If our customers do not purchase our merchandise offerings in sufficient quantities, we respond by taking markdowns. If we have to reduce our retail selling prices, the cost of sales on our consolidated statement of operations will correspondingly rise, thus reducing our net income and cash flow.
•Success of brand-The success of our exclusive brand merchandise as well as merchandise we source from national vendors is dependent upon customer fashion preferences and how well we can predict and anticipate trends.
•Sourcing-Our store merchandise selection is dependent upon our ability to acquire appealing products from a number of sources. Our ability to attract and retain compelling vendors as well as in-house design talent, the adequacy and stable availability of materials and production facilities from which we source our merchandise and the speed at which we can respond to customer trends and preferences all have a significant impact on our merchandise mix and, thus, our ability to sell merchandise at profitable prices.
•Store growth-Our ability to open new stores is dependent upon a number of factors, such as the identification of suitable markets and locations and the availability of shopping developments, especially in a weak economic environment. Store growth can be further hindered by mall attrition and subsequent closure of underperforming properties.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a novel coronavirus (COVID-19) as a pandemic, which continues to impact the United States and global economies. As a result, during fiscal 2020, we closed all of our brick-and-mortar store locations for varying amounts of time, mostly due to government mandate, negatively impacting the Company's sales and results of operations. While all stores are now open (operating under reduced hours) and vaccines now are available to many Americans, uncertainty remains regarding the duration of the disruption from the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, the related financial impact to fiscal 2021 cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Seasonality and Inflation
Our business, like many other retailers, is subject to seasonal influences, with a significant portion of sales and income typically realized during the last quarter of our fiscal year due to the holiday season. Because of the seasonality of our business, results from any quarter are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be achieved for a full fiscal year.
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our results during the periods presented; however, our business could be affected by such in the future.
2021 Guidance
A summary of management's estimates of certain financial measures for fiscal 2021 is shown below:
General
Net sales. Net sales includes merchandise sales of comparable and non-comparable stores and revenue recognized on contracts of CDI Contractors, LLC (“CDI”), the Company’s general contracting construction company. Comparable store sales includes sales for those stores which were in operation for a full period in both the most recently completed quarter and the corresponding quarter for the prior fiscal year, including our internet store. Comparable store sales excludes changes in the allowance for sales returns. Non-comparable store sales includes: sales in the current fiscal year from stores opened during the previous fiscal year before they are considered comparable stores; sales from new stores opened during the current fiscal year; sales in the previous fiscal year for stores closed during the current or previous fiscal year that are no longer considered comparable stores; sales in clearance centers; and changes in the allowance for sales returns.
Sales occur as a result of interaction with customers across multiple points of contact, creating an interdependence between in-store and online sales. Online orders are fulfilled from both fulfillment centers and retail stores. Additionally, online customers have the ability to buy online and pick up in-store. Retail in-store customers have the ability to purchase items that may be ordered and fulfilled from either a fulfillment center or another retail store location. Online customers may return orders via mail, or customers may return orders placed online to retail store locations. Customers who earn reward points under the private label credit card program may earn and redeem rewards through in-store or online purchases.
Service charges and other income. Service charges and other income includes income generated through the long-term marketing and servicing alliance with Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. (“Wells Fargo Alliance”). Other income includes rental income, shipping and handling fees, gift card breakage and lease income on leased departments.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales includes the cost of merchandise sold (net of purchase discounts, non-specific margin maintenance allowances and merchandise margin maintenance allowances), bankcard fees, freight to the distribution centers, employee and promotional discounts, shipping to customers and direct payroll for salon personnel. Cost of sales also includes CDI contract costs, which comprise all direct material and labor costs, subcontract costs and those indirect costs related to contract performance, such as indirect labor, employee benefits and insurance program costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses include buying, occupancy, selling, distribution, warehousing, store and corporate expenses (including payroll and employee benefits), insurance, employment taxes, advertising, management information systems, legal and other corporate level expenses. Buying expenses consist of payroll, employee benefits and travel for design, buying and merchandising personnel.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expenses include depreciation and amortization on property and equipment.
Rentals. Rentals includes expenses for store leases, including contingent rent, and data processing and other equipment rentals.
Interest and debt expense, net. Interest and debt expense includes interest, net of interest income and capitalized interest, relating to the Company’s unsecured notes, subordinated debentures and borrowings under the Company’s credit
facility. Interest and debt expense also includes gains and losses on note repurchases, if any, amortization of financing costs and interest on finance lease obligations.
Other expense. Other expense includes the interest cost and net actuarial loss components of net periodic benefit costs.
Loss (gain) on disposal of assets. Loss (gain) on disposal of assets includes the net gain or loss on the sale or disposal of property and equipment, as well as gains from any insurance proceeds in excess of the cost basis of the insured assets.
Asset impairment and store closing charges. Asset impairment and store closing charges consist of (a) write-downs to fair value of under-performing or held for sale properties and cost method investments and (b) exit costs associated with the closure of certain stores, if any. Exit costs include future rent, taxes and common area maintenance expenses from the time the stores are closed.
Income on and equity in earnings of joint ventures. Income on and equity in earnings of joint ventures includes the Company's portion of the income or loss of the Company's unconsolidated joint ventures as well as the distribution of excess cash (excluding returns of investments) from a mall joint venture, if any.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company's significant accounting policies are also described in Note 1 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" in Item 8 hereof. As disclosed in that note, the preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. The Company evaluates its estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis and predicates those estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Since future events and their effects cannot be determined with absolute certainty, actual results could differ from those estimates.
Management of the Company believes the following critical accounting policies, among others, affect its more significant judgments and estimates used in preparation of the Company's consolidated financial statements.
Merchandise inventory. All of the Company’s inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market using the last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) inventory method. Approximately 96% of the Company's inventories are valued using the LIFO retail inventory method. Under the retail inventory method, the valuation of inventories at cost and the resulting gross margins are calculated by applying a cost to retail ratio to the retail value of inventories. The retail inventory method is an averaging method that is widely used in the retail industry due to its practicality. Inherent in the retail inventory method calculation are certain significant management judgments including, among others, merchandise markon, markups, and markdowns, which significantly impact the ending inventory valuation at cost as well as the resulting gross margins. During periods of deflation, inventory values on the first-in, first-out ("FIFO") retail inventory method may be lower than the LIFO retail inventory method. Additionally, inventory values at LIFO cost may be in excess of net realizable value. At January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020, merchandise inventories valued at LIFO, including adjustments as necessary to record inventory at the lower of cost or market, approximated the cost of such inventories using the FIFO retail inventory method. The application of the LIFO retail inventory method did not result in the recognition of any LIFO charges or credits affecting cost of sales for fiscal 2020, 2019, or 2018. A 1% change in the dollar amount of markdowns would have impacted net loss by approximately $8 million for fiscal 2020.
The Company regularly records a provision for estimated shrinkage, thereby reducing the carrying value of merchandise inventory. Complete physical inventories of the Company's stores and warehouses are performed no less frequently than annually, with the recorded amount of merchandise inventory being adjusted to coincide with these physical counts. The differences between the estimated amounts of shrinkage and the actual amounts realized during the past three years have not been material.
Revenue recognition. The Company's retail operations segment recognizes revenue upon the sale of merchandise to its customers, net of anticipated returns of merchandise. The asset and liability for sales returns are based on historical evidence of our return rate. We recorded an allowance for sales returns of $11.7 million and $18.3 million and return assets of $7.5 million and $12.1 million as of January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020, respectively. The return asset and the allowance for sales returns are recorded in the consolidated balance sheets in other current assets and trade accounts payable and accrued expenses, respectively. Adjustments to earnings resulting from revisions to estimates on our sales return provision were not material for fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018.
The Company's share of income under the Wells Fargo Alliance, involving the Dillard's branded private label credit cards is included as a component of service charges and other income. The Company received income of approximately $79 million, $91 million and $94 million from the alliance in fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The Company participates in the marketing of the private label credit cards, which includes the cost of customer reward programs. Through the reward programs, customers earn points that are redeemable for discounts on future purchases. The Company defers a portion of its net sales upon the sale of merchandise to its customer reward program members that is recognized in net sales when the reward is redeemed or expired at a future date.
Revenues from CDI construction contracts are generally measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to total estimated contract costs (the "cost-to-cost method"). Some of our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations based on stand-alone selling prices. Construction contracts are often modified to account for changes in contract specifications and requirements. We consider contract modifications to exist when the modification either creates new or changes the existing enforceable rights and obligations. Most of our contract modifications are for goods and services that are not distinct from the existing contracts; therefore, the modifications are accounted for as if they were part of the existing contract. The effect of a contract modification on the transaction price and our measure of progress for the performance obligation for which it relates, is recognized as an adjustment to revenue on a cumulative catch-up basis. The length of each contract varies but is typically nine to eighteen months. The progress towards completion is
determined by relating the actual costs of work performed to date to the current estimated total costs of the respective contracts. Estimated contract losses are recognized in full when determined.
Construction contracts give rise to accounts receivable, contract assets and contract liabilities. We record accounts receivable based on amounts billed to customers. We also record costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings on uncompleted contracts (contract assets) and billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings on uncompleted contracts (contract liabilities) in other current assets and trade accounts payable and accrued expenses, respectively, on the consolidated balance sheets.
Vendor allowances. The Company receives concessions from vendors through a variety of programs and arrangements, including cooperative advertising, payroll reimbursements and margin maintenance programs.
Cooperative advertising allowances are reported as a reduction of advertising expense in the period in which the advertising occurred. If vendor advertising allowances were substantially reduced or eliminated, the Company would likely consider other methods of advertising as well as the volume and frequency of our product advertising, which could increase or decrease our expenditures. We are not able to assess the impact of vendor advertising allowances on creating additional revenues, as such allowances do not directly generate revenues for our stores.
Payroll reimbursements are reported as a reduction of payroll expense in the period in which the reimbursement occurred.
Amounts of margin maintenance allowances are recorded only when an agreement has been reached with the vendor and the collection of the concession is deemed probable. All such merchandise margin maintenance allowances are recognized as a reduction of cost purchases. Under the retail inventory method, a portion of these allowances reduces cost of goods sold and a portion reduces the carrying value of merchandise inventory.
Insurance accruals. The Company's consolidated balance sheets include liabilities with respect to claims for self-insured workers' compensation (with a self-insured retention of $4 million per claim) and general liability (with a self-insured retention of $2 million per claim). The Company's retentions are insured through a wholly-owned captive insurance subsidiary. The Company estimates the required liability of such claims, utilizing an actuarial method, based upon various assumptions, which include, but are not limited to, our historical loss experience, projected loss development factors, actual payroll and other data. The required liability is also subject to adjustment in the future based upon the changes in claims experience, including changes in the number of incidents (frequency) and changes in the ultimate cost per incident (severity). As of January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020, insurance accruals of $37.9 million and $42.9 million, respectively, were recorded in trade accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities. Adjustments resulting from changes in historical loss trends have helped control expenses during fiscal 2020 and 2019, partially due to Company programs that have helped decrease both the number and cost of claims. These expenses declined further in fiscal 2020 due to temporary store closures, reduced operating hours and decreased associate headcount in response to COVID-19. We do not anticipate any significant change in loss trends, settlements or other costs that would cause a significant change in our earnings. A 10% change in our self-insurance reserve would have affected net loss by approximately $2 million for fiscal 2020.
Long-lived assets. The Company's judgment regarding the existence of impairment indicators is based on market and operational performance. We assess the impairment of long-lived assets, primarily fixed assets and operating lease assets, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors we consider important which could trigger an impairment review include the following:
•Significant changes in the manner of our use of assets or the strategy for the overall business;
•Significant negative industry or economic trends;
•A current-period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses; and
•Store closings.
The Company performs an analysis of the anticipated undiscounted future net cash flows of the related long-lived assets. If the carrying value of the related asset exceeds the fair value, the carrying value is reduced to its fair value. Various factors including future sales growth, profit margins and real estate values are included in this analysis. To the extent these future projections, the Company's strategies, or market conditions change, the conclusion regarding impairment may differ from the current estimates.
Income taxes. Temporary differences arising from differing treatment of income and expense items for tax and financial reporting purposes result in deferred tax assets and liabilities that are recorded on the balance sheet. These balances, as well as income tax expense, are determined through management's estimations, interpretation of tax law for multiple jurisdictions and tax planning. If the Company's actual results differ from estimated results due to changes in tax laws, changes
in store locations, settlements of tax audits or tax planning, the Company's effective tax rate and tax balances could be affected. As such, these estimates may require adjustment in the future as additional facts become known or as circumstances change. Changes in the Company's assumptions and judgments can materially affect amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheets and statements of operations.
The total amount of unrecognized tax benefits as of January 30, 2021 was $5.1 million, of which, $3.3 million would, if recognized, affect the Company's effective tax rate. The total amount of unrecognized tax benefits as of February 1, 2020 was $5.2 million, of which $3.5 million would, if recognized, affect the Company’s effective tax rate. The Company does not expect a significant change in unrecognized tax benefits in the next twelve months. The Company classifies accrued interest expense and penalties relating to income tax in the consolidated financial statements as income tax expense. The total amounts of interest and penalties were not material.
The fiscal tax years that remain subject to examination for the federal tax jurisdiction and major state tax jurisdictions are 2017 and forward. At this time, the Company does not expect the results from any income tax audit to have a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
Pension obligations. The discount rate that the Company utilizes for determining future pension obligations is based on the FTSE Above Median Pension Index Curve on its annual measurement date as of the end of each fiscal year and is matched to the future expected cash flows of the benefit plans by semi-annual periods. The discount rate decreased to 2.5% as of January 30, 2021 from 2.8% as of February 1, 2020. We believe that these assumptions have been appropriate and that, based on these assumptions, the pension liability of $235.8 million is appropriately stated as of January 30, 2021; however, actual results may differ materially from those estimated and could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. A further 50 basis point change in the discount rate would increase or decrease the pension liability by approximately $15 million. The Company expects to make a contribution to the pension plan of approximately $6.1 million in fiscal 2021. The Company expects pension expense to be approximately $12.8 million in fiscal 2021 with a liability of $239.7 million at January 29, 2022.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth the results of operations and percentage of net sales, for the periods indicated:
Sales
The percent change by segment and product category in the Company's sales for the past two years is as follows:
2020 Compared to 2019
Net sales from the retail operations segment decreased $1.9 billion during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, a decrease of 30.8% primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company reported no comparable store sales data for the fiscal year due to the temporary closure of its brick-and-mortar stores as well as the interdependence between in-store and online sales. During fiscal 2020, sales in all product categories decreased significantly.
Net sales from the construction segment decreased $50.7 million or 26.5% during fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 due to a decrease in construction activity. The remaining performance obligations related to executed construction contracts totaled $76.2 million, decreasing approximately 51% from February 1, 2020.
Exclusive Brand Merchandise
Sales penetration of exclusive brand merchandise for fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018 was 20.4%, 21.1% and 20.7% of total net sales, respectively.
Service Charges and Other Income
2020 Compared to 2019
Service charges and other income is composed primarily of income from the Wells Fargo Alliance. Income from the alliance decreased $12.6 million in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 primarily due to a decrease in finance charges in 2020. Shipping and handling income increased during fiscal 2020 primarily due to the increase in online orders and ship-from-store capabilities.
Leased department income consisted primarily of commissions from a principal licensed department of an upscale women's apparel vendor located in certain stores. By the end of July 2020, our agreement with this principal licensed department had been terminated. We expect future leased department income to be minimal.
Gross Profit
2020 Compared to 2019
Gross profit as a percentage of net sales declined 308 basis points of sales during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. Gross profit from retail operations declined 319 basis points of segment net sales during the same periods.
During fiscal 2020, gross margin declined significantly in ladies' apparel, while declining moderately in men's apparel and accessories and shoes. Gross margin declined slightly in junior's and children's apparel and cosmetics. Gross margin increased moderately in ladies' accessories and lingerie, while increasing significantly in home and furniture.
Gross profit from the construction segment increased 203 basis points of segment net sales.
Retail store inventory decreased 26% at January 30, 2021 compared to February 1, 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses ("SG&A")
2020 Compared to 2019
SG&A decreased $479.5 million, or 28.4%, during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 while increasing 91 basis points of sales due to lack of sales leverage. SG&A for the retail operations segment increased 96 basis points of sales during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease in SG&A dollars was realized across all SG&A categories; however, the decrease was primarily due to decreases in payroll expense.
Payroll expense and related payroll taxes for fiscal 2020 were $788.5 million compared to $1,176.9 million for fiscal 2019, a decline of 33.0%. The Company furloughed store associates as stores temporarily closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and furlough actions were also implemented in certain corporate and support facility functions. Stores then re-
opened at reduced operating hours, requiring fewer sales associates. During fiscal 2020, the Company was also able to reduce payroll expense and related benefits by $6.1 million through the employee retention credit available under the CARES Act.
Depreciation and Amortization
2020 Compared to 2019
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $9.0 million during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, primarily due to the timing and composition of capital expenditures.
Interest and Debt Expense, Net
2020 Compared to 2019
Net interest and debt expense increased $2.9 million in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 primarily due to an increase in short term borrowings under the credit facility, in addition to an increase in fees associated with the amendment to the credit facility in April 2020. Total weighted average debt outstanding during fiscal 2020 increased approximately $71.7 million compared to fiscal 2019, primarily due to the increase in short term borrowings under the credit facility as the Company responded to liquidity pressures resulting from the impact of COVID-19.
Other Expense
2020 Compared to 2019
The interest cost and net actuarial loss components of net periodic benefit costs relating to the Company's nonqualified defined benefit plan are included in other expense, which increased to $8.4 million for fiscal 2020 from $7.7 million for fiscal 2019.
Loss (Gain) on Disposal of Assets
Fiscal 2020
During fiscal 2020, the Company received proceeds of $1.5 million primarily from the sale of one property, resulting in a loss of $2.2 million that was recorded in loss (gain) on disposal of assets.
Fiscal 2019
During fiscal 2019, the Company received proceeds of $30.6 million primarily from the sale of six store properties, resulting in a gain of $20.3 million that was recorded in loss (gain) on disposal of assets.
Asset Impairment and Store Closing Charges
Fiscal 2020
During fiscal 2020, the Company recorded $10.7 million in asset impairment charges related to certain clearance locations.
Income Taxes
The Company's estimated federal and state effective income tax rate, inclusive of income on and equity in earnings of joint ventures, was 53.3% in fiscal 2020, 17.0% in fiscal 2019, and 18.1% in fiscal 2018. Due to uncertainty relating to the impacts of COVID-19 on the Company’s business operations, the Company is not providing an expected fiscal 2021 federal and state effective income tax rate.
Fiscal 2020
The Company is in a net operating loss position for the fiscal year ending January 30, 2021. The CARES Act, signed into law on March 27, 2020, allows for net operating loss carryback to years in which the statutory federal income tax rate was 35% rather than the current 21%. During fiscal 2020, income taxes included tax benefits of approximately $45.2 million related to the rate differential in the carryback year and approximately $0.9 million related to federal tax credits.
Fiscal 2019
During fiscal 2019, income taxes included tax benefits of approximately $5.1 million related to federal tax credits, which includes approximately $2.3 million in current and prior year credits provided in the Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2019. Income taxes also included the recognition of approximately $2.8 million in tax benefits for amended state tax return filings and related decreases to accrued state income taxes.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company's current non-operating priorities for its use of cash are strategic investments to enhance the value of existing properties, stock repurchases and dividend payments to stockholders.
Cash flows for the Company's most recent three fiscal years were as follows:
Operating Activities
The primary source of the Company's liquidity is, and historically has been, cash flows from operations. Due to the seasonality of the Company's business, we have historically realized a significant portion of the cash flows from operating activities during the second half of the fiscal year. Retail operations sales are the key operating cash component, providing 93.8%, 94.8% and 94.1% of total revenues in fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Net cash flows from operations decreased $112.1 million during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 due to our net loss, primarily due to decreases in sales which were significantly negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
In response to the pandemic, the Company took a number of actions during fiscal 2020 to enhance liquidity including the following:
▪ Extended vendor payment terms during the first quarter, with restoration to standard payment terms for most vendors by August 9, 2020
▪ Canceled, suspended and significantly delayed merchandise shipments
▪ Reduced merchandise purchases during the fiscal year by 37%
▪ Reviewed and reduced discretionary operating and capital expenditures
▪ Reduced payroll expense
▪ Executed aggressive promotional markdowns to clear inventory
Operating cash inflows also include the Company's income and reimbursements from the Wells Fargo Alliance and cash distributions from joint ventures (excluding returns of investments). Operating cash outflows include payments to vendors for inventory, services and supplies, payments to employees and payments of interest and taxes.
Wells Fargo owns and manages the Dillard's private label cards under the Wells Fargo Alliance. Under the Wells Fargo Alliance, Wells Fargo establishes and owns private label card accounts for our customers, retains the benefits and risks associated with the ownership of the accounts, provides key customer service functions, including new account openings, transaction authorization, billing adjustments and customer inquiries, receives the finance charge income and incurs the bad debts associated with those accounts.
Pursuant to the Wells Fargo Alliance, we receive on-going cash compensation from Wells Fargo based upon the portfolio's earnings. The compensation received from the portfolio is determined monthly and has no recourse provisions. The amount the Company receives is dependent on the level of sales on Wells Fargo accounts, the level of balances carried on Wells Fargo accounts by Wells Fargo customers, payment rates on Wells Fargo accounts, finance charge rates and other fees on Wells Fargo accounts, the level of credit losses for the Wells Fargo accounts as well as Wells Fargo's ability to extend credit to our customers. We participate in the marketing of the private label cards, which includes the cost of customer reward programs. The Wells Fargo Alliance expires in November 2024.
The Company received income of approximately $79 million, $91 million and $94 million from the Wells Fargo Alliance during fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
During fiscal 2020, the Company received proceeds from insurance of $7.7 million for claims filed for merchandise losses related to storm damage incurred at two stores.
At January 30, 2021, the Company had purchase obligations of $1,083.6 million outstanding for merchandise and store construction commitments, all of which are expected to be paid during fiscal 2021.
Investing Activities
Cash inflows from investing activities generally include proceeds from sales of property and equipment. Investment cash outflows generally include payments for capital expenditures such as property and equipment.
Capital expenditures decreased $42.9 million for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease in capital expenditures was primarily related to a decrease in the remodeling of existing stores during fiscal 2020. During fiscal 2020, the Company received cash proceeds of $1.5 million and recorded a related loss of $2.2 million, primarily for the sale of one store property in Slidell, Louisiana. During fiscal 2019, the Company received cash proceeds of $30.6 million and recorded a $20.3 million gain, primarily related to the sale of six store locations in Boardman, Ohio, Boynton Beach, Florida, Cary, North Carolina, Mesa, Arizona, Midland, Texas and Council Bluffs, Iowa.
During fiscal 2020, the Company received proceeds from insurance of $6.1 million for claims filed for building losses related to storm damage incurred at two stores.
During fiscal 2020, the Company opened an 85,000 square foot expansion at Columbia Mall in Columbia, Missouri (dual-anchor location totaling 185,000 square feet). Additionally, the Company replaced a 100,000 square foot leased facility at Richland Fashion Mall in Waco, Texas with a 125,000 square foot owned facility (dual-anchor location totaling 190,000 square feet).
During fiscal 2019, the Company opened an expansion at Killeen Mall in Killeen, Texas, replacing a 70,000 square foot leased facility with a 75,000 square foot owned facility at this dual-anchor location totaling 110,000 square feet. The Company has announced plans to open a new store at Mesa Mall in Grand Junction, Colorado during the Fall of 2021 (105,000 square feet). The Company has also announced plans to open a new store at University Place in Orem, Utah in the Spring of 2022 (160,000 square feet). Both opportunities arose from peer closures at those centers.
During fiscal 2020, we permanently closed the locations at Central Mall in Lawton, Oklahoma (100,000 square feet); Crossroads Center in Waterloo, Iowa (150,000 square feet); and North Plains Mall in Clovis, New Mexico (62,000 square feet). We announced the upcoming closure of the Paradise Valley Mall location in Phoenix, Arizona (200,000 square feet). There were no material costs associated with any of these store closures. We remain committed to closing under-performing stores where appropriate and may incur future closing costs related to such stores when they close.
During fiscal 2019, we closed our locations in Boardman, Ohio (186,000 square feet), Muskogee, Oklahoma (70,000 square feet), Enid, Oklahoma (70,000 square feet), Cary, North Carolina (145,000 square feet), Council Bluffs, Iowa (Clearance Center - 100,000 square feet) and Mesa, Arizona (Clearance Center - 100,000 square feet).
During fiscal 2020, the Company received life insurance proceeds of $4.3 million related to four policies. During fiscal 2019, the Company received life insurance proceeds of $2.4 million related to one policy.
Financing Activities
Our primary source of cash inflows from financing activities is generally our $800 million senior secured revolving credit facility. Financing cash outflows generally include the repayment of borrowings under the revolving credit facility, the repayment of long-term debt, finance lease obligations, the payment of dividends and the purchase of treasury stock.
Cash used in financing activities decreased to $121.3 million in fiscal 2020 from $143.4 million in fiscal 2019. This reduction was primarily due to decreases in treasury stock purchases during 2020.
Stock Repurchase. In March 2018, the Company's Board of Directors authorized the Company to repurchase up to $500 million of the Company's Class A Common Stock under an open-ended plan ("March 2018 Stock Plan").
During fiscal 2020, the Company repurchased 2.2 million shares of Class A Common Stock for $95.6 million at an average price of $42.83 per share. As of January 30, 2021, $173.1 million of authorization remained under the March 2018 Stock Plan.
During fiscal 2019, the Company repurchased 2.2 million shares of Class A Common Stock for $138.3 million (including the accrual of $7.3 million of share repurchases that had not settled as of February 1, 2020) at an average price of $62.88 per share.
The ultimate disposition of the repurchased stock has not been determined.
Revolving Credit Agreement. The COVID-19 pandemic has had and may continue to have to have a significant impact on the Company's business and results of operations. The Company began closing stores on March 19, 2020 as
mandated by state and local governments, and by April 9, 2020, all brick-and-mortar store locations were temporarily closed to the public.
To increase our cash position during this crisis and to provide additional financial flexibility, on March 25, 2020, we borrowed the unutilized availability of $779.0 million from our $800 million unsecured revolving credit facility (the "credit agreement"), subject to the terms and covenants under the credit agreement.
In April 2020, the Company amended its credit agreement (the "amended credit agreement"). The amended credit agreement is secured by certain deposit accounts of the Company and certain inventory of certain subsidiaries. The amended credit agreement provides a borrowing capacity of $800 million, subject to certain limitations as outlined in the amended credit agreement, with a $200 million expansion option and matures on August 9, 2022. The amended credit agreement is available to the Company for general corporate purposes including, among other uses, working capital financing, the issuance of letters of credit, capital expenditures and, subject to certain restrictions, the repayment of existing indebtedness and share repurchases. The Company pays a variable rate of interest on borrowings under the amended credit agreement and a commitment fee to the participating banks. The rate of interest on borrowings is the greater of LIBOR or 1.0% plus 1.750%, and the commitment fee for unused borrowings is 0.30% per annum. As long as availability exceeds $100 million and no event of default occurs and is continuing, there are no financial covenant requirements under the amended credit agreement.
Concurrent with the signing of the amended credit agreement, the Company repaid the $779 million borrowed on March 25, 2020. Additionally, the Company paid $3.2 million in issuance costs related to the amended credit agreement, which were recorded in other assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
No borrowings were outstanding at January 30, 2021. Letters of credit totaling $21.0 million were issued under the amended credit agreement leaving unutilized availability under the facility of $662.0 million at January 30, 2021. The Company had weighted-average borrowings of $148.6 million, $76.9 million and $85.9 million during fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Peak borrowings under our revolving credit facility were $779 million during fiscal 2020.
Long-term Debt. At January 30, 2021, the Company had $365.8 million of long-term debt, comprised of unsecured notes. The unsecured notes bear interest at rates ranging from 7.0% to 7.875% with due dates from fiscal 2022 through fiscal 2028.
Long-term debt maturities over the next five years are (in millions):
During fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, the Company made finance lease payments of $1.2 million and $1.0 million, respectively, and no debt matured.
During fiscal 2021, the Company expects to accrue interest expense of $27.3 million on its long-term debt.
Subordinated Debentures. As of January 30, 2021, the Company had $200 million outstanding of its 7.5% subordinated debentures due August 1, 2038. All of these subordinated debentures were held by Dillard's Capital Trust I, a 100% owned, unconsolidated finance subsidiary of the Company. The Company has the right to defer the payment of interest on the subordinated debentures at any time for a period not to exceed 20 consecutive quarters; however, the Company has no present intention of exercising this right to defer interest payments.
During fiscal 2021, the Company expects to accrue interest expense of $15.0 million on its subordinated debentures.
Fiscal 2021 Outlook
Due to ongoing uncertainty relating to the impacts of COVID-19 on the Company’s business operations, including the duration and impact on overall customer demand, our liquidity and net sales may be further impacted if we are unable to appropriately manage our inventory levels and expenses.
The Company expects to finance its operations during fiscal 2021 from cash on hand, cash flows generated from operations and utilization of our revolving credit facility. Depending upon our actual and anticipated sources and uses of liquidity, the Company will from time to time consider other possible financing transactions, the proceeds of which could be used to fund working capital or for other corporate purposes.
LIBOR
On March 5, 2021, the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates LIBOR, announced that all LIBOR settings will either cease to be provided by any administrator or no longer be representative: (a) immediately after December 31, 2021, in the case of the 1-week and 2-month U.S. dollar settings; and (b) immediately after June 30, 2023, in the case of the remaining U.S. dollar settings. Going forward, we intend to work with our lenders to use a suitable alternative reference rate for the credit agreement, the Wells Fargo Alliance and any other applicable agreements. We will continue to monitor, assess and plan for the phase out of LIBOR.
OFF-BALANCE-SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The Company has not created, and is not party to, any special-purpose entities or off-balance-sheet arrangements for the purpose of raising capital, incurring debt or operating the Company's business. The Company does not have any off-balance-sheet arrangements or relationships that are reasonably likely to materially affect the Company's financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or the availability of capital resources.
COMMERCIAL COMMITMENTS
AMOUNT OF COMMITMENT EXPIRATION PER PERIOD
___________________________________
(1)At January 30, 2021, letters of credit totaling $21.0 million were issued under the credit agreement.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For information with respect to new accounting pronouncements and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 1 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" in Item 8 hereof.
FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
This report contains certain forward-looking statements. The following are or may constitute forward looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995: (a) statements including words such as "may," "will," "could," "should," "believe," "expect," "future," "potential," "anticipate," "intend," "plan," "estimate," "continue," or the negative or other variations thereof; (b) statements regarding matters that are not historical facts; and (c) statements about the Company's future occurrences, plans and objectives, including those statements included under the heading "Fiscal 2021 Outlook" included in this Management's Discussion and Analysis and other statements regarding management's expectations and forecasts for fiscal 2021 and beyond, statements concerning the opening of new stores or the closing of existing stores, statements regarding our competitive position, statements concerning capital expenditures and sources of liquidity, statements regarding the expected impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related government responses, statements concerning share repurchases, statements concerning pension contributions, statements concerning changes in loss trends, settlements and other costs related to our self-insurance programs, statements concerning the phase out of LIBOR, statements concerning expectations regarding the payment of dividends, statement regarding future leased department income and statements concerning estimated taxes. The Company cautions that forward-looking statements contained in this report are based on estimates, projections, beliefs and assumptions of management and information available to management at the time of such statements and are not guarantees of future performance. The Company disclaims any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements based on the occurrence of future events, the receipt of new information, or otherwise. Forward-looking statements of the Company involve risks and uncertainties and are subject to change based on various important factors. Actual future performance, outcomes and results may differ materially from those expressed in forward-looking statements made by the Company and its management as a result of a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Representative examples of those factors include (without limitation) the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on public health, our supply chain, the health and well-being of our employees and customers, and the retail industry in general; other general retail industry conditions and macro-economic conditions; economic and weather conditions for regions in which the Company's stores are located and the effect of these factors on the buying patterns of the Company's customers, including the effect of changes in prices and availability of oil and natural gas; the availability of consumer credit; the impact of competitive pressures in the department store industry and other retail channels including specialty, off-price, discount and Internet retailers; changes in consumer spending patterns, debt levels and their ability to meet credit obligations; high levels of unemployment; changes in tax legislation; changes in legislation, affecting such matters as the cost of employee benefits or credit card income; adequate and stable availability and pricing of materials, production facilities and labor from which the Company sources its merchandise; changes in operating expenses, including employee wages, commission structures and related benefits; system failures or data security breaches; possible future acquisitions of store properties from other department store operators; the continued availability of financing in amounts and at the terms necessary to support the Company's future business; fluctuations in LIBOR and other base borrowing rates; the elimination of LIBOR; potential disruption from terrorist activity and the effect on ongoing consumer confidence; other epidemic, pandemic (including COVID-19) or other public health issues; potential disruption of international trade and supply chain efficiencies; any government-ordered restrictions on the movement of the general public or the mandated or voluntary closing of retail stores in response to the COVID-19 pandemic; world conflict and the possible impact on consumer spending patterns and other economic and demographic changes of similar or dissimilar nature, and other risks and uncertainties, including those detailed from time to time in our periodic reports filed with the SEC, particularly those set forth under the caption "Item 1A, Risk Factors" in this Annual Report.