Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and Notes thereto included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Information. Our discussion and analysis includes forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties and should be read in conjunction with Risk Factors under Item 1A of this Form 10-K, along with Forward-Looking Information at the end of this section for information on the risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to be materially different from our forward-looking statements. For a discussion of the financial results for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018, see Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the SEC on February 27, 2020.
OVERVIEW
Denbury is an independent energy company with operations focused on producing oil from mature oil fields in the Gulf Coast and Rocky Mountain regions. The Company is differentiated by its focus on CO2 EOR and the emerging CCUS industry, supported by the Company’s CO2 EOR technical and operational expertise and its extensive CO2 pipeline infrastructure. The utilization of captured industrial-sourced CO2 in EOR significantly reduces the carbon footprint of the oil that Denbury produces, underpinning the Company’s goal to fully offset its Scope 1, 2, and 3 CO2 emissions within the decade.
Emergence from Voluntary Reorganization Under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code. On July 30, 2020 (the “Petition Date”), Denbury Resources Inc. and its subsidiaries filed petitions for reorganization in a “prepackaged” voluntary bankruptcy (the “Chapter 11 Restructuring”) under chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of Texas (the “Bankruptcy Court”) under the caption “In re Denbury Resources Inc., et al., Case No. 20-33801”. On September 2, 2020, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order (the “Confirmation Order”) confirming the chapter 11 plan of reorganization (the “Plan”) and approving the Disclosure Statement, and on September 18, 2020 (the “Emergence Date”), the Plan became effective in accordance with its terms and the Company emerged from Chapter 11. Key accomplishments of the Chapter 11 Restructuring included the following:
•Eliminated approximately $2.1 billion of bond debt by issuing equity and/or warrants to the holders of that debt;
•Significantly improved leverage ratios;
•Reduced ongoing annual interest expense by approximately $165 million, significantly lowering our cash flow breakeven level;
•Eliminated approximately $9 million from ongoing general and administrative expenses by terminating certain office leases and relocating our corporate headquarters; and
•Established a new $575 million senior secured bank credit facility with $482.0 million of availability at December 31, 2020 after outstanding letters of credit.
For more information on the Chapter 11 Restructuring and related matters, refer to Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Emergence from Voluntary Reorganization Under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code, and Note 8, Long-Term Debt, to the consolidated financial statements.
Fresh Start Accounting. Upon emergence from bankruptcy, we met the criteria and were required to adopt fresh start accounting in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Codification (“FASC”) Topic 852, Reorganizations, which on the Emergence Date resulted in a new entity, the Successor, for financial reporting purposes, with no beginning retained earnings or deficit as of the fresh start reporting date. References to “Successor” relate to the financial position and results of operations of the Company subsequent to the Company’s emergence from bankruptcy on September 18, 2020, and references to “Predecessor” relate to the financial position and results of operations of the Company prior to, and including, September 18, 2020. In order to assist investors in understanding the comparability of our financial results for the applicable periods, we have provided certain comparative analysis on a combined basis, which management believes provides meaningful information to assist investors in understanding our financial results for the applicable period, but should not be considered in isolation, as a substitute for, or more meaningful than, independent results of the Predecessor and Successor periods for the year reported in accordance with GAAP.
Fresh start accounting requires that new fair values be established for the Company’s assets, liabilities and equity as of the date of emergence from bankruptcy, September 18, 2020, and therefore certain values and operational results of the
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
consolidated financial statements subsequent to September 18, 2020 are not comparable to the Company’s consolidated financial statements prior to, and including September 18, 2020, principally due to the Emergence Date re-evaluation of the fair value of our oil and natural gas properties, CO2 properties, and pipelines, together with the conversion of over $2 billion of previously outstanding debt into new common stock and/or warrants in the Successor. The reorganization value derived from the range of enterprise values associated with the Plan was allocated to the Company’s identifiable tangible and intangible assets and liabilities based on their fair values. The Emergence Date fair values of the Successor’s assets and liabilities differ materially from their recorded values as reflected on the historical balance sheet of the Predecessor and may materially affect our results of operations in Successor reporting periods.
Oil Price Impact on Our Business. Our financial results are significantly impacted by changes in oil prices, as 97% of our production is oil. Changes in oil prices impact all aspects of our business, most notably our cash flows from operations, revenues, capital allocation and budgeting decisions, and oil and natural gas reserves volumes. The table below outlines changes in our realized oil prices, before and after commodity hedging impacts, over the last three years:
Response to 2020 Oil Price Declines. In January and February 2020, NYMEX WTI oil prices averaged in the mid-$50s per Bbl range before a precipitous decline in oil prices that began in early March 2020 due to the combination of the COVID-19 coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic and the failure of the group of oil producing nations known as OPEC+ to reach an agreement over proposed oil production cuts. While oil prices have improved from the low points experienced during the second quarter of 2020, the concerns and uncertainties around the balance of supply and demand for oil are expected to continue for some time.
The precipitous decline in oil prices that began in the latter part of the first quarter of 2020 caused us to reassess our original plans for 2020, and as a result the Company adopted the following operational and financial measures:
•Reduced budgeted 2020 capital spending by $80 million, or 44%, to a range of $95 million to $105 million;
•Deferred the CO2 pipeline to Cedar Creek Anticline and the Cedar Creek Anticline CO2 tertiary flood development project beyond 2020;
•Implemented cost reduction measures including shutting-in production, shutting down compressors, negotiating reductions with vendors, delaying uneconomic well repairs and workovers and reducing our workforce;
•Restructured approximately 50% of our three-way collars covering 14,500 Bbls/d into fixed-price swaps for the second quarter through the fourth quarter of 2020 in order to increase downside oil price protection; and
•Evaluated production economics at each field and shut-in production beginning in late March 2020 that was uneconomic to produce or repair based on then-prevailing oil prices.
Comparative Financial Results and Highlights. As a result of Denbury filing for bankruptcy and emerging from bankruptcy during September 2020, our financial results are broken out between the Predecessor period (January 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020) and the Successor period (September 19, 2020 through December 31, 2020). For the Predecessor period, we recognized a net loss of $1.4 billion, and for the Successor period, we recognized a net loss of $50.7 million. The primary drivers of our significant financial net loss for the Predecessor period included the following:
•A $996.7 million full cost pool ceiling test write-down during the Predecessor period as a result of the decline in NYMEX oil prices (see Depletion, Depreciation, and Amortization (“DD&A”) - Full Cost Pool Ceiling Test below); and
•Reorganization items, net, resulted in an $850.0 million charge during the Predecessor period, due to fresh start accounting adjustments of $1.9 billion to decrease the carrying value of our assets, partially offset by a gain on settlements of liabilities subject to compromise of $1.0 billion, primarily representing the net impact of approximately $2.1 billion of debt elimination offset by the new equity value in Denbury.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
On a comparative basis, we recognized net income of $217.0 million, or $0.45 per diluted share, during 2019. The following reflects some of the primary drivers for our change in operating results between full-year 2020 and 2019:
•Oil and natural gas revenues decreased by $518.8 million (43%), with 31% of the decrease due to lower commodity prices and 12% due to lower production;
•Lease operating expenses decreased by $125.7 million (26%), primarily due to cost reduction measures in light of the low oil price environment, as well as the sale of a portion of our working interest in four southeast Texas oil fields (see March 2020 Sale of Working Interests in Certain Texas Fields below) and Delhi insurance reimbursements (see Delhi Insurance Recovery below);
•Commodity derivative expense decreased by $110.2 million ($40.1 million of income during 2020 compared to $70.1 million of expense during 2019), resulting from a $78.9 million increase in cash receipts upon settlement and an incremental $31.3 million decrease in noncash fair value losses between periods;
•A noncash gain on debt extinguishment of $156.0 million during 2019 compared to $19.0 million during 2020; and
•Reductions across numerous expense categories including $33.6 million in taxes other than income and $15.0 million in general and administrative expenses.
March 2021 Acquisition of Wyoming CO2 EOR Fields. In December 2020, we entered into an agreement to acquire a nearly 100% working interest (approximately 83% net revenue interest) in the Big Sand Draw and Beaver Creek oil fields located in Wyoming for $12 million cash, including surface facilities and a 46-mile CO2 transportation pipeline to the acquired fields. The agreement provides for us to make two contingent cash payments of $4 million each in 2021 and 2022 if NYMEX WTI oil prices average at least $50 per Bbl during the respective calendar years. The acquisition closed on March 3, 2021.
October 2020 Restructuring of CO2 Pipeline Agreements. In late October 2020, we restructured our CO2 pipeline financing arrangements with Genesis Energy, L.P. (“Genesis”), whereby (1) Denbury reacquired the NEJD pipeline system from Genesis in exchange for $70 million to be paid in four equal payments during 2021, representing full settlement of all remaining obligations under the NEJD secured financing lease; and (2) Denbury reacquired the Free State Pipeline from Genesis in exchange for a one-time payment of $22.5 million on October 30, 2020.
Delhi Insurance Recovery. During 2020, we received insurance reimbursements totaling $16.1 million ($15.4 million net to Denbury’s interest) for previously-incurred well control costs, cleanup costs, and damages associated with a 2013 incident at Delhi Field. Denbury’s portion of the insurance recovery of $15.4 million was recorded as a reduction to lease operating expenses.
Houston Area Land Sales. As part of our marketing non-producing surface acreage primarily around the Houston area for sale, we completed the sale of a portion of this acreage for gross proceeds of approximately $29 million during 2020. To date, we have closed acreage sales for total gross proceeds of approximately $49 million, and we currently have an additional $4 million under contract which is expected to close in the third quarter of 2021.
March 2020 Sale of Working Interests in Certain Texas Fields. On March 4, 2020, we sold half of our nearly 100% working interest positions in four southeast Texas oil fields (consisting of Webster, Thompson, Manvel and East Hastings) for $40 million net cash and a carried interest in ten wells to be drilled by the purchaser (the “Gulf Coast Working Interests Sale”).
CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY
Overview. Our primary sources of capital and liquidity are our cash flows from operations and availability of borrowing capacity under our Successor bank credit facility. Our most significant cash outlays relate to our development capital expenditures and current period operating expenses. The most significant changes during 2020 to our capital resources and liquidity resulted from our financial restructuring and emergence from Chapter 11 reorganization in which we eliminated approximately $2.1 billion of bond debt and reduced ongoing annual interest expense by approximately $165 million, significantly improving our cash flow on a go-forward basis.
2020 Cash Sources and Uses. NYMEX oil prices decreased significantly during 2020, directly reducing our operating cash flow; however, we took significant actions to reduce capital expenditures and operating expenses in order to adjust our spending levels such that our spending for ongoing operations was below our cash flow generated from operations. During 2020, we generated cash flows from operations of $153.7 million, while incurring capital expenditures of $95.2 million and
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
capitalized interest of $24.1 million, resulting in approximately $50 million of cash flow in excess of capital expenditures (excluding working capital changes, but including $46.4 million of interest payments treated as repayment of debt in our financial statements). During 2020, we further supplemented our cash flow and liquidity with proceeds from asset sales, including $40 million of proceeds from our March 2020 sale of working interests in four southeast Texas fields and by $29 million of proceeds from sales of non-producing surface acreage primarily around the Houston area. These supplemental cash inflows were offset with a similar amount of debt reduction and repurchase of the NEJD and Free State CO2 pipelines from Genesis.
Capital Expenditure Summary. The following table reflects incurred capital expenditures (including accrued capital) for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1)Includes capitalized internal acquisition, exploration and development costs and pre-production tertiary startup costs.
2021 Plans and Capital Budget. Oil prices continued to strengthen during the first two months of 2021, reaching the low-$60s per barrel in mid-February. Considering the current oil price environment and strategic importance of the CO2 flood at Cedar Creek Anticline (“CCA”), we plan to move forward in 2021 with the development of this significant long-term project. We expect to allocate approximately $150 million of capital in 2021 to this CCA development, consisting of approximately $100 million dedicated to the 105-mile extension of the Greencore CO2 pipeline from Bell Creek to CCA, with the remainder dedicated to facilities, well work and field development at CCA. In total, we estimate that our total development capital expenditures in 2021, excluding acquisitions and capitalized interest, will be in a range of $250 million to $270 million. Based on current oil prices and the Company’s hedge positions, we estimate that our 2021 cash flows from operations will exceed our budgeted level of planned development capital expenditures. In addition to our 2021 planned development capital, we acquired the Big Sand Draw and Beaver Creek oil fields in Wyoming in early March 2021 for a cash purchase price of $12 million before closing adjustments. Also, we plan to settle the remaining debt obligation to Genesis for the NEJD CO2 pipeline, with $70 million in payments to be made over the course of 2021. We expect to fulfill these remaining obligations from cash flow and borrowings under our bank credit facility. At December 31, 2020, we had $482 million of availability under our bank credit facility, which we believe is more than adequate to cover any near-term liquidity needs. To supplement our liquidity, we may seek other sources of funding for all or a portion of the CCA CO2 Pipeline expenditure.
The 2021 capital budget, excluding capitalized interest and acquisitions, provides for approximate spending of $260 million at the midpoint of our guidance as follows:
•$100 million for the 105-mile extension of the Greencore CO2 pipeline to CCA
•$50 million for CCA tertiary well work, facilities, and field development;
•$50 million allocated for other tertiary oil field development;
•$35 million allocated for non-tertiary oil field development; and
•$25 million for other capital items such as capitalized internal acquisition, exploration and development costs and pre-production tertiary startup costs.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Based on our capital spending plans, we currently anticipate 2021 average daily production to be between 47,500 BOE/d and 51,500 BOE/d, including the Big Sand Draw and Beaver Creek working interests acquisition expected to close in early March 2021. Our anticipated 2021 production level compares to 2020 average continuing production of 50,957 BOE/d, after reduction for 2020 property divestitures.
New Senior Secured Bank Credit Agreement. In connection with our emergence from Chapter 11 proceedings on September 18, 2020, we entered into a bank credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, and other lenders party thereto (the “Bank Credit Agreement”). The Bank Credit Agreement is a senior secured revolving credit facility with an initial borrowing base and lender commitments of $575 million, under which we had $70.0 million borrowed as of December 31, 2020, leaving us with $482.0 million of availability after consideration of $23.0 million of outstanding letters of credit. Availability under the Bank Credit Agreement is subject to a borrowing base, which is redetermined semiannually on or around May 1 and November 1 of each year, with our next scheduled redetermination around May 1, 2021. The borrowing base is adjusted at the lenders’ discretion and is based, in part, upon external factors over which we have no control. The borrowing base is subject to a reduction by twenty-five percent (25%) of the principal amount of any unsecured or subordinated debt issued or incurred. The borrowing base may also be reduced if we sell borrowing base properties and/or cancel commodity derivative positions with an aggregate value in excess of 5% of the then-effective borrowing base between redeterminations. The Bank Credit Agreement matures on January 30, 2024.
The Bank Credit Agreement prohibits us from paying dividends on our common stock through September 17, 2021. The Bank Credit Agreement also limits our ability to, among other things, incur and repay other indebtedness; grant liens; engage in certain mergers, consolidations, liquidations and dissolutions; engage in sales of assets; make acquisitions and investments; make other restricted payments (including redeeming, repurchasing or retiring our common stock); and enter into commodity derivative agreements, in each case subject to customary exceptions.
The Bank Credit Agreement contains certain financial performance covenants including the following:
•A Consolidated Total Debt to Consolidated EBITDAX covenant, with such ratio not to exceed 3.5 times; and
•A requirement to maintain a current ratio (i.e., Consolidated Current Assets to Consolidated Current Liabilities) of at least 1.0 times.
For purposes of computing the current ratio per the Bank Credit Agreement, Consolidated Current Assets exclude the current portion of derivative assets but include available borrowing capacity under the Bank Credit Agreement, and Consolidated Current Liabilities exclude the current portion of derivative liabilities as well as the current portions of long-term indebtedness outstanding. Under these financial performance covenant calculations, as of December 31, 2020, our ratio of consolidated total debt to consolidated EBITDAX was 0.45 to 1.0 (with a maximum permitted ratio of 3.5 to 1.0) and our current ratio was 3.73 to 1.0 (with a required ratio of not less than 1.0 to 1.0). Based upon our currently forecasted levels of production and costs, hedges in place as of February 24, 2021, and current oil commodity futures prices, we currently anticipate continuing to be in compliance with our financial performance covenants during the foreseeable future.
The above description of our Bank Credit Agreement is qualified by the express language and defined terms contained in the Bank Credit Agreement, which is filed as an exhibit to our Form 8-K Report filed with the SEC on September 18, 2020.
Commitments, Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. As of December 31, 2020, we had a total of $23.0 million of letters of credit outstanding under our senior secured bank credit facility. Additionally, we have obligations for development and exploratory expenditures that arise from our normal capital expenditure program or from other transactions common to our industry, none of which are recorded on our balance sheet. These obligations are further described in 2021 Plans and Capital Budget above. In addition, in order to recover our undeveloped proved reserves, we must also fund the associated future development costs estimated in our proved reserve reports. For a further discussion of our future development costs, see Supplemental Oil and Natural Gas Disclosures (Unaudited) to the consolidated financial statements.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our periodic obligations include operational expenses that we anticipate being paid out of our cash flow from sale of production, plus the capital expenditures detailed above. In addition to these periodic expenditures, we have various future cash commitments under contracts in place as of December 31, 2020. The most material of these commitments to be settled within the next 12 months include:
•Pipeline financing obligations of $70.0 million associated with the NEJD pipeline system, which is to be repaid in four equal payments during 2021, with the first payment made on January 31, 2021;
•Contracts for the purchase of CO2 captured from industrial sources that is used in our tertiary recovery activities and processing fees related to our overriding royalty interest in the CO2 at LaBarge Field (see Note 14, Commitments and Contingencies, to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion); and
•Operating lease obligations (see Note 5, Leases, to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion).
In addition to these commitments, we have recurring expenditures for such things as accounting, engineering and legal fees; software maintenance; subscriptions; and other overhead-type items. Normally these expenditures do not change materially on an aggregate basis from year to year and are part of our general and administrative expenses. Most of these recurring expenditures could be quickly canceled with regard to any specific vendor, even though the expense itself may be required for our ongoing normal operations. Other commitments include certain transportation agreements and well-related costs. Our longer-term commitments that extend beyond the next 12 months include the following:
•Obligations and periodic interest payments under our senior secured bank credit facility, which matures on January 30, 2024, and of which $70.0 million was outstanding as of December 31, 2020; and
•Asset retirement obligations related to future costs associated with plugging and abandoning our oil, natural gas and CO2 wells, removing equipment and facilities from leased acreage, and returning land to its original condition (see Note 6, Asset Retirement Obligations, to the consolidated financial statements).
As detailed throughout this report, the largest determinant of our cash flow is the oil price we receive. The variability of proceeds from the sale of our production is offset to some extent by similar directional variances in certain expenses, including a portion of our lease operating expenses and production taxes, as these expenses experience some variability with changes in oil prices. Because revenues and expenses do not rise and fall at the same rate, the continuing volatility of the oil market in recent years often results in variances when comparing period-to-period revenues and expense items. Additionally, events in world oil markets can affect cash flow, which we attempt to offset to some extent with our hedging program.
FINANCIAL OVERVIEW OF TERTIARY OPERATIONS
As discussed in Item 1, Business and Properties - Oil and Natural Gas Operations - Enhanced Oil Recovery Overview, our tertiary operations represent a significant portion of our overall operations and have become our primary strategic focus. The economics of a tertiary field and the related impact on our financial statements differ from a conventional oil and gas play and are explained further below.
While it is difficult to accurately forecast future production, we believe our tertiary recovery operations provide significant long-term production growth potential at reasonable return metrics, with relatively low risk, assuming crude oil prices are at levels that support the development of those projects. We have been developing tertiary oil properties for over 21 years, and the financial impact of such operations is reflected in our historical financial statements. The summary below highlights our observations regarding how tertiary operations have impacted our financial statements.
Finding and Development Costs. We currently expect finding and development costs (including future development and abandonment costs but excluding CO2 pipeline infrastructure capital expenditures) over the life of each field to be competitive with the industry average costs for other oil properties. See the definition of finding and development costs in the Glossary and Selected Abbreviations.
Timing of Capital Costs. When initiating a new tertiary flood, there generally is a delay between the initial capital expenditures and the resulting production increases. We must build facilities, and often a CO2 pipeline to the field, before CO2 flooding can commence, and it usually takes six to twelve months before the field responds to the injection of CO2 (i.e., oil production commences). Further, we may spend significant amounts of capital before we can recognize any proved reserves
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
from fields we flood and, even after a field has proved reserves, significant amounts of additional capital will usually be required to fully develop the field.
Recognition of Proved Reserves. In order to recognize proved tertiary oil reserves, we must either demonstrate production resulting from the tertiary process or the field must be analogous to an existing tertiary flood. The magnitude of proved reserves that we can book in any given year will depend on our progress with new floods, the timing of the production response from new floods and the performance of our existing floods.
Production Rates. The production rate at a tertiary flood can vary from quarter to quarter, as a tertiary field’s production may increase rapidly when wells respond to the CO2, plateau temporarily, and then resume growth as additional areas of the field are developed. During a tertiary flood life cycle, facility capacity is increased from time to time, which occasionally requires temporary shutdowns during installation, thereby causing temporary declines in production. We also find it difficult to precisely predict when any given well will respond to the injected CO2, as the CO2 seldom travels through the rock consistently due to heterogeneity in the oil-bearing formations. With the lower level of oil prices over the past several years, our pace of development has generally slowed, thereby reducing our Company-wide production rates. We find all of these fluctuations to be normal and generally expect oil production at a tertiary field to increase over time until the field is fully developed, albeit sometimes in inconsistent patterns.
Operating Costs. Tertiary projects may be more expensive to operate than traditional industry operations because of the cost of injecting and recycling the CO2 (primarily due to the cost of the CO2 and the significant energy requirements to re-compress the CO2 back into a near-liquid state for re-injection purposes). The costs of our CO2 and the electricity required to recycle and inject this CO2 comprise over half of our typical tertiary operating expenses. Since these costs vary along with commodity and commercial electricity prices, they are highly variable and will increase in a high-commodity-price environment and decrease in a low-price environment. The cost of purchasing and/or producing CO2 for use in tertiary floods is allocated to our tertiary oil fields and recorded as lease operating expenses (following the commencement of tertiary oil production) at the time the CO2 is injected. These costs have historically represented approximately 20% to 25% of the total operating costs for our tertiary operations. Since we expense all of the operating costs to produce and inject our CO2 (following the commencement of tertiary oil production), operating costs per barrel for a new flood will be higher at the inception of CO2 injection projects because of minimal related oil production at that time.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Financial and Operating Results Tables
Certain of our financial results for our Successor and Predecessor periods are included in the following table.
(1)Includes a pre-tax full cost pool ceiling test write-down of our oil and natural gas properties of $1.0 million for the Successor period September 19, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and $996.7 million for the Predecessor period January 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020. In addition, the Predecessor period January 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020 includes reorganization adjustments, net totaling $850.0 million.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Certain of our financial and operating results and statistics for each of the last three years are included in the following table.
(1)See also Commodity Derivative Contracts below and Market Risk Management for information concerning our commodity derivative transactions.
(2)Noncash fair value gains (losses) on commodity derivatives is a non-GAAP measure and is different from “Commodity derivatives expense (income)” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in that the noncash fair value gains (losses) on commodity derivatives represent only the net changes between periods of the fair market values of commodity derivative positions, and exclude the impact of settlements on commodity derivatives during the period, which were receipts on settlements of $102.5 million and $23.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, compared to payments on settlements of $175.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. We believe that noncash fair value gains (losses) on commodity derivatives is a useful supplemental disclosure to “Commodity derivatives expense (income)” in order to differentiate noncash fair market value adjustments from receipts or payments upon settlements on commodity derivatives during the period. This supplemental disclosure is widely used within the industry and by securities analysts, banks and credit rating agencies in calculating EBITDA and in adjusting net income (loss) to present those measures on a comparative basis across companies, as well as to assess compliance with certain debt covenants. Noncash fair value gains (losses) on commodity derivatives is not a measure of financial or operating performance under GAAP, nor should it be
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
considered in isolation or as a substitute for “Commodity derivatives expense (income)” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. See also the Glossary and Selected Abbreviations for the definition of noncash fair value gains (losses) on commodity derivatives.
Production
Average daily production by area for 2020, 2019 and 2018, and for each of the quarters of 2020, is shown below:
(1)Mature properties include Brookhaven, Cranfield, Eucutta, Little Creek, Mallalieu, Martinville, McComb and Soso fields.
(2)Includes non-tertiary production related to the March 2020 sale of 50% of our working interests in Webster, Thompson, Manvel, and East Hastings fields, Citronelle Field sold in July 2019 and Lockhart Crossing Field sold in the third quarter of 2018.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Total Production
Total continuing production during 2020 averaged 50,957 BOE/d, including 34,135 Bbls/d from tertiary properties and 16,822 BOE/d from non-tertiary properties. Total continuing production excludes sold production related to our Gulf Coast Working Interests Sale in March 2020 and, for prior-year periods, excludes production from Citronelle Field sold in July 2019 and Lockhart Crossing Field sold in the third quarter of 2018. Our 2020 total continuing production level represents a decrease of 5,957 BOE/d (10%) compared to 2019 levels, most significantly attributable to production that was shut-in due to wells that were uneconomic to produce or repair based on NYMEX oil prices during the second through fourth quarters of 2020. In addition to shut-in production, the year-over-year production decline included production declines at Delhi Field due to the lack of CO2 purchases between late-February and late-October 2020 as a result of the Delta-Tinsley CO2 pipeline being down for repair during that period, reduced levels of workovers and capital investment due to lower oil prices and higher than normal declines resulting from such. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Delta-Tinsley pipeline was brought back into service, allowing CO2 purchases to resume at Delhi Field. Our production during 2020 was 97% oil, consistent with 2019 and 2018.
Oil and Natural Gas Revenues
Oil and natural gas revenues decreased 43% between 2019 and 2020 and decreased 15% between 2018 and 2019. The changes in our oil and natural gas revenues are due to changes in production quantities and realized commodity prices (excluding any impact of our commodity derivative contracts), as reflected in the following table:
Excluding any impact of our commodity derivative contracts, our average net realized commodity prices and NYMEX differentials were as follows during 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Prices received in a regional market fluctuate frequently and can differ from NYMEX pricing due to a variety of reasons, including supply and/or demand factors, crude oil quality, and location differentials.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
•Gulf Coast Region. Our average NYMEX oil differential in the Gulf Coast region was a negative $1.14 per Bbl in 2020 and a positive $3.30 per Bbl during 2019. With the recent exception of 2020, our Gulf Coast region differentials have generally been positive to NYMEX due to historically higher prices received for Gulf Coast crudes, such as Light Louisiana Sweet crude oil, though storage constraints and weak demand caused these differentials to weaken significantly during 2020.
•Rocky Mountain Region. NYMEX oil differentials in the Rocky Mountain region averaged $2.80 per Bbl below NYMEX during 2020, compared to an average differential of $2.01 per Bbl below NYMEX in 2019. Differentials in the Rocky Mountain region can fluctuate significantly on a month-to-month basis due to weather, refinery or transportation issues, and Canadian and U.S. crude oil price index volatility.
Our realized oil prices and differentials during 2020 have been significantly impacted by the rapid and precipitous drop in oil demand caused by the slowdown in economic activity due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This drop in oil demand followed the early-March 2020 failure by the group of oil producing nations known as OPEC+ to reach an agreement over proposed oil production cuts, causing oil prices to drop to unprecedented levels in the second quarter of 2020. Uncertainty about the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its resulting economic consequences has resulted in abnormally high worldwide inventories of produced oil. While oil prices have improved from the low points experienced during the second quarter of 2020, concerns and uncertainties around the balance of supply and demand for oil are expected to continue for some time. While our oil differentials have improved since the second quarter of 2020, oil prices are expected to continue to be volatile as a result of these events, and as changes in oil inventories, oil demand and economic performance are reported.
CO2 Revenues and Expenses
We sell CO2 produced from Jackson Dome to third-party industrial users at various contracted prices primarily under long-term contracts. We recognize the revenue received on these CO2 sales as “CO2 sales and transportation fees” with the corresponding costs recognized as “CO2 operating and discovery expenses” in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Oil Marketing Revenues and Expenses
From time to time, we market third-party production for sale in exchange for a fee. We recognize the revenue received on these oil sales as “Oil marketing revenues” and the expenses incurred to market and transport the oil as “Oil marketing expenses” in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Commodity Derivative Contracts
We routinely enter into oil derivative contracts to provide an economic hedge of our exposure to commodity price risk associated with anticipated future oil production and to provide more certainty to our future cash flows. These contracts have historically consisted of price floors, collars, three-way collars, fixed-price swaps, fixed-price swaps enhanced with a sold put, and basis swaps.
The following table summarizes the impact our commodity derivative contracts had on our operating results for the periods indicated:
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
(1)Noncash fair value gains (losses) on commodity derivatives is a non-GAAP measure. See Financial and Operating Results Tables above for a discussion of the reconciliation between noncash fair value gains (losses) on commodity derivatives to “Commodity derivatives expense (income)” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. See also the Glossary and Selected Abbreviations for the definition of noncash fair value gains (losses) on commodity derivatives.
In order to provide a level of price protection to a portion of our oil production and to meet certain hedging requirements under our Successor senior secured bank credit facility, we have hedged a portion of our estimated oil production in 2021 and 2022 using both NYMEX fixed-price swaps and costless collars. See Note 12, Commodity Derivative Contracts, to the consolidated financial statements for additional details of our outstanding commodity derivative contracts as of December 31, 2020, and Market Risk Management below for additional discussion. In addition, the following table summarizes our oil derivative contracts as of February 24, 2021:
(1)Averages are volume weighted.
Commodity derivative contracts in place for 2021 include fixed-price swaps and collars. Based on current contracts in place and NYMEX oil futures prices as of February 24, 2021, which averaged approximately $61 per Bbl for the remainder of 2021, we currently expect that we would make cash payments of approximately $185 million during 2021 upon settlement of these contracts, the amount of which is dependent upon fluctuations in future NYMEX oil prices in relation to the prices of our 2021 fixed-price swaps which have a weighted average NYMEX oil price of $43.69 per Bbl. See Note 12, Commodity Derivative Contracts, to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion. Changes in commodity prices, expiration of contracts, and new commodity contracts entered into cause fluctuations in the estimated fair value of our oil derivative contracts. Because we do not utilize hedge accounting for our commodity derivative contracts, the period-to-period changes in the fair value of these contracts, as outlined above, are recognized in our statements of operations.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Production Expenses
Lease Operating Expenses
Total lease operating expenses were $351.5 million, or $18.78 per BOE, for the combined Predecessor and Successor periods included within the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $477.2 million, or $22.46 per BOE, during 2019. The decreases on an absolute-dollar basis and per-BOE basis were primarily due to lower expenses across all expense categories, with the largest decreases in labor, workover expense, and power and fuel costs, as well as insurance reimbursements totaling $15.4 million recorded for previously-incurred well control costs, cleanup costs, and damages associated with a 2013 incident at Delhi Field. In response to the significant decline in oil prices in 2020, we implemented cost reduction measures which included shutting down compressors, negotiating reductions with vendors and curtailing well repairs and workovers as most were uneconomic at the lower oil price levels experienced throughout most of 2020.
Currently, our CO2 expense comprises approximately 20% to 25% of our typical tertiary lease operating expenses, and consists of (1) CO2 production expenses for the CO2 reserves we own, and (2) our purchase of CO2 from royalty and working interest owners and industrial sources for the CO2 reserves we do not own. During the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 48% of the CO2 utilized in our CO2 floods consisted of CO2 owned and produced by us (our net revenue interest). The price we pay others for CO2 varies by source and is generally indexed to oil prices. When combining the production cost of the CO2 we own with what we pay third parties for CO2, our average cost of CO2 during 2020 was approximately $0.38 per Mcf, including taxes paid on CO2 production but excluding depletion, depreciation and amortization of capital expended at our CO2 source fields and industrial sources. This per-Mcf CO2 cost during 2020 was higher than the $0.36 per Mcf comparable measure during 2019 due primarily to higher utilization in our Gulf Coast operations of industrial-sourced CO2, which has a higher average cost than our naturally occurring CO2 source.
Transportation and Marketing Expenses
Transportation and marketing expenses primarily consist of amounts incurred related to the transportation, marketing, and processing of oil and natural gas production. Transportation and marketing expenses were $37.8 million for the combined Predecessor and Successor periods included within the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $41.8 million during 2019. The decrease between periods was primarily due to fewer third-party oil purchases and lower marketing expenses.
Taxes Other than Income
Taxes other than income, which includes production, ad valorem and franchise taxes, were $60.1 million for the combined Predecessor and Successor periods included within the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $93.8 million for 2019. The decrease between periods was primarily due to a decrease in production taxes resulting from lower oil and natural gas revenues and production levels.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
General and Administrative Expenses (“G&A”)
Our net G&A expense on an absolute-dollar basis was $68.0 million for the combined Predecessor and Successor periods included within the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $15.0 million (18%) from 2019. Excluding severance-related costs from both years results in net G&A expense being essentially even between 2020 and 2019. Severance-related expense of $18.6 million during 2019 was associated with our voluntary separation program, the majority of which was paid out in the first quarter of 2020.
On the Emergence Date and pursuant to the terms of the Plan and the Confirmation Order, a framework for a management incentive plan was adopted, which reserves for officers, other employees, directors and other service providers a pool of shares of new common stock. The 2020 Omnibus Stock and Incentive Plan was adopted on December 2, 2020, and initial awards were granted on December 4, 2020. The initial award grants contained both time-based awards for senior management and directors, vesting over three years, and also contained performance-based awards for senior management, with vesting based upon achieving certain stock price levels over a consecutive 60-trading day period on a volume-weighted average price basis. It is currently estimated that full vesting of the performance awards will be achieved in early March 2021, which resulted in $8.1 million of performance-based stock compensation being expensed in the fourth quarter of 2020 and $16.6 million of performance-based stock compensation expected to be recognized in the first quarter of 2021.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Interest and Financing Expenses
(1)Cash interest during the Predecessor periods includes the portion of interest on certain debt instruments accounted for as a reduction of debt for GAAP financial reporting purposes in accordance with FASC 470-60, Troubled Debt Restructuring by Debtors. The portion of interest treated as a reduction of debt was related to the Predecessor’s 9% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes due 2021 (the “2021 Notes”) and 9¼% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes due 2022 (the “2022 Notes”) during the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020 and years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, as well as the Predecessor’s previously outstanding 3½% Convertible Senior Notes due 2024 and 5% Convertible Senior Notes due 2023 during 2018. Amounts related to the 2021 Notes and 2022 Notes remaining in future interest payable were written-off to “Reorganization items, net” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations on the Petition Date.
(2)Represents amortization of debt discounts of $3.0 million related to the 7¾% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes due 2024 (the “7¾% Senior Secured Notes”) during the Predecessor period January 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020 and $6.1 million related to the 6⅜% Convertible Senior Notes due 2024 (the “2024 Convertible Notes”) during the Predecessor period January 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020. Remaining debt discounts were written-off to “Reorganization items, net” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations on the Petition Date.
(3)Excludes debt discounts related to our 7¾% Senior Secured Notes and 2024 Convertible Notes.
(4)Includes commitment fees but excludes debt issue costs and amortization of discount.
Cash interest was $111.1 million for the combined Predecessor and Successor periods included within the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $191.5 million during 2019. The decrease between periods was primarily due to a decrease in the average debt principal outstanding, with the Successor period reflecting the full extinguishment of all outstanding obligations under the senior secured second lien notes, convertible senior notes, and senior subordinated notes on the Emergence Date, pursuant to the terms of the Plan, relieving approximately $2.1 billion of debt by issuing equity and/or warrants in the Successor period to the holders of that debt.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Depletion, Depreciation, and Amortization (“DD&A”)
(1)Represents an accelerated depreciation charge related to capitalized amounts associated with unevaluated properties that were transferred to the full cost pool.
DD&A expense was $234.4 million for the combined Predecessor and Successor periods included within the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $233.8 million during 2019, with the slight increase due to a $39.2 million accelerated depreciation charge during the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020. The combined Predecessor and Successor period decreases in oil and natural gas properties depletion and CO2 properties, pipelines, plants and other property and equipment DD&A was primarily due to lower depletable costs due to the step down in book value resulting from fresh start accounting. Our oil and natural gas properties depletion rate was $7.37 per BOE during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Full Cost Pool Ceiling Test
Under full cost accounting rules, we are required each quarter (as well as at the end of the Predecessor period) to perform a ceiling test calculation. Under these rules, the full cost ceiling value is calculated using the average first-day-of-the-month oil and natural gas price for each month during a 12-month rolling period prior to the end of a particular reporting period. The first-day-of-the-month oil prices for the preceding 12 months, after adjustments for market differentials and transportation expenses by field, averaged $35.84 per Bbl as of December 31, 2020, $40.08 per Bbl as of September 18, 2020, $44.74 per Bbl as of June 30, 2020 and $55.17 per Bbl as of March 31, 2020. While representative oil prices at March 31, 2020 were roughly consistent with adjusted prices used to calculate the December 31, 2019 full cost ceiling value, the decline in NYMEX oil prices in late March 2020 due to OPEC supply pressures and a reduction in worldwide oil demand amid the COVID-19 pandemic contributed to the transfer of $244.9 million of our unevaluated costs to the full cost amortization base during the three months ended March 31, 2020. Primarily as a result of adding these additional costs to the amortization base, we recognized a full cost pool ceiling test write-down of $72.5 million during the three months ended March 31, 2020. In addition, as a result of the precipitous decline in NYMEX oil prices, we recognized additional full cost pool ceiling test write-downs of $662.4 million during the three months ended June 30, 2020, $261.7 million during the period from July 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020, and an additional $1.0 million during the Successor period from September 19, 2020 through December 31, 2020.
Based upon fresh start accounting, oil and gas properties were recorded at fair value as of September 18, 2020. See Note 2, Fresh Start Accounting, to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Impairment Assessment of Long-lived Assets
We test long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. These long-lived assets, which are not subject to our full cost pool ceiling test, are principally comprised of our capitalized CO2 properties and pipelines, and for the Successor period also included long-term contracts to sell CO2 to industrial customers. Given the significant declines in NYMEX oil prices to approximately $20 per Bbl in late March 2020 due to OPEC supply pressures and a reduction in worldwide oil demand amid the COVID-19 pandemic, we performed a long-lived asset impairment test for our two long-lived asset groups (Gulf Coast region and Rocky Mountain region) as of March 31, 2020 (Predecessor).
We perform our long-lived asset impairment test by comparing the net carrying costs of our two long-lived asset groups to the respective expected future undiscounted net cash flows that are supported by these long-lived assets which include production of our probable and possible oil and natural gas reserves. The portion of our capitalized CO2 costs related to CO2 reserves and CO2 pipelines that we estimate will be consumed in the process of producing our proved oil and natural gas reserves is included in the full cost pool ceiling test as a reduction to future net revenues. The remaining net capitalized costs that are not included in the full cost pool ceiling test, and related intangible assets, are subject to long-lived asset impairment testing. These costs totaled approximately $1.3 billion as of March 31, 2020 (Predecessor). If the undiscounted net cash flows are below the net carrying costs for an asset group, we must record an impairment loss by the amount, if any, that net carrying costs exceed the fair value of the long-lived asset group. The undiscounted net cash flows for our asset groups exceeded the net carrying costs; thus, step two of the impairment test was not required and no impairment was recorded.
Significant assumptions impacting expected future undiscounted net cash flows include projections of future oil and natural gas prices, projections of estimated quantities of oil and natural gas reserves, projections of future rates of production, timing and amount of future development and operating costs, projected availability and cost of CO2, projected recovery factors of tertiary reserves and risk-adjustment factors applied to the cash flows. We performed a qualitative assessment as of June 30, 2020 and September 18, 2020 (Predecessor periods) and determined there were no material changes to our key cash flow assumptions and no triggering events since the analysis performed as of March 31, 2020; therefore, no impairment test was performed for the second quarter of 2020 or for the period ending September 18, 2020. Upon emergence from bankruptcy, the Company adopted fresh start accounting which resulted in our long-lived assets being recorded at their fair value at the Emergence Date (see Note 2, Fresh Start Accounting, to the consolidated financial statements for additional information). We performed a qualitative assessment as of December 31, 2020 (Successor period) and determined there were no material changes to our key cash flow assumptions and no triggering events since the Company’s assets were revalued in fresh start accounting as of September 18, 2020; therefore, no impairment test was performed for the fourth quarter of 2020.
Reorganization Items, Net
Reorganization items represent (i) expenses incurred during the Chapter 11 Restructuring subsequent to the Petition Date as a direct result of the Plan, (ii) gains or losses from liabilities settled, and (iii) fresh start accounting adjustments and are recorded in “Reorganization items, net” in our Consolidated Statements of Operations. Professional service provider charges associated with our restructuring that were incurred before the Petition Date and after the Emergence Date are recorded in “Other expenses” in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the losses (gains) on reorganization items, net:
Other Expenses
Other expenses totaled $43.9 million for the combined Predecessor and Successor periods included within the year ended December 31, 2020. Other expenses during 2020 primarily are comprised of $28.2 million of professional fees associated with restructuring activities, $5.1 million for the write-off of certain trade receivables, $4.3 million of costs associated with the Delta-Tinsley CO2 pipeline repair, and $0.9 million of costs associated with the APMTG Helium, LLC helium supply contract ruling (see Note 14, Commitments and Contingencies - Litigation, to the consolidated financial statements). The 2019 amounts are primarily comprised of $1.9 million of impairment expense, $1.8 million of costs associated with the Riley Ridge helium supply contract ruling, and $1.6 million of transaction costs associated with the Predecessor’s privately negotiated debt exchanges.
Income Taxes
Our income tax provisions for the Predecessor were based on an estimated statutory rate of approximately 25% for 2020, 2019 and 2018. As provided for under FASC 740-270-35-2, we determined the actual effective tax rate for the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020 was the best estimate of our annual effective tax rate. Our effective tax rate for the 2020 Predecessor period was lower than our estimated statutory rate, primarily due to the establishment of a valuation allowance on our federal and state deferred tax assets after the application of fresh start accounting. Our income tax provision for the Successor period was also based on the same estimated statutory rate of approximately 25% but is expected to be near zero, as any tax expense or benefit associated with pre-tax book income or loss will be offset with a change in valuation allowance on our federal and state deferred tax assets. The Successor’s effective tax rate of 4.7% was primarily due to adjustments related to our Texas net deferred tax liabilities.
We have evaluated the impact of the Plan, including the change in control, resulting from our emergence from bankruptcy. The cancellation of debt income (“CODI”) realized upon emergence is excludable from income and resulted in the elimination
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
of all available federal net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards, as well as a partial reduction in tax basis in assets, in accordance with the attribute reduction and ordering rules of Section 108 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (the “Code”). The reduction in the Company’s tax attributes for excludable CODI did not occur until the last day of the Company’s tax year, December 31, 2020. Accordingly, the tax adjustments recorded in the Predecessor period represented our best estimate using all available information at September 30, 2020. The final tax impacts of the bankruptcy emergence, as well as the Plan’s overall effect on the Company’s tax attributes which were refined based on the Company’s final financial position at December 31, 2020 as required under the Code, resulted in the Company fully reducing its federal net operating loss carryforwards, enhanced oil recovery credits, and research and development tax credits, and reducing a portion of its tax basis in assets.
As the tax basis of our assets, primarily our oil and gas properties, is in excess of the carrying value, as adjusted in fresh start accounting, the Successor is in a net deferred tax asset position at December 31, 2020. We evaluated our deferred tax assets in light of all available evidence as of the balance sheet date, including the tax impacts of the Chapter 11 Restructuring and the full reduction of net operating losses and tax credits and partial reduction of tax basis in assets (collectively “tax attributes”). Given our cumulative loss position and the continued low oil price environment, we recorded a total valuation allowance of $129.4 million on our underlying deferred tax assets, consisting of $54.3 million on our federal deferred tax assets and $75.1 million on our state deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020. Valuation allowances totaling $60.8 million, $10.2 million, and $4.1 million were recorded for our Louisiana, Mississippi, and other state deferred tax assets, respectively. A $1.3 million state deferred tax liability is recorded on the Successor balance sheet. For the Successor period, the income tax benefit associated with the Successor’s pre-tax book loss was substantially offset by a change in valuation allowance.
The current income tax benefit for the Predecessor period ended September 18, 2020 represents amounts estimated to be receivable resulting from alternative minimum tax credits and certain state tax obligations.
Our effective tax rate for 2019 was higher than our estimated statutory rate primarily due to the establishment of a valuation allowance against a portion of our business interest expense deduction that we estimate will be disallowed. Our 2018 effective tax rate was lower than our estimated statutory rate primarily due to tax benefits resulting from enhanced oil recovery income tax credits.
We have $0.6 million of alternative minimum tax credits, which under the Tax Cut and Jobs Act will be refunded in 2021 and are recorded as a receivable on the balance sheet. Our state net operating loss carryforwards expire in various years, starting in 2025. The statutes of limitation for our income tax returns for tax years ending prior to 2017 have lapsed and therefore are not subject to examination by respective taxing authorities.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Per-BOE Data
The following table summarizes our cash flow and results of operations on a per-BOE basis for the comparative periods. Each of the individual components is discussed above.
(1)General and administrative expenses includes an accrual for severance-related costs of $18.6 million associated with our voluntary separation program for the year ended December 31, 2019, which if excluded, would have averaged $3.03 per BOE.
(2)Represents an accelerated depreciation charge related to impaired unevaluated properties that were transferred to the full cost pool.
(3)Noncash fair value gains (losses) on commodity derivatives is a non-GAAP measure. See Financial and Operating Results Tables above for a discussion of the reconciliation between noncash fair value gains (losses) on commodity derivatives to “Commodity derivatives expense (income)” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. See also the Glossary and Selected Abbreviations for the definition of noncash fair value gains (losses) on commodity derivatives.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
MARKET RISK MANAGEMENT
Debt and Interest Rate Sensitivity
At December 31, 2020, we had $70.0 million of outstanding borrowing under our Bank Credit Agreement. At this level of variable-rate debt, an increase or decrease of 10% in interest rates would have an immaterial effect on our interest expense. Our Bank Credit Agreement does not have any triggers or covenants regarding our debt ratings with rating agencies. The following table presents the principal and fair values of our outstanding debt as of December 31, 2020:
Commodity Derivative Contracts
We enter into oil derivative contracts to provide an economic hedge of our exposure to commodity price risk associated with anticipated future oil production and to provide more certainty to our future cash flows. We do not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for trading purposes. Generally, these contracts have consisted of various combinations of price floors, collars, three-way collars, fixed-price swaps, fixed-price swaps enhanced with a sold put, and basis swaps. The production that we hedge has varied from year to year depending on our levels of debt, financial strength, and expectation of future commodity prices. Depending on market conditions, we may continue to add to our existing 2021 and 2022 hedges. See also Note 12, Commodity Derivative Contracts, and Note 13, Fair Value Measurements, to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our commodity derivative contracts. Under the terms of our Successor senior secured bank credit facility, by December 31, 2020, we were required to have hedges in place covering a minimum of 65% of our anticipated crude oil production for the first twelve calendar months between August 1, 2020 through July 31, 2021 and 35% of our anticipated crude oil production for the second twelve month period between August 1, 2021 through July 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the hedging requirements of our Successor Bank Credit Agreement.
All of the mark-to-market valuations used for our commodity derivatives are provided by external sources. We manage and control market and counterparty credit risk through established internal control procedures that are reviewed on an ongoing basis. We attempt to minimize credit risk exposure to counterparties through formal credit policies, monitoring procedures and diversification. All of our commodity derivative contracts are with parties that are lenders under our senior secured bank credit facility (or affiliates of such lenders). We have included an estimate of nonperformance risk in the fair value measurement of our commodity derivative contracts, which we have measured for nonperformance risk based upon credit default swaps or credit spreads.
For accounting purposes, we do not apply hedge accounting to our commodity derivative contracts. This means that any changes in the fair value of these commodity derivative contracts will be charged to earnings instead of charging the effective portion to other comprehensive income and the ineffective portion to earnings.
At December 31, 2020, our commodity derivative contracts were recorded at their fair value, which was a net liability of $58.8 million, a $62.4 million decrease from the $3.6 million net asset recorded at December 31, 2019. This change is primarily related to the expiration of commodity derivative contracts during 2020, new commodity derivative contracts entered into during 2020 for future periods, and changes in oil futures prices between December 31, 2019 and 2020.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Commodity Derivative Sensitivity Analysis
Based on NYMEX oil futures prices as of December 31, 2020, and assuming both a 10% increase and decrease thereon, we would expect to make payments on our crude oil derivative contracts as shown in the following table:
Our commodity derivative contracts are used as an economic hedge of our exposure to commodity price risk associated with anticipated future production. As a result, changes in receipts or payments of our commodity derivative contracts due to changes in commodity prices, as reflected in the above table, would be mostly offset by a corresponding increase or decrease in the cash receipts on sales of our oil production to which those commodity derivative contracts relate.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles requires that we select certain accounting policies and make certain estimates and judgments regarding the application of those policies. Our significant accounting policies are included in Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements. These policies, along with the underlying assumptions and judgments by our management in their application, have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements. Following is a discussion of our most critical accounting estimates, judgments and uncertainties that are inherent in the preparation of our financial statements.
Fresh Start Accounting
Upon emergence from bankruptcy, we met the criteria and were required to adopt fresh start accounting in accordance with FASC Topic 852, Reorganizations, which on the Emergence Date resulted in a new entity, the Successor, for financial reporting purposes, with no beginning retained earnings or deficit as of the fresh start reporting date. Fresh start accounting requires that new fair values be established for the Company’s assets, liabilities and equity as of the date of emergence from bankruptcy, September 18, 2020. The Emergence Date fair values of the Successor’s assets and liabilities differ materially from their recorded values as reflected on the historical balance sheet of the Predecessor and required a number of estimates and judgments to be made. All estimates, assumptions, valuations and financial projections, including the fair value adjustments, financial projections, enterprise value and equity value, are inherently subject to significant uncertainties and the resolution of contingencies beyond our control. Accordingly, there is no assurance that the estimates, assumptions, valuations or financial projections will be realized, and actual results could vary materially. Among the most material of these judgments and estimates that were made were the following:
•Reorganization Value - The reorganization value derived from the range of enterprise values associated with the Plan was allocated to the Company’s identifiable tangible and intangible assets and liabilities based on their fair values. The value of the reconstituted entity (i.e., Successor) was based on management projections and the valuation models as determined by the Company’s financial advisors in setting an estimated range of enterprise values. With the assistance of third-party valuation advisors, we determined the enterprise and corresponding equity value of the Successor using various valuation approaches and methods, including: (i) income approach using a calculation of the present value of future cash flows based on our financial projections, (ii) the market approach using selling prices of similar assets and (iii) the cost approach.
•Oil and Natural Gas Properties - The fair value of our oil and natural gas properties was determined based on the discounted cash flows expected to be generated from these assets. The computations were based on market conditions and reserves in place as of the Emergence Date.
The fair value analysis was based on the Company’s estimated future production rates of proved and probable reserves as prepared by the Company’s independent petroleum engineers. Discounted cash flow models were prepared using the estimated future revenues and operating costs for all developed wells and undeveloped properties comprising the proved
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
and probable reserves. Future revenue estimates were based upon estimated future production rates and forward strip oil and natural gas prices as of the Emergence Date through 2024 and escalated for inflation thereafter, adjusted for differentials. Operating costs were adjusted for estimated inflation beginning in year 2025. A risk adjustment factor was applied to each reserve category, consistent with the risk of the category. The discounted cash flow models also included adjustments for income tax expenses.
Discount factors utilized were derived using a weighted average cost of capital computation, which included an estimated cost of debt and equity for market participants with similar geographies and asset development type and varying corporate income tax rates based on the expected point of sale for each property’s produced assets. Reserve values were also adjusted for any asset retirement obligations as well as for CO2 indirect costs not directly allocable to oil fields.
•CO2 Properties - The fair value of CO2 properties includes the value of CO2 mineral rights and associated infrastructure and was determined using the discounted cash flow method under the income approach. After-tax cash flows were forecast based on expected costs to produce and transport CO2 as provided by management, and income was imputed using a gross-up of costs based on a five-year average historical EBITDA margin for publicly traded companies that primarily develop or produce natural gas. Cash flows were also adjusted for a market participant profit on CO2 costs, since Denbury charges oil fields for CO2 use on a cost basis. Cash flows were then discounted using a rate considering reduced risk associated with CO2 industrial sales.
•Pipelines - The fair values of our pipelines were determined using a combination of the replacement cost method under the cost approach and the discounted cash flow method under the income approach. The replacement cost method considers historical acquisition costs for the assets adjusted for inflation, as well as factors in any potential obsolescence based on the current condition of the assets and the ability of those assets to generate cash flow. For assets valued using the discounted cash flow method, after-tax cash flows were forecast based on expected costs provided by management, and profits were imputed using a gross-up of costs based on a five-year average historical EBITDA margin for publicly traded companies that primarily transport natural gas.
Full Cost Method of Accounting, Depletion and Depreciation and Oil and Natural Gas Properties
Businesses involved in the production of oil and natural gas are required to follow accounting rules that are unique to the oil and gas industry. We apply the full cost method of accounting for our oil and natural gas properties. Another acceptable method of accounting for oil and natural gas production activities is the successful efforts method of accounting. In general, the primary differences between the two methods are related to the capitalization of costs and the evaluation for asset impairment. Under the full cost method, all geological and geophysical costs, exploratory dry holes and delay rentals are capitalized to the full cost pool, whereas under the successful efforts method such costs are expensed as incurred. In the assessment of impairment of oil and natural gas properties, the successful efforts method follows the Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets topic of the FASC, under which the net book value of assets is measured for impairment against the undiscounted future cash flows using commodity prices consistent with management expectations. Under the full cost method, the full cost pool (net book value of oil and natural gas properties) is measured against future cash flows discounted at 10% using the average first-day-of-the-month oil and natural gas price for each month during a 12-month rolling period through the end of each quarterly reporting period. The financial results for a given period could be substantially different depending on the method of accounting that an oil and gas entity applies. Further, we do not designate our oil and natural gas derivative contracts as hedging instruments for accounting purposes under the Derivatives and Hedging topic of the FASC (see below), and as a result, these contracts are not considered in the full cost ceiling test.
We make significant estimates at the end of each period related to accruals for oil and natural gas revenues, production, capitalized costs and operating expenses. We calculate these estimates with our best available data, which includes, among other things, production reports, price posting, information compiled from daily drilling reports and other internal tracking devices, and analysis of historical results and trends. While management is not aware of any required revisions to its estimates, there will likely be future adjustments resulting from such things as revisions in estimated oil and natural gas volumes, changes in ownership interests, payouts, joint venture audits, re-allocations by the purchasers or pipelines, or other corrections and adjustments common in the oil and gas industry, many of which will require retroactive application. These types of adjustments cannot be currently estimated or determined and will be recorded in the period during which the adjustment occurs.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Under full cost accounting, the estimated quantities of proved oil and natural gas reserves used to compute depletion and the related present value of estimated future net cash flows therefrom used to perform the full cost ceiling test have a significant impact on the underlying financial statements. The process of estimating oil and natural gas reserves is very complex, requiring significant decisions in the evaluation of all available geological, geophysical, engineering and economic data. The data for a given field may also change substantially over time as a result of numerous factors, including additional development activity, evolving production history and continued reassessment of the viability of production under varying economic conditions. As a result, material revisions to existing reserve estimates may occur from time to time. Although every reasonable effort is made to ensure the reported reserve estimates represent the most accurate assessments possible, including the hiring of independent engineers to prepare reported estimates, the subjective decisions and variances in available data for various fields make these estimates generally less precise than other estimates included in our financial statement disclosures. Over the last three years, annual revisions to our reserve estimates, excluding any revisions related to changes in commodity prices, have averaged approximately 2.2% of the previous year’s estimates and have been both positive and negative.
Changes in commodity prices also affect our reserve quantities. These changes in quantities affect our DD&A rate, and the combined effect of changes in quantities and commodity prices impacts our full cost ceiling test calculation. For example, we estimate that a 5% increase in our estimate of proved reserve quantities would have lowered our fourth quarter 2020 oil and natural gas property DD&A rate from $7.37 per BOE to approximately $7.05 per BOE, and a 5% decrease in our proved reserve quantities would have increased our DD&A rate to approximately $7.72 per BOE. Also, reserve quantities and their ultimate values, determined solely by our lenders, are the primary factors in determining the maximum borrowing base under our senior secured bank credit facility, particularly quantities and values of our proved developed producing reserves.
Under full cost accounting rules, we are required each quarter (as well as at the end of the Predecessor period) to perform a ceiling test calculation. The net capitalized costs of oil and natural gas properties are limited to the lower of unamortized cost or the cost center ceiling. The cost center ceiling is defined as (1) the present value of estimated future net revenues from proved oil and natural gas reserves before future abandonment costs (discounted at 10%), based on the average first-day-of-the-month oil and natural gas price for each month during a 12-month rolling period prior to the end of a particular reporting period; plus (2) the cost of properties not being amortized; plus (3) the lower of cost or estimated fair value of unproved properties included in the costs being amortized, if any; less (4) related income tax effects. Our future net revenues from proved oil and natural gas reserves are not reduced for development costs related to the cost of drilling for and developing CO2 reserves nor those related to the cost of constructing CO2 pipelines, as we do not have to incur additional costs to develop the proved oil and natural gas reserves. Therefore, we include in the ceiling test, as a reduction of future net revenues, that portion of our capitalized CO2 costs related to CO2 reserves and CO2 pipelines that we estimate will be consumed in the process of producing our proved oil and natural gas reserves. The fair value of our oil and natural gas derivative contracts is not included in the ceiling test, as we do not designate these contracts as hedging instruments for accounting purposes. The cost center ceiling test is prepared quarterly.
The average first-day-of-the-month NYMEX oil price used in estimating our proved reserves, after adjustments for market differentials and transportation expenses by field, was $55.55 at December 31, 2019, $40.08 at September 18, 2020 and $35.84 at December 31, 2020. Primarily as a result of these commodity price declines, the Predecessor recognized full cost pool ceiling test write-downs of $996.7 million during the period from January 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020 and an additional full cost pool ceiling test write-down of $1.0 million was recognized during the Successor period from September 19, 2020 through December 31, 2020. We did not record any ceiling test write-downs during the Predecessor periods of 2018 or 2019.
We exclude certain unevaluated costs from the amortization base and full cost ceiling test pending the determination of whether proved reserves can be assigned to such properties. The costs classified as unevaluated are transferred to the full cost amortization base as the properties are developed, tested and evaluated. At least annually, we test these assets for impairment based on an evaluation of management’s expectations of future pricing, evaluation of lease expiration terms, and planned project development activities. Given the significant declines in NYMEX oil prices in March and April 2020 due to the oil supply and demand imbalance precipitated by the dramatic fall in demand associated with the COVID-19 pandemic combined with the concurrent OPEC+ decision to increase oil supply, we reassessed our development plans and transferred $244.9 million of our unevaluated costs to the full cost pool during the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Tertiary Injection Costs
Our tertiary operations are conducted in reservoirs that have already produced significant amounts of oil over many years; however, in accordance with the rules for recording proved reserves, we cannot recognize proved reserves associated with enhanced recovery techniques, such as CO2 injection, until we can demonstrate production resulting from the tertiary process or unless the field is analogous to an existing flood. Our costs associated with the CO2 we produce (or acquire) and inject are principally our cash out-of-pocket costs of production, transportation and acquisition, and to pay royalties.
We capitalize, as a development cost, injection costs in fields that are in their development stage, which means we have not yet seen incremental oil production due to the CO2 injections (i.e., a production response). These capitalized development costs will be included in our unevaluated property costs until we are able to recognize proved oil reserves associated with the development project. After we see a production response to the CO2 injections (i.e., the production stage), injection costs will be expensed as incurred, and any previously deferred unevaluated development costs will become subject to depletion. We capitalized $2.3 million of tertiary injection costs associated with our tertiary projects during the Successor period from September 19, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and $16.2 million during the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020, and we capitalized an additional $19.1 million and $24.5 million during 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Income Taxes
We make certain estimates and judgments in determining our income tax expense for financial reporting purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the calculation of certain tax assets and liabilities that arise from differences in the timing and recognition of revenue and expense for tax and financial reporting purposes. Our federal and state income tax returns are generally not prepared or filed before the consolidated financial statements are prepared; therefore, we estimate the tax basis of our assets and liabilities at the end of each period as well as the effects of tax rate changes, tax credits and net operating loss carryforwards. Adjustments related to these estimates are recorded in our tax provision in the period in which we finalize our income tax returns. Further, we must assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover or utilize our deferred tax assets. If recovery is not likely, we must record a valuation allowance against such deferred tax assets for the amount we would not expect to recover, which would result in an increase to our income tax expense. As of December 31, 2020, we had tax valuation allowances totaling $129.4 million to reduce the carrying value of deferred tax assets related to our federal and state deferred tax assets. As of December 31, 2019, we had tax valuation allowances totaling $77.2 million to reduce the carrying value of deferred tax assets related to our disallowed business interest expense and state deferred income tax assets, and as of December 31, 2018, valuation allowances totaling $51.1 million to reduce the carrying value of our state deferred income tax assets. The valuation allowances will remain until the realization of future deferred tax benefits are more likely than not to become utilized. A 1% increase in our statutory tax rate would have increased our calculated income tax expense (benefit) by approximately ($0.5 million) during the Successor period from September 19, 2020 through December 31, 2020, although any change would be offset by a corresponding change in our valuation allowance, ($18.5 million) during the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 through September 18, 2020, and $3.2 million and $4.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. See Note 9, Income Taxes, to the consolidated financial statements and Results of Operations - Income Taxes above for further information concerning our income taxes.
Fair Value Estimates
The FASC defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and requires disclosures about fair value measurements. It does not require us to make any new fair value measurements, but rather establishes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to the valuation techniques used to measure fair value. Level 1 inputs are given the highest priority in the fair value hierarchy, as they represent observable inputs that reflect unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets as of the reporting date, while Level 3 inputs are given the lowest priority, as they represent unobservable inputs that are not corroborated by market data. Valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs are favored. See Note 13, Fair Value Measurements, to the consolidated financial statements for disclosures regarding our recurring fair value measurements.
Significant uses of fair value measurements include:
•valuation of the Company’s assets, liabilities and equity upon application of fresh start accounting (see Fresh Start Accounting above);
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
•assessment of impairment of long-lived assets; and
•recorded value of commodity derivative instruments.
Impairment Assessment of Long-Lived Assets
We test long-lived assets that are not subject to our quarterly full cost pool ceiling test for impairment, including a portion of our capitalized CO2 properties and pipelines, and long-term contracts to sell CO2 to industrial customers, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The factors we assess to determine if a long-lived asset impairment test is necessary include, among other factors, a significant adverse change in the business climate that could affect the value of a long-lived asset, a significant decrease in the market price of an asset group, a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which a long-lived asset (asset group) is being used or in its physical condition, or a current-period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a projection or forecast that demonstrates continuing losses associated with the use of a long-lived asset (asset group).
We perform our long-lived asset impairment test by comparing the net carrying costs of our long-lived asset groups to the respective expected future undiscounted net cash flows that are supported by these long-lived assets which include production of our probable and possible oil and natural gas reserves. If the undiscounted net cash flows are below the net carrying costs for an asset group, we must record an impairment loss by the amount, if any, that net carrying costs exceed the fair value of the long-lived asset group. Significant assumptions impacting expected future undiscounted net cash flows include projections of future oil and natural gas prices, projections of estimated quantities of oil and natural gas reserves, projections of future rates of production, timing and amount of future development and operating costs, projected availability and cost of CO2, projected recovery factors of tertiary reserves and risk-adjustment factors applied to the cash flows. Given the significant declines in NYMEX oil prices to approximately $20 per Bbl in late March 2020 due to OPEC supply pressures and a reduction in worldwide oil demand amid the COVID-19 pandemic, we performed a long-lived asset impairment test for our two long-lived asset groups (Gulf Coast and Rocky Mountain region) as of March 31, 2020 (Predecessor). We performed a qualitative assessment as of June 30, 2020 and September 18, 2020 (Predecessor periods) and determined there were no material changes to our key cash flow assumptions and no triggering events since the analysis performed as of March 31, 2020; therefore, no impairment test was performed for the second quarter of 2020 or for the period ending September 18, 2020. Upon emergence from bankruptcy, the Company adopted fresh start accounting which resulted in our long-lived assets being recorded at their fair value at the Emergence Date (see Note 2, Fresh Start Accounting, for additional information). We performed a qualitative assessment as of December 31, 2020 (Successor period) and determined there were no material changes to our key cash flow assumptions and no triggering events since the Company’s assets were revalued in fresh start accounting as of September 18, 2020; therefore, no impairment test was performed for the fourth quarter of 2020.
Commodity Derivative Contracts
Historically, we have entered into oil and natural gas derivative contracts to provide an economic hedge of our exposure to commodity price risk associated with anticipated future oil and natural gas production and to provide more certainty to our future cash flows. We do not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for trading purposes. Generally, these contracts have consisted of various combinations of price floors, collars, three-way collars, fixed-price swaps, fixed-price swaps enhanced with a sold put, and basis swaps. Our derivative financial instruments are recorded on the balance sheet as either an asset or liability measured at fair value. The valuation methods used to measure the fair values of these assets and liabilities require considerable management judgment and estimates to derive the inputs necessary to determine fair value estimates, such as forward prices for commodities, interest rates, volatility factors and credit worthiness, as well as other relevant economic measures. We do not apply hedge accounting to our commodity derivative contracts under the FASC Derivatives and Hedging topic; accordingly, changes in the fair value of these instruments are recognized in earnings instead of charging the effective portion to other comprehensive income and the ineffective portion to earnings. While we may experience more volatility in our net income (loss) than if we were to apply hedge accounting treatment as permitted by the FASC Derivatives and Hedging topic, we believe that for us, the benefits associated with applying hedge accounting do not outweigh the cost, time and effort to comply with hedge accounting. We estimate that a 10% increase in NYMEX oil futures prices as of December 31, 2020 would increase our estimated payments on our crude oil derivative contracts by $55 million, and a 10% decrease in NYMEX oil futures prices would reduce our estimated payments by $55 million.
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Use of Estimates
See Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of our use of estimates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURE AND RECONCILIATION
Reconciliation of Standardized Measure to PV-10 Value
PV-10 Value is a non-GAAP measure and is different from the Standardized Measure in that PV-10 Value is a pre-tax number and the Standardized Measure is an after-tax number. The information used to calculate PV-10 Value is derived directly from data determined in accordance with FASC Topic 932. We believe that PV-10 Value is a useful supplemental disclosure to the Standardized Measure because the Standardized Measure can be impacted by a company’s unique tax situation, and it is not practical to calculate the Standardized Measure on a property-by-property basis. Because of this, PV-10 Value is a widely used measure within the industry and is commonly used by securities analysts, banks and credit rating agencies to evaluate the estimated future net cash flows from proved reserves on a comparative basis across companies or specific properties. PV-10 Value is commonly used by us and others in our industry to evaluate properties that are bought and sold, to assess the potential return on investment in our oil and natural gas properties, and to perform our impairment testing of oil and natural gas properties. PV-10 Value is not a measure of financial or operating performance under GAAP, nor should it be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the Standardized Measure. Our PV-10 Value and the Standardized Measure do not purport to represent the fair value of our oil and natural gas reserves. See also Glossary and Selected Abbreviations for the definition of “PV-10 Value” and Supplemental Oil and Natural Gas Disclosures (Unaudited) to the consolidated financial statements for additional disclosures about the Standardized Measure.
The following table provides a reconciliation of the Standardized Measure to PV-10 Value for the periods indicated:
FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
The data and/or statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K that are not historical facts, including, but not limited to, statements found in the sections entitled “Business and Properties” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” are forward-looking statements, as that term is defined in Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Such forward-looking statements may be or may concern, among other things, our ability to capitalize on emerging from bankruptcy and our ability to succeed on a long-term basis, the extent and length of the drop in worldwide oil demand due to the COVID-19 coronavirus, financial forecasts, future hydrocarbon prices and their volatility, current or future liquidity sources or their adequacy to support our anticipated future activities, possible future write-downs of oil and natural gas reserves, together with assumptions based on current and projected production levels, oil and gas prices and oilfield costs, current or future expectations or estimations of our cash flows or the impact of changes in commodity prices on cash flows, availability of capital, borrowing capacity, price and availability of advantageous commodity derivative contracts or the predicted cash flow benefits therefrom, forecasted capital expenditures, drilling activity or methods, including the timing and location thereof, the nature of any future asset purchases or sales or the timing or proceeds thereof, estimated timing of commencement of CO2 flooding of particular fields or areas, including Cedar Creek Anticline (“CCA”), or the availability of capital for CCA pipeline construction, or its ultimate cost or date of completion, timing of CO2 injections and initial production responses in tertiary
Denbury Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
flooding projects, development activities, finding costs, anticipated future cost savings, capital budgets, interpretation or prediction of formation details, production rates and volumes or forecasts thereof, hydrocarbon reserve quantities and values, CO2 reserves and supply and their availability, potential reserves, barrels or percentages of recoverable original oil in place, the impact of regulatory rulings or changes, outcomes of pending litigation, prospective legislation affecting the oil and gas industry, environmental regulations, mark-to-market values, competition, rates of return, estimated costs, changes in costs, future capital expenditures and overall economics, worldwide economic conditions, and other variables surrounding operations and future plans. Such forward-looking statements generally are accompanied by words such as “plan,” “estimate,” “expect,” “predict,” “forecast,” “to our knowledge,” “anticipate,” “projected,” “preliminary,” “should,” “assume,” “believe,” “may” or other words that convey, or are intended to convey, the uncertainty of future events or outcomes. Such forward-looking information is based upon management’s current plans, expectations, estimates, and assumptions and is subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that could significantly and adversely affect current plans, anticipated actions, the timing of such actions and our financial condition and results of operations. As a consequence, actual results may differ materially from expectations, estimates or assumptions expressed in or implied by any forward-looking statements made by us or on our behalf. Among the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially are fluctuations in worldwide oil prices or in U.S. oil prices and consequently in the prices received or demand for our oil and natural gas; decisions as to production levels and/or pricing by OPEC or production levels by U.S. shale producers in future periods; levels of future capital expenditures; success of our risk management techniques; accuracy of our cost estimates; access to and terms of credit in the commercial banking or other debt markets; fluctuations in the prices of goods and services; the uncertainty of drilling results and reserve estimates; operating hazards and remediation costs; disruption of operations and damages from well incidents, hurricanes, tropical storms, floods, forest fires, or other natural occurrences; acquisition risks; requirements for capital or its availability; conditions in the worldwide financial, trade and credit markets; general economic conditions; competition; government regulations, including changes in tax or environmental laws or regulations; and unexpected delays, as well as the risks and uncertainties inherent in oil and gas drilling and production activities or that are otherwise discussed in this annual report, including, without limitation, the portions referenced above, and the uncertainties set forth from time to time in our other public reports, filings and public statements.
Denbury Inc.