Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our financial statements, including the notes thereto, included in this Report. Some of the information contained in this Report may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1933, as amended (the “Act”) and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). This information may involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by any forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements which involve assumptions and describe our future plans, strategies and expectations, are generally identifiable by the use of the words “may,” “will,” “should,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “intend” or “project” or the negative of these words or other variations on these words or comparable terminology. These forward-looking statements are based on assumptions that may be incorrect, and there can be no assurance that the projections included in these forward-looking statements will come to pass. Our actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. We undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements for any reason, even if new information becomes available or other events occur in the future.
Our Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm’s report contains a statement that our net loss and limited working capital raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our independent registered public accountants have stated in their report (included in Item 8. Financial Statements) that our significant operating losses and working capital deficit raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We incurred net income of $1,221 for the year ended June 30, 2021 and net loss of $2,477,557 during the year ended June 30, 2020. Although the Company continues to rely on equity and debt investors to finance its losses, it is implementing plans to achieve cost savings and other strategic objectives to address Company profitability. In addition to raising debt and equity financing, the Company continues to focus on growing the subsidiaries anticipated to be most profitable while reducing investments in areas that are not expected to have long-term benefits. The Company will continue to pursue synergistic opportunities to enhance its business portfolio.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth the results of our operations for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:
Revenues and Cost of Revenues
Revenues as attributable to each entity were as follows:
The acquisition of Prakat occurred in January 2020, and revenue was generated from the date of acquisition until June 30, 2020, whereas for fiscal 2021, revenue was recorded for an entire fiscal year. Dalrada Health’s sales activity picked up in 2020 when the Company acquired Shark Technologies and launched its GlanHealth product line. The acquisition of Shark Technologies occurred in March of 2020, and revenue was generated from the date of acquisition until June 30, 2020, whereas for fiscal 2021, revenue was recorded for an entire fiscal year. Likido’s revenue increased during 2021 as it was primarily an R&D entity during fiscal 2020.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $9,504,869 compared to operating expenses of $3,241,335 during the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of $6,263,534. The increase in operating expenses was due to an increase in the operating activity as most of fiscal 2020 was spent on the continuing development of the Company’s proposed business operations. The increase was also partially attributable to non-cash stock compensation, the continued development and commercialization of the Likido operation and new business units.
Other Income (Expense)
During the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized $670,272 and $768,361, respectively, of penalties and interest within interest expense on the consolidated statements of operations. For years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized $9,504,041 and $1,229,199, respectively, within “Gain on expiration of accrued payroll taxes” as a result of quarterly tax liabilities that expired during the fiscal years.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $1,221 compared to a net loss of $2,477,557 during the year ended June 30, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of June 30, 2021, the Company had current assets of $1,640,511 and current liabilities of $17,264,374 compared with current assets of $1,251,537 and current liabilities of $17,029,243 at June 30, 2020. The decrease in the working capital deficit was due to the fact that the Company recovered tax liability during the year which was used to offset outstanding obligations. Cash presently on hand is immaterial. The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent upon the successful financing through equity and/or debt investors and growing the subsidiaries anticipated to be profitable while reducing investments in areas that are not expected to have long-term benefits. The Company anticipates an increase in sales through the commercialization of the Likido heating and cooling units, the expansion of Prakat’s technology services, IHG’s increased educational footprint, additional GlanHealth sales channels and other new business opportunities (see “Subsequent Events”). These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
Cash flow from Operating Activities
During the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company used $5,583,788 of cash for operating activities compared to $2,392,446 used during the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in the use of cash for operating activities was primarily due to an overall increase in day-to-day operating costs while the Company continues to grow in addition to its new business units.
Cash flow from Investing Activities
During the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company purchased equipment for $357,691. During the year ended June 30, 2020 the Company purchased equipment for $194,073.
Cash flow from Financing Activities
During the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company received proceeds of $5,967,054 from the issuance of related party notes payables compared to $2,393,232 received from notes payables during the year ended June 30, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Subsequent Events
On August 4, 2021, the Company issued 87,500 shares of common stock as part of the consideration for the acquisition of Pacific Stem.
On August 10, 2021, the Company issued 125,000 shares of common stock as part of the consideration for the acquisition of IHG.
On August 16, 2021, the Company issued and aggregate of 2,000,000 shares of common stock to four new directors pursuant to Amendment No.1 of the 2020 Stock Compensation Plan used to compensate the company board of directors. The Amended plan allocates the issuance of up to 6,500,000 shares. The 2,000,000 shares issued are valued at $0.28 per share or $560,000.
In July 2021, Dalrada, through its subsidiary Dalrada Health, expanded its presence in medical services sector by establishing Sòlas Rejuvenation + Wellness (“Solas”) which provides science-supported, medically backed services, and creates overall wellness programs that are customized to the unique needs of its clients. Solas will be opening its first health services location in October 2021 where it will provide a myriad of health and wellness treatments and procedures.
In August 2021, Dalrada, through its subsidiary Dalrada Health, entered into a joint venture ("JV") with Vivera Pharmaceuticals, Inc ("Vivera") for a 51% ownership. The JV, Pala Diagnostics, LLC ("Pala") is a CLIA-certified diagnostics lab focused on SARS-CoV-2 testing for now with additional testing capabilities to be introduced. Pursuant to the partnership agreement, Dalrada had an equity commitment of $500,000 of which it achieved during September 2021. Dalrada has invested additional funding to continue the expansion of the SARS-CoV-2 testing while commercial insurance and CARES Act reimbursements process claims. Since fiscal year-end, Pala has conducted over 25,000 tests. As part of the JV, Dalrada shall also issue two hundred and fifty thousand common shares (250,000) to Vivera.
Subsequent to year-end, the Company borrowed $366,263 from Related Entity 1, and borrowed $2,206,718 from Related Entity 3.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
We regularly evaluate the accounting policies and estimates that we use to prepare our financial statements. A complete summary of these policies is included in note (1) of the notes to our financial statements. In general, management's estimates are based on historical experience, on information from third party professionals, and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the facts and circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates made by management.
Accrued Payroll Taxes
The total balance for Federal Accrued Payroll Taxes is accumulated on a quarterly basis beginning on their respective quarterly filing dates. Accrued Interest is compounded daily at an Effective Annual Interest Rate of approximately seven percent. The individual quarterly sub-totals have a calculated expiration date of Ten years according to the Internal Revenue Service statute of limitations. This timeline can be extended as a result of bankruptcy or other legal action that is filed by the company (Code 520 per IRS Federal Account Transcripts). Code 520 effectively stops the clock for the Statute of limitations until the Bankruptcy or other legal action has been removed (Code 521 per IRS Federal Account Transcripts). In addition to the number of days between Code 520 and 521, every Code 520 automatically extends the IRS Statute of limitations by 30 days. As the quarterly sub-totals surpass their respective “Calculated Expiration Date” the company removes the liability from the Consolidated Balance Sheets and an equivalent amount is recognized as “Gain on expiration of accrued payroll taxes” on the Statements of Operations. The amount owing may be subject to additional late filing fees and penalties that are not quantifiable as at the date of these consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes and accounts for revenue in accordance with ASC 606 as a principal on the sale of goods. Pursuant to ASC 606, revenue is measured based on a consideration specified in a contract with a customer, and excludes any sales incentives and amounts collected on behalf of third parties. The Company recognizes revenue when it satisfies a performance obligation by transferring control over a product or service to a customer.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates and assumptions take into account historical and forward-looking factors that the Company believes are reasonable, including but not limited to the potential impacts arising from the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) and related public and private sector policies and initiatives. Actual results could differ from those estimates and assumptions. A couple key categories that use estimates are Goodwill, Intangible Assets, and Impairment.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company records stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, using the fair value method. All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are accounted for based on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, whichever is more reliably measurable. Equity instruments issued to employees and the cost of the services received as consideration are measured and recognized based on the fair value using quoted market prices of the equity instruments issued.
Business Combination
ASC 805, Business Combinations (“ASC 805”), applies the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations to all acquisitions where the acquirer gains a controlling interest, regardless of whether consideration was exchanged. ASC 805 establishes principles and requirements for how the acquirer: a) recognizes and measures in its financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree; b) recognizes and measures the goodwill acquired in the business combination or a gain from a bargain purchase; and c) determines what information to disclose to enable users of the financial statements to evaluate the nature and financial effects of the business combination. Accounting for acquisitions requires the Company to recognize, separately from goodwill, the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at their acquisition-date fair values. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the excess of consideration transferred and the net of the acquisition-date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While the Company uses its best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, the estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, the Company may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The Company accounts for goodwill and intangible assets in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”). ASC 350 requires that goodwill and other intangibles with indefinite lives should be tested for impairment annually or on an interim basis if events or circumstances indicate that the fair value of an asset has decreased below its carrying value.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level (operating segment or one level below an operating segment) on an annual basis (June 30 for the Company) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. The Company considers its market capitalization and the carrying value of its assets and liabilities, including goodwill, when performing its goodwill impairment test. When conducting its annual goodwill impairment assessment, the Company initially performs a qualitative evaluation of whether it is more likely than not that goodwill is impaired. If it is determined by a qualitative evaluation that it is more likely than not that goodwill is impaired, the Company then applies a two-step impairment test. The two-step impairment test first compares the fair value of the Company's reporting unit to its carrying or book value. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is not impaired and the Company is not required to perform further testing. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the Company determines the implied fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill and if the carrying value of the reporting unit's goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, then an impairment loss equal to the difference is recorded in the consolidated statements of operations. There was no impairment of goodwill as of June 30, 2021.
An intangible asset is an identifiable non-monetary asset without physical substance. Such an asset is identifiable when it is separable, or when it arises from contractual or other legal rights. Separable assets can be sold, transferred, licensed, etc. Examples of intangible assets include computer software, licenses, trademarks, patents, films and copyrights. The Company’s intangible assets are finite lived assets and are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
Purchase Price Allocation
Upon the completion of a business combination, the consideration transferred as well as the assets and liabilities acquired must be recorded at their acquisition date fair values. Upon identification of the acquirer and determination of the acquisition date, business combinations are accounted for through the preparation of a Purchase Price Allocation (PPA). We take into consideration the five steps when completing a PPA:
Step 1: Determine the fair value of consideration paid;
Step 2: Revalue all existing assets and liabilities (excluding intangible assets and goodwill which are addressed in step 3 to 5 below) to their acquisition date fair values;
Step 3: Identify the intangible assets acquired;
Step 4: Determine the fair value of identifiable intangible assets acquired; and,
Step 5: Allocate the remaining consideration to goodwill and assess the reasonableness of the overall
Related Party Transactions
Related party transactions are conducted with parties with which DFCO has a close association, such as majority owned subsidiaries, its executive, managers, and their families. The types of transactions that can be conducted between related parties are many, such as sales, asset transfers, leases, lending arrangements, guarantees, allocations of common costs, and the filing of consolidated tax returns. DFCO discloses any transaction that would impact the decision making of the users of a company’s financial statements. This involves the following disclosures:
· General. DFCO discloses all material related party transactions, including the nature of the relationship, the nature of the transactions, the dollar amounts of the transactions, the amounts due to or from related parties.
· Receivables. DFCO separately discloses any receivables from officers, employees, or affiliated entities.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740), Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The amendments in this Update simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740. The amendments also improve consistent application of and simplify GAAP for other areas of Topic 740 by clarifying and amending existing guidance. For public business entities, the amendments in this Update are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. For all other entities, the amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and interim periods within fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company adopted this pronouncement on July 1, 2020, and there was not a material impact on the financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, as part of its overall simplification initiative to reduce costs and complexity of applying accounting standards while maintaining or improving the usefulness of the information provided to users of financial statements. Among other changes, the new guidance removes from GAAP separation models for convertible debt that require the convertible debt to be separated into a debt and equity component, unless the conversion feature is required to be bifurcated and accounted for as a derivative or the debt is issued at a substantial premium. As a result, after adopting the guidance, entities will no longer separately present such embedded conversion features in equity, and will instead account for the convertible debt wholly as debt. The new guidance also requires use of the “if-converted” method when calculating the dilutive impact of convertible debt on earnings per share, which is consistent with the Company’s current accounting treatment under the current guidance. The guidance is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted, but only at the beginning of the fiscal year. The Company is currently evaluating the impact the adoption of ASU 2020-06 will have on its consolidated financial position, results of operations and disclosures.
We have reviewed all the recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and we do not believe any of these pronouncements will have a material impact on the Company.
Contractual Obligations
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and are not required to provide the information under this item.