Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis constitutes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K particularly under “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” which immediately follows “Risk Factors.” Unless otherwise specified, references to Notes to our consolidated financial statements are to the Notes to our audited consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and for years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Introduction and Overview
Discover Financial Services (“DFS”) is a digital banking and payment services company. We provide digital banking products and services and payment services through our subsidiaries. We offer our customers credit card loans, private student loans, personal loans, home loans and deposit products. We also operate the Discover Network, the PULSE network (“PULSE”) and Diners Club International (“Diners Club”). The Discover Network processes transactions for Discover-branded credit and debit cards and provides payment transaction processing and settlement services. PULSE operates an electronic funds transfer network, providing financial institutions issuing debit cards on the PULSE network with access to ATMs domestically and internationally, as well as merchant acceptance throughout the United States for debit card transactions. Diners Club is a global payments network of licensees, which are generally financial institutions, that issue Diners Club branded credit and charge cards and/or provide card acceptance services.
Our primary revenues consist of interest income earned on loan receivables and fees earned from customers, financial institutions, merchants and issuers. The primary expenses required to operate our business include funding costs (interest expense), credit loss provisions, customer rewards and expenses incurred to grow, manage and service our loan receivables and networks. Our business activities are funded primarily through consumer deposits, securitization of loan receivables and the issuance of unsecured debt.
Change in Accounting Principle
Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments became effective for us on January 1, 2020. The standard significantly amended accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) by replacing the incurred loss model with the current expected credit loss ("CECL") approach. The CECL approach requires our allowance for credit losses to be based on an estimate of all anticipated credit losses over the remaining expected life of all of the loans, as opposed to an estimate of incurred losses as of the balance sheet date. For additional information on CECL, see Note 1: Background and Basis of Presentation to our consolidated financial statements.
The ASU required modified-retrospective application, meaning a cumulative-effect adjustment was recorded on January 1, 2020, without adjusting comparative prior periods. This cumulative-effect adjustment did not reflect the economic disruption resulting from the coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) pandemic since the global disruption occurred subsequent to January 1, 2020. As a result of adoption, we recorded:
•A $2.5 billion increase to the allowance for credit losses on loan receivables primarily representing the adjustment for recording reserves for expected losses, not simply those deemed to be already incurred, and extending the loss estimate period over the entire life of the loan;
•A $0.6 billion increase to other assets related to deferred tax assets on the larger allowance for credit losses;
•An offsetting $1.9 billion decrease, net of tax, to the opening balance of retained earnings; and
•Immaterial adjustments to the following:
•The carrying value of Purchased Credit-Deteriorated (“PCD”) loans and related accrued interest reflected in other assets; and
•Accrued expenses and other liabilities to record reserves for unfunded commitments.
As required by the ASU, financial statement results and balances prior to January 1, 2020, have not been retrospectively adjusted to reflect the amendments in ASU No. 2016-13. Therefore, current period results and balances are not comparable to prior period amounts, particularly with regard to the provision and allowance for credit losses (and their related subtotals).
Additional Information for Comparability
To help investors understand our year-over-year performance, we are providing adjusted prior year allowance for credit losses and related allowance build figures using the CECL approach for comparative purposes. These adjusted prior year figures are non-GAAP financial measures and should be viewed in addition to, not as a substitute for, our reported results. We believe that these adjusted figures are useful to investors since credit losses were estimated using the incurred loss approach prior to adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020. The adjusted allowance and related build figures provide investors with comparable amounts to understand our results.
The following table provides a reconciliation of prior year allowance for credit losses figures as reported (using the incurred loss approach) to adjusted allowance for credit losses using the CECL approach, as well as related allowance build figures (dollars in millions):
(1)Represents adjustment for recording reserves for expected losses, not simply those deemed to be already incurred, and extending the loss estimate period over the entire life of the loan.
(2)Calculated as the change in the allowance for credit losses as reported using the incurred loss approach.
(3)Calculated as the change in the allowance for credit losses as adjusted using the CECL approach.
Refer to "- Critical Accounting Estimates - Allowance for Credit Losses on Loan Receivables" for more details on our estimation process and key assumptions requiring significant judgment and to "- Loan Quality - Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses" for discussion of drivers of current period changes in the allowance for credit losses.
COVID-19 Pandemic Response and Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has continued to have a widespread and unprecedented impact on a global scale. The health crisis continues to have a severe effect on the economy and unemployment. The impact of COVID-19 continues to evolve rapidly. Its future effects are uncertain and it may be difficult to assess or predict the extent of the impacts of the pandemic on us as many factors are beyond our control and knowledge. For a discussion of the risks we face with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic, the associated economic uncertainty, the steps taken to mitigate the pandemic and the resulting economic contraction, see "Item 1A - Risk Factors" in Part I of this annual report on Form 10-K. This section includes a discussion of significant areas of potential impact on us of the COVID-19 pandemic and certain actions we are taking or expect to take in this time of uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Outlook and Financial Results
The pandemic has adversely impacted our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year we saw a decrease in sales volume and credit card loan growth as well as an increase in our estimate of life of loan expected credit losses. Due to the economic environment and the resulting pressure on earnings in 2020, we successfully executed our strategy and implemented approximately $400 million of cost reductions off of previously provided guidance from the fourth quarter 2019 earnings release, by targeting areas such as account acquisition costs and marketing expenses. Offsetting these executed cost reductions were several non-recurring expense items in the fourth quarter of 2020 that were unrelated to the COVID-19 pandemic. Outbreaks of COVID-19 have resulted in state and local governments implementing, or in some cases re-implementing, measures to try to contain the virus such as travel bans and restrictions, shutdowns and quarantines. We anticipate these measures as well as the related economic uncertainty will continue to negatively impact consumer and business spending habits and the consumer credit
environment, including the ability of consumers to repay their loans. While certain parts of the United States have lifted these measures, the resurgence of COVID-19 has, and may continue to result in, governments re-imposing restrictions that may remain in place for a significant period of time.
We expect the economic uncertainty associated with the COVID-19 pandemic to continue in 2021. The level of impact on our business depends on the timing and shape of the economic recovery. We anticipate modest loan growth during 2021, the size of which will be dependent on payment rate trends and the timing and pace of the broad economic recovery. Regarding net interest margin, we expect to see continued benefit from lower deposit rates and the maturity of higher rate funding. In terms of credit performance, we expect losses to increase in the second half of 2021. The timing and magnitude of losses could be impacted by any additional government stimulus or material shifts in the economic environment. We remain committed to disciplined expense management and will continue to make investments for profitable long-term growth, including increased marketing as well as investments in core technology capabilities and efficiency improvements.
Regulatory and Legislative
Federal, state and local governments, including the United States Congress, the Executive Branch and independent banking agencies have taken extraordinary measures to support the United States economy and mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and on society at large. These policies have included regulatory relief and flexibility to financial institutions, liquidity to capital markets and financial support to businesses and consumers, including financial stimulus, payment forbearance, small business lending programs, increased unemployment payments and other forms of assistance. Lawmakers continue to offer additional proposals in an attempt to mitigate harm to the economy and consumers. The effects of these programs are broad and very complex and depend upon a wide variety of factors some of which are yet to be identified. Thus, the ultimate impact of these programs and policies on our business, results of operations and financial condition is difficult to quantify and may not be known for some time. For more information, see “- Regulatory Environment and Developments” below.
Loan Receivables
In our loan portfolio, we continue to lend to customers, but have tightened standards for new accounts and for growing existing accounts. Currently, we are providing support to our customers impacted by COVID-19 across all of our loan products to help our customers during this period of economic difficulty. Over the course of the year, we materially increased our allowance for credit losses in anticipation of higher credit losses caused by deterioration in the macroeconomic outlook. Our estimate of expected loss reflected in our allowance for credit losses includes the risk associated with all loans and considers the effects of all loan modifications, including TDRs, loan modifications exempt from TDR status under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act”) and Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) programs. The reserve for the year ended December 31, 2020, also took into account our best estimate for the impact of programs put in place by federal and state governments and agencies to mitigate the economic impact of the pandemic. It is unclear whether the measures employed to date are complete or whether federal and state governments and agencies may take additional action that could impact our business. Refer to "- Loan Quality - Impact of COVID-19 on Loan Quality" for more details on the current period allowance for credit losses.
Capital and Liquidity
We entered the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 with strong capital and liquidity position sized to allow us to maintain normal operations during extended periods of financial market stress and disruptions to wholesale and retail funding sources. Our reserves of high-quality liquid assets and access to diverse funding channels allowed us to refrain from issuing debt while certain wholesale funding markets experienced disruptions and wider credit spreads, particularly during the second quarter. Moreover, our direct-to-consumer balance increased substantially during the second and third quarters as investors sought safer assets. Consequently, our cash and other liquid assets balances have increased materially since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, curtailing our need for wholesale funding.
We remain well-capitalized with capital ratios in excess of regulatory minimums and have taken prudent actions to preserve capital and augment our capital when the macroeconomic and operating environment turned uncertain. Of note, we suspended our plans to purchase shares of our common stock through the end of 2020, took actions to reduce our exposure to higher-risk segments of our credit portfolio and issued preferred stock during the second quarter of 2020. We have also completed numerous stress tests to assess the impact of a severe economic downturn on our capital and liquidity and maintain ample amounts of both to ensure we remain well-capitalized and funded while continuing to serve our customers and extend special accommodations to those who need it.
For purposes of calculating regulatory capital, we have elected to defer recognition of the estimated impact of CECL on regulatory capital for two years in accordance with the interim final rule announced by Federal banking regulators on March 27, 2020. Pursuant to the interim final rule, the estimated impact of CECL on regulatory capital will be phased in over a three-year period beginning in 2022. For more information on the impact of COVID-19 on liquidity and capital, see "- Liquidity and Capital Resources - Impact of COVID-19 on Liquidity and Capital."
Payment Services
As governments across the United States and the world have taken steps to minimize the transmission of COVID-19, the number of transactions processed on the Discover Global Network has declined overall despite increases in certain categories. Certain negatively impacted categories such as travel make up a small portion of the transactions processed but may have an outsized impact on some of our Diners Club franchisees. The current crisis may result in lasting changes in consumer payment behaviors, such as a shift from credit to debit, a decline in the use of cash, increasing online sales and rapid adoption of contactless payment. As economic uncertainty persists, these shifts may continue to result in changes to the Payment Services segment’s results of operations.
Fair Value and Impairments
With the uncertain nature of the pandemic's overall impact to the economy, we continue to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic with respect to our goodwill and intangible assets, investment securities and other long-term assets and determined that there were no material impairments necessary during the quarter ended December 31, 2020. For more information on the impact of COVID-19 on intangible assets, see Note 7: Goodwill and Intangible Assets to our consolidated financial statements.
Business Continuity and Operations
We have re-opened some of our physical locations with appropriate health safety measures and capacity limitations, including our corporate headquarters. However, we have informed employees that they may continue to work from home and will not be required to return to our physical locations until June 2021, at the earliest. Notwithstanding the shift to work-from-home, our operations continue largely unaffected due to the successful implementation of certain of our business continuity plans. Operational changes necessitated by the rapid shift in employee location have not thus far had a material adverse effect on us or our financial condition; however, the shift has caused us to grow increasingly dependent on third-party service providers, including those with which we have no relationship such as our employees’ internet service providers. For more information on the risks associated with reliance on third-party service providers and the shift to work from home, see our risk factors disclosed in "Item 1A - Risk Factors" in Part I of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Regulatory Environment and Developments
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to dramatically impact the U.S. and global economies. We continue to work with our customers to address their unique financial situations, while balancing safety and soundness requirements. We are in contact with our regulators, who continue to proactively encourage banks to work with borrowers during this time of stress. Among other actions, the federal banking agencies have taken the following measures to proactively address the economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19 outbreak and provide flexibility for banking organizations to work with impacted businesses and consumers:
•Market Stabilization: The Federal Reserve reduced short-term interest rates to near zero and launched numerous programs and facilities, including the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, to increase market liquidity and promote stability;
•Capital & Liquidity Flexibility: Regulatory agencies issued statements urging banks to use their capital and liquidity buffers to continue lending during the crisis;
•CECL: A joint agency final rule on CECL provided banks, such as Discover, with the option to delay CECL's impact on regulatory capital for two years, followed by a three year phase-in of those impacts. The United States Department of the Treasury subsequently released a study on CECL impacts, noting the need to continue to assess and potentially make changes to the standard or regulatory capital requirements;
•Flexibility to Work with Consumers: The agencies issued joint guidance encouraging banks to work with borrowers and provided guidelines for prudent relief programs. The agencies worked with the FASB to provide accounting-classification flexibility for certain short-term loan modifications. Subsequently, the
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (“FFIEC”) issued a statement emphasizing the need for institutions to utilize “prudent risk management and consumer protection principles…while working with borrowers as loans near the end of initial loan accommodation periods”;
•Pandemic Planning: The FFIEC released updated guidance to remind banks of actions they should be taking to minimize potential adverse effects of the pandemic on business continuity; and
•Supervisory Flexibility: Regulatory agencies have indicated willingness to work with institutions to provide flexibility and minimize burdens of supervisory activities, including extending deadlines for data collections.
In addition to the above regulatory actions, legislative action was taken to address the economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19 outbreak:
•CARES Act: Enactment of the CARES Act in March 2020 provided expanded unemployment benefits and direct payments to impacted consumers, and offered relief to consumers through changes to credit reporting requirements and mandated forbearance on certain federally-backed mortgages and Federal student loans. The CARES Act provided the option for financial institutions, including Discover, to temporarily suspend certain accounting requirements related to troubled debt restructurings ("TDRs") and delay the effective date of CECL for the duration of the national emergency. See "- Banking - Capital Standards and Stress Testing" and “- Loan Quality - Impact of COVID-19 on Loan Quality” below for more information.
•Omnibus and COVID Relief and Response Act: Enactment of additional COVID relief in the 2021 Appropriations bill, H.R. 133, in December 2020 provided additional stimulus payments, increased unemployment benefits, increased small business funding under the Payment Protection Program and extended many CARES Act provisions, including those related to CECL and TDRs.
As the pandemic continues into its second year, additional legislative and regulatory action may be proposed and could include provisions that significantly impact our prospects and business practices. The impact of these legislative and regulatory initiatives on us, the economy and the United States consumer will depend upon a wide variety of factors some of which are yet to be identified.
Banking
Capital Standards and Stress Testing
Discover is subject to mandatory supervisory stress tests every other year and is required to submit annual capital plans to the Federal Reserve based on internal forward-looking analysis of income and capital levels under expected and stressful conditions. Discover is also subject to capital buffer requirements, including the Stress Capital Buffer ("SCB"), which requires maintenance of regulatory capital levels above a threshold that is established based on the results of supervisory stress tests after accounting for planned dividend payments.
On June 25, 2020, we received results of the Federal Reserve’s supervisory stress tests and preliminary SCB requirement. The notice indicated that Discover’s capital ratios remain above all required minimums under each of the supervisory scenarios and based on the stress test results our preliminary SCB requirement was set at 3.5%, which was announced as final in a public notice issued by the Federal Reserve on August 10, 2020. However, in addition to the stress test and SCB results, the Federal Reserve also notified Discover that it and all other firms that participated in the 2020 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review ("CCAR") exercise would be required to submit a revised capital plan to be assessed by the Federal Reserve under newly developed scenarios incorporating economic stresses reflecting the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The Federal Reserve notified all firms subject to CCAR that they would be subject to temporary restrictions on capital distributions in the third and fourth quarter of 2020 that restricted most share repurchases and limited dividends based on a formula that takes into account the firm’s average net income over the preceding four quarters.
On November 2, 2020, Discover submitted its revised capital plan as part of the CCAR resubmission process and the Federal Reserve publicly announced results of its analysis on December 18, 2020. The results indicate that Discover’s regulatory capital ratios remained above all minimum requirements under each of the stress test scenarios. However, due to ongoing economic uncertainty, the Federal Reserve has extended the temporary restrictions on capital distributions, with modifications, for all firms subject CCAR through at least the first quarter of 2021. For the first quarter of 2021, provided Discover does not increase the amount of its common stock dividends, Discover may pay common stock dividends and make share repurchases that, in the aggregate, do not exceed an amount equal to the average of Discover’s net income for the four preceding quarters. The Federal Reserve has not yet indicated whether it
will use the recent stress test results to adjust Discover or other firms’ SCB requirement. We will continue to conduct forward-looking sensitivity analysis and stress tests to assess the potential impact of economic changes resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic on capital planning and provide this information to our Board of Directors as well as our regulators.
On January 19, 2021, the Federal Reserve finalized regulatory amendments that make targeted changes to the capital planning, regulatory reporting and SCB requirements for firms subject to Category IV standards to be consistent with the Federal Reserve’s regulatory the tailoring framework. The final rules generally align to instructions that had previously been provided by the Federal Reserve to Category IV firms for recent capital plan submissions. The amended rules also provides Category IV firms with the option to submit to supervisory stress tests during off years if they wish to have the stress test portion of their SCB reset. The Federal Reserve had solicited comment on the need for possible changes to regulatory guidance related to the capital planning process. In connection with the final rulemaking, the Federal Reserve revised the scope of application of its existing regulatory guidance for capital planning to align to the tailoring framework. However, the timing and substance of any additional changes to existing guidance is uncertain.
Consumer Financial Services
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (the “CFPB”) regulates consumer financial products and services and examines certain providers of consumer financial products and services, including Discover. The CFPB’s authority includes preventing “unfair, deceptive or abusive acts or practices” and ensuring that consumers have access to fair, transparent and competitive financial products and services. The CFPB has rulemaking, supervision and enforcement powers with respect to federal consumer protection laws. Historically, the CFPB’s policy priorities focused on several financial products of the type we offer (e.g. credit cards and other consumer lending products). In addition, the CFPB is required by statute to undertake certain actions including its biennial review of the consumer credit card market. In December 2020, certain of our subsidiaries entered into a consent order with the CFPB regarding certain student loan servicing practices. See Note 19: Litigation and Regulatory Matters to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
President Biden has announced that he intends to nominate Federal Trade Commissioner Rohit Chopra to serve as the Director of the CFPB. Until Mr. Chopra is confirmed by the United States Senate, President Biden has appointed David Uejio to serve as acting Director of the CFPB. Under Mr. Chopra’s leadership, the CFPB’s priorities are expected to focus on, among other things, vigorous enforcement of existing consumer protection laws, with a particular focus on unfair, deceptive and abusive acts and practices, student lending and servicing, fair lending and debt collection. These changes to the CFPB’s strategies and priorities and any resulting regulatory developments, findings, potential supervisory or enforcement actions and ratings could negatively impact our business strategies, require us to limit or change our business practices, limit our product offerings, invest more management time and resources in compliance efforts, limit the fees we can charge for services, or limit our ability to pursue certain business opportunities and obtain related required regulatory approvals. The additional expense, time and resources needed to comply with ongoing or new regulatory requirements may adversely impact our business and results of operations.
President Biden’s nomination of a new CFPB Director as well as a new head of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency will also change the composition of the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”). Although the term of the FDIC’s Chair does not expire until 2024, the Board may not adopt and approve her priorities for the FDIC.
Data Security and Privacy
Policymakers at the federal and state levels remain focused on measures to enhance data security and data breach incident response requirements. Furthermore, regulations and legislation at various levels of government have been proposed and enacted to augment data privacy standards. For example, the California Consumer Privacy Act ("CCPA") creates a broad set of privacy rights and remedies modeled in part on the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation ("GDPR"). The CCPA went into effect on January 1, 2020, and the final California Attorney General regulations became effective on August 14, 2020. California Attorney General enforcement for CCPA began on July 1, 2020. The California Privacy Rights Act ("CPRA"), a ballot measure led by the original proponent of the CCPA, passed on November 3, 2020, and largely enters into force on January 1, 2023. The CPRA amends the CCPA to enhance consumer privacy protections and overall brings California’s privacy law closer to the GDPR. The CPRA also creates a new California Privacy Protection Agency. While the CPRA retains an exemption for information collected, processed, sold, or disclosed subject to the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, we continue to evaluate the impact of the CPRA on
our businesses and other providers of consumer financial services or networks that could adversely affect our businesses.
Results of Operations
The discussion below provides a summary of our results of operations and information about our loan receivables as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Refer to our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, for discussion of our results of operations and loan receivables information as of and for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Segments
We manage our business activities in two segments, Digital Banking and Payment Services, based on the products and services provided. For a detailed description of the operations of each segment, as well as the allocation conventions used in our business segment reporting, see Note 22: Segment Disclosures to our consolidated financial statements.
The following table presents segment data (dollars in millions):
(1)Prior to adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, credit losses were estimated using the incurred loss approach.
The following table presents information on transaction volume (dollars in millions):
(1)Diners Club volume is derived from data provided by licensees for Diners Club branded cards issued outside North America and is subject to subsequent revision or amendment.
(2)Represents gross Discover card sales volume on the Discover Network.
(3)Represents Discover card activity related to sales net of returns, balance transfers, cash advances and other activity.
(4)Represents Discover card activity related to sales net of returns.
Digital Banking
Our Digital Banking segment reported pretax income of $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $3.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net interest income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by lower yields and lower volume on credit card loans, partially offset by lower funding costs. Interest income decreased over the prior year primarily due to lower yields on credit cards loans, which was the result of lower market rates, and lower volume. Interest expense decreased compared to the prior year due to lower average market rates and lower funding costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the provision for credit losses increased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, which primarily reflects the impact of life of loan reserving under CECL and a significant adverse change in the economic outlook due to the COVID-19 pandemic. For a detailed discussion on provision for credit losses, see “- Loan Quality - Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses.”
Total other income for the Digital Banking segment decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by a decrease in discount and interchange revenue, other income and loan fee income. Net discount and interchange revenue decreased as a result of a decline in sales volume due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Other income decreased due to a non-recurring write-down of certain real estate facilities. Loan fee income decreased primarily due to lower late fees and cash advance fees.
Total other expense was relatively flat for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Employee compensation and benefits increased as a result of higher average salaries, a larger headcount base, and a voluntary early retirement program which was initiated in the fourth quarter of 2020. Information processing and communications increased due to non-recurring software write-offs and investments in infrastructure. This was offset by a decrease in marketing costs due to COVID-19 related expense reductions in brand advertising for card.
Discover card sales volume was $142.8 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was a decrease of 2.3% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This volume decline was primarily driven by lower consumer spending at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Payment Services
Our Payment Services segment reported pretax income of $172 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to pretax income of $189 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in segment pretax income was primarily due to an increase in segment pretax expense driven by a COVID-19 related non-cash impairment charge on the Diners Club business in the second quarter of 2020, partially offset by gains on equity investment sales during the year.
Critical Accounting Estimates
In preparing our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP, management must make judgments and use estimates and assumptions about the effects of matters that are uncertain. For estimates that involve a high degree of judgment and subjectivity, it is possible that different estimates could reasonably be derived for the same period. For estimates that are particularly sensitive to changes in economic or market conditions, significant changes to the estimated amount from period to period are also possible. Management believes the current assumptions and other considerations used to estimate amounts reflected in our consolidated financial statements are appropriate. However, if actual experience differs from the assumptions and other considerations used in estimating amounts in our consolidated financial statements, the resulting changes could have a material effect on our consolidated results of operations and, in certain cases, could have a material effect on our consolidated financial condition. Management has identified the estimates related to our allowance for credit losses as a critical accounting estimate.
Allowance for Credit Losses
We base our allowance for credit losses on several analyses that help us estimate credit losses anticipated over the remaining expected life of loan receivables as of the balance sheet date. In deriving this estimate, we consider the collectability of principal, interest and fees associated with our loan receivables. We also consider expected recoveries of amounts that were either previously charged-off or are expected to be charged-off. Our estimation process includes models that predict customer losses based on risk characteristics and portfolio attributes, macroeconomic variables and historical data and analysis. There is a significant amount of judgment applied in selecting inputs and analyzing the results produced to determine the allowance. The allowance for credit losses for each loan product type is based on: (i) a reasonable and supportable forecast period, (ii) a reversion period and (iii) a post-reversion period based on historical information covering the remaining life of the loan. For credit card loans, we use a modeling framework that includes the following components: (i) probability of default, (ii) exposure at default and (iii) loss given default, as well as estimated recoveries, for estimating expected credit losses. For student loans and personal loans, we use vintage-based models that estimate expected credit losses net of recoveries over the life of the loans. The considerations in these models include past and current loan performance, loan growth and seasoning, risk management practices, account collection strategies, economic conditions, bankruptcy filings, policy changes and forecasting uncertainties. Given the same information, others may reach different reasonable estimates.
The key assumptions requiring significant judgment in the allowance for credit losses estimate on a quarterly basis include determination of the lengths of the reasonable and supportable forecast and reversion periods, as well as the macroeconomic variables selected for use in loss forecast models. The lengths of the reasonable and supportable forecast and reversion periods can vary and are subject to a quarterly assessment that considers the economic outlook and level of variability among macroeconomic forecasts. Generally, a straight-line method is used to revert from the reasonable and supportable forecast period to the post-reversion period, but in certain stressed scenarios, a weighted approach may be deemed more appropriate. The specific macroeconomic variables most significant to the loss forecast models may change over time, but generally include measures of consumer indebtedness, unemployment, personal income and housing-related metrics.
The overall economic environment directly impacts both the reasonable and supportable forecast and reversion periods, as well as the macroeconomic variables that are used in the loss forecast models. If management used different assumptions about the economic environment in estimating expected credit losses, the impact to the allowance for credit losses could have a material effect on our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. In addition, if we experience a rapidly changing economic environment, as experienced recently under the COVID-19 pandemic, the uncertainty around the credit loss forecasts may increase, both due to the uncertainty of the economic forecasts and the challenges our models may have in incorporating them. See "- Loan Quality" and Note 4: Loan Receivables to our consolidated financial statements for further details about our allowance for credit losses.
Earnings Summary
The following table outlines changes in our consolidated statements of income (dollars in millions):
(1)Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, credit losses were estimated using the incurred loss approach.
Net Interest Income
The tables that follow this section have been provided to supplement the discussion below and provide further analysis of net interest income, net interest margin and the impact of rate and volume changes on net interest income. Net interest income represents the difference between interest income earned on our interest-earning assets and the interest expense incurred to finance those assets. We analyze net interest income in total by calculating net interest margin (net interest income as a percentage of average total loan receivables) and net yield on interest-earning assets (net interest income as a percentage of average total interest-earning assets). We also separately consider the impact of the level of loan receivables and the related interest yield and the impact of the cost of funds related to each of our funding sources, along with the income generated by our liquidity portfolio, on net interest income.
Our interest-earning assets consist of: (i) cash and cash equivalents primarily related to amounts on deposit with the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia; (ii) restricted cash; (iii) other short-term investments; (iv) investment securities; and (v) loan receivables. Our interest-bearing liabilities consist primarily of deposits, both direct-to-consumer and brokered and long-term borrowings, including amounts owed to securitization investors. Net interest income is influenced by the following:
•The level and composition of loan receivables, including the proportion of credit card loans to other loans, as well as the proportion of loan receivables bearing interest at promotional rates as compared to standard rates;
•The credit performance of our loans, particularly with regard to charge-offs of finance charges, which reduce interest income;
•The terms of long-term borrowings and certificates of deposit upon initial offering, including maturity and interest rate;
•The interest rates necessary to attract and maintain direct-to-consumer deposits;
•The level and composition of other interest-earning assets, including our liquidity portfolio and interest-bearing liabilities;
•Changes in the interest rate environment, including the levels of interest rates and the relationships among interest rate indices, such as the prime rate, the Federal Funds rate, interest rate on excess reserves and London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”); and
•The effectiveness of interest rate swaps in our interest rate risk management program.
Net interest income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by lower yields and lower volume on credit card loans, partially offset by lower funding costs. Interest income decreased over the prior year primarily due to lower yields on credit cards loans, which was the result of lower market rates, and lower volume. Interest expense decreased compared to the prior year due to lower average market rates and lower funding costs.
Average Balance Sheet Analysis
(dollars in millions)
(1)Average balances of loan receivables include non-accruing loans, which are included in the yield calculations. If the non-accruing loan balances were excluded, there would not be a material impact on the amounts reported above.
(2)Interest income on credit card loans includes $298 million, $281 million and $241 million of amortization of balance transfer fees for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(3)Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, credit losses were estimated using the incurred loss approach.
(4)Includes the impact of interest rate swap agreements used to change a portion of floating-rate funding to fixed-rate funding.
(5)Includes the impact of Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) insurance premiums and Large Institution Surcharge. As of October 2018, the FDIC no longer assesses a Large Institution Surcharge.
(6)Includes the impact of interest rate swap agreements used to change a portion of fixed-rate funding to floating-rate funding.
(7)Net interest margin represents net interest income as a percentage of average total loan receivables.
(8)Net yield on interest-earning assets represents net interest income as a percentage of average total interest-earning assets.
(9)Interest rate spread represents the difference between the rate on total interest-earning assets and the rate on total interest-bearing liabilities.
Rate/Volume Variance Analysis(1)
(dollars in millions)
(1) The rate/volume variance for each category has been allocated on a consistent basis between rate and volume variances between the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 based on the percentage of the rate or volume variance to the sum of the two absolute variances.
Loan Quality
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Loan Quality
The COVID-19 pandemic and its impact to the economy has had a significant effect on our sales volume and credit card loan growth during 2020. While we continue to lend to customers, we have tightened standards for new accounts and for growing existing accounts across all products.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we expanded borrower relief offerings to include Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) and other loan modification programs, complementing the assistance already available through our existing loan modification programs. The accounts using these modifications as a result of the pandemic impact were evaluated for potential exclusion from TDR status either due to the insignificance of the concession or because they qualified for exemption pursuant to the CARES Act. While we continue to support and provide assistance to all customers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, we are no longer offering enrollments in the Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) programs or loan modifications developed specifically for COVID-19 as of August 31, 2020. While the Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) programs were active, we enrolled approximately 699 thousand customers and $5.5 billion in receivables in total. As of December 31, 2020, accounts actively enrolled in the Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) programs were immaterial. The Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) programs provided only an insignificant delay in payment on the enrolled accounts or loans and therefore those deferrals were not classified as TDRs.
The utilization of these Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) programs had a favorable impact on reported credit performance because, pursuant to regulatory guidelines, accounts enrolled in the Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) programs did not advance through delinquency cycles in the same time frame as would have occurred without the programs. Specifically, current accounts enrolled in the Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) programs did not advance to delinquency and delinquent accounts enrolled in the Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) programs did not advance to the next delinquency cycle or to charge-off. This impact was most pronounced in the second quarter of 2020 when the Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) programs were initially offered; the impact dissipated as enrollments tapered off significantly after the initial months of the COVID-19 pandemic. By the fourth quarter of 2020, there was no material impact to delinquencies from these payment deferrals since delinquent loans were advancing through the delinquency cycles or to charge-off as appropriate after these payment deferrals ceased being offered.
Additionally, certain customer accounts entering loan modification programs during the pandemic were excluded from being reported as TDRs due to relief provided by the CARES Act. As a result, fewer loan modifications were reported as TDRs at December 31, 2020, than otherwise would have been. The payment status of modified accounts excluded from TDR status pursuant to the CARES Act is reflected in our delinquency reporting.
The table below reflects both the new loan modifications reported as TDRs and the amount of new loan modifications excluded from TDR classification as a result of the CARES Act (dollars in millions):
(1) Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) programs were not considered TDRs and therefore are not included in accounts excluded from TDR designation by the CARES Act.
The following table provides the number of accounts that exited a temporary loan modification program that were exempt from TDR designation pursuant to the CARES Act and corresponding outstanding balances along with the amount of the outstanding balances that were delinquent (30 or more days past due) upon exiting the temporary loan modification program (dollars in millions):
(1)Includes balances charged-off at the end of the month the account exited the temporary loan modification program. The balances charged-off were not meaningful for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(2)The private student and personal loan balances that were delinquent were not meaningful for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Omnibus and COVID Relief and Response Act extended the loan modification relief provided by the CARES Act through the earlier of January 1, 2022, or the date that is 60 days after the termination of the national emergency declared by the President of the United States of America on March 13, 2020, under the National Emergencies Act related to the outbreak of COVID-19. As such, reported TDRs are expected to remain lower than they otherwise would have been.
Our estimate of expected loss reflected in our allowance for credit losses includes the risk associated with all loans and considers the effects of all loan modifications, including TDRs, loan modifications exempt from TDR status under the CARES Act and Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) programs. Despite the lower delinquency and TDR trends we have seen in 2020, we believe we have appropriately reflected the risk presented by the accounts using these programs as well as the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers in the allowance for credit losses. Since the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, the increases in the allowance for credit losses during 2020 are indicative of the deterioration in consumer credit we expect related to the pandemic. The year-to-date build in the allowance of $4.8 billion, which includes the $2.5 billion cumulative-effect adjustment for the adoption of CECL, is largely attributable to card loans but includes increases associated with all loan products. Labor markets, historically indicative of trends in credit losses, have been significantly stressed by the COVID-19 pandemic with unemployment reaching levels that are elevated by historical standards. The higher allowance for credit losses reflects our view of this economic impact on our customers. Refer to Note 4: Loan Receivables to our consolidated financial statements for more details on modification programs, TDRs and the allowance for credit losses.
Loan receivables consist of the following (dollars in millions):
(1)Prior to adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, credit losses were estimated using the incurred loss approach.
Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses
Provision for credit losses is the expense related to maintaining the allowance for credit losses at an appropriate level to absorb the estimate of credit losses anticipated over the remaining expected life of loan receivables at each period end date. In deriving the estimate of expected credit loss, we consider the collectability of principal, interest and fees associated with our loan receivables. We also consider expected recoveries that were either previously charged-off or are expected to be charged-off. Establishing the estimate for expected losses requires significant management judgment. The factors that influence the provision for credit losses include:
•Increases or decreases in outstanding loan balances, including:
•Changes in consumer spending, payment and credit utilization behaviors;
•The level of originations and maturities; and
•Changes in the overall mix of accounts and products within the portfolio;
•The credit quality of the loan portfolio, which reflects our credit granting practices and the effectiveness of collection efforts, among other factors;
•The impact of general economic conditions on the consumer, including national and regional conditions, unemployment levels, bankruptcy trends and interest rate movements;
•The level and direction of historical losses; and
•Regulatory changes or new regulatory guidance.
For more details on how we estimate the allowance for credit losses, refer to "- Critical Accounting Estimates - Allowance for Credit Losses on Loan Receivables" and Note 4: Loan Receivables to our consolidated financial statements. The following tables provide changes in our allowance for credit losses (dollars in millions):
(1)Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, credit losses were estimated using the incurred loss approach.
(2)Represents the adjustment to the allowance for credit losses as a result of the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020.
(3)Excludes a $17 million build of the liability for expected credit losses on unfunded commitments for the year ended December 31, 2020, as the liability is recorded in accrued expenses and other liabilities in our consolidated statements of financial condition.
(4)Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, net charge-offs on PCD loans generally did not result in a change to earnings.
(5)Net change in reserves on PCD pools having no remaining non-accretable difference (prior to adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020).
(1)Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, credit losses were estimated using the incurred loss approach.
(2)Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, net charge-offs on PCD loans generally did not result in a change to earnings.
(3)Net change in reserves on PCD pools having no remaining non-accretable difference (prior to adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020).
The allowance for credit losses was $8.2 billion at December 31, 2020, which reflects a $4.8 billion build over the amount of the allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2019. The allowance build across all loan products was due to (i) a $2.5 billion cumulative-effect adjustment for the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, and (ii) a $2.3 billion build that primarily reflects an economic outlook that included the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting economic stress.
In estimating the allowance at December 31, 2020, we used a macroeconomic forecast that projected (i) a peak unemployment rate of 8.7%, recovering to 8.2% by the end of 2021with slow recovery over the next few years and (ii) a 2.7% growth in gross domestic product in 2021. We also considered the uncertainties associated with some of the assumptions used in the macroeconomic forecast, including the amount and timing of additional government stimulus. Furthermore, the estimate contemplated the impact of previous government stimulus programs and other loan modification programs on borrower payment trends. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy continues to cause uncertainty in assumptions surrounding factors such as length and depth of economic stresses and longer term impacts on borrower behavior, which has required significant management judgment in estimating the allowance for credit losses.
The forecast period we deemed to be reasonable and supportable was 18 months for all periods since the adoption of CECL except for the estimate as of March 31, 2020. The decrease to 12 months as of March 31, 2020, was due to the uncertainty caused by the rapidly changing economic environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The return to an 18-month reasonable and supportable forecast period was based on the view that the present macroeconomic conditions will last for a longer period than previously expected. The reversion period was 12 months for all quarters since the adoption of CECL. During the first quarter of 2020, a straight-line method was used to revert to appropriate historical information. In the second quarter of 2020, the high degree of economic stress led us to apply a weighted reversion method for credit card loans that puts more emphasis on the loss forecast model rather than
lower historical losses. For similar reasons, we determined it was appropriate to apply a weighted reversion method for all loans in the third and fourth quarter.
The provision for credit losses is the amount of expense realized after considering the level of net charge-offs in the period and the required amount of allowance for credit losses at the balance sheet date. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the provision for credit losses increased by $1.9 billion, or 58%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The provision for credit losses was determined under separate methodologies for these two periods based on the timing of the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020; however, the largest driver of the increase in provision between the two periods was the significant adverse change in economic outlook due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Net Charge-offs
Our net charge-offs include the principal amount of losses charged off less principal recoveries and exclude charged-off and recovered interest and fees and fraud losses. Charged-off and recovered interest and fees are recorded in interest income and loan fee income, respectively, which is effectively a reclassification of the provision for credit losses, while net fraud losses are recorded in other expense.
The following table presents amounts and rates of net charge-offs of key loan products (dollars in millions):
(1) Prior to adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, net charge-offs on PCD loans generally did not result in a charge to earnings.
The net charge-offs on credit card loans for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to decreased loan receivables, government stimulus and disaster relief programs. The net charge-offs on private student loans for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to the impacts of government stimulus and disaster relief programs. The net charge-offs on personal loans for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to improved underwriting, government stimulus and disaster relief programs.
The net charge-off rate on our credit card loans remained relatively flat for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, as a result of the decrease in receivables year-over-year offset by the impact of improved underwriting, government stimulus and disaster relief programs. The net charge-off rate on our private student loans decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to the impacts of government stimulus and disaster relief programs. The net charge-off rate on our personal loans decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to improved underwriting and the impacts of government stimulus and disaster relief programs.
Delinquencies
Delinquencies are an indicator of credit quality at a point in time. A loan balance is considered delinquent when contractual payments on the loan become 30 days past due.
The following table presents the amounts and delinquency rates of key loan products that are 30 and 90 days or more delinquent, loan receivables that are not accruing interest regardless of delinquency and loans restructured in TDR programs (dollars in millions):
(1)Includes PCD loans for all periods presented.
(2)Credit card loans that were 90 or more days delinquent at December 31, 2020, included $44 million in modified loans exempt from TDR status under the CARES Act. Within private student loans and personal loans that were 90 or more days delinquent at December 31, 2020, the respective amounts associated with modifications exempt from TDR status under the CARES Act were immaterial.
(3)We estimate that interest income recognized on credit card loans restructured in TDR programs was $221 million, $347 million, $180 million, $107 million and $88 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively. We do not separately track interest income on loans in TDR programs. This amount was estimated by applying an average interest rate to the average loans in the various TDR programs.
(4)We estimate that the incremental interest income that would have been recorded in accordance with the original terms of credit card loans restructured in TDR programs was $181 million, $202 million, $137 million, $86 million and $77 million, for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively. We do not separately track the amount of incremental interest income that would have been recorded if the loans in TDR programs had not been restructured and interest had instead been recorded in accordance with the original terms. This amount was estimated by applying the difference between the average interest rate earned on non-modified loans and the average interest rate earned on loans in the TDR programs to the average loans in the TDR programs.
(5)Credit card loans restructured in TDR programs include $94 million, $184 million, $124 million, $74 million and $60 million at December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively, which are also included in loans 90 or more days delinquent.
(6)Private student loans restructured in TDR programs include $6 million, $10 million, $7 million, $5 million and $3 million at December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively, which are also included in loans 90 or more days delinquent. Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, no modifications of PCD loans were accounted for as TDRs.
(7)Personal loans restructured in TDR programs include $6 million, $7 million, $6 million, $5 million and $2 million at December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively, which are also included in loans 90 or more days delinquent.
The 30-day and 90-day delinquency rates in the table above include all loans, including TDRs, modified loans exempt from TDR status and prior modifications which are no longer required to be reported as TDRs. The 30-day and 90-day delinquency rates for credit card loans at December 31, 2020, decreased as compared to December 31, 2019, primarily due to government stimulus and disaster relief programs. The 30-day and 90-day delinquency rates for personal loans decreased at December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019, as a result of improved underwriting, government stimulus and disaster relief programs. The 30-day and 90-day delinquency rates for student loans decreased at December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019, due to government stimulus and disaster relief programs.
The balance of credit card loans reported as TDRs decreased at December 31, 2020, as compared to December 31, 2019, due to customer usage of loan modification programs subject to TDR exclusion pursuant to the CARES Act as well as the exclusion of customer accounts that had previously been classified as a TDR for which the account has been subsequently restructured to a market interest rate and the customer has demonstrated financial stability. As of December 31, 2020, there were approximately $1.1 billion, or 1.61%, of credit card loan receivables currently enrolled in a loan modification program that were exempt from TDR designation pursuant to the CARES Act. To provide additional clarity with respect to credit card loans classified as TDRs, the table above presents loans that are currently enrolled in modification programs separately from loans that have exited those programs but retain that classification.
The balance of private student and personal loans reported as TDRs increased at December 31, 2020, as compared to December 31, 2019, due to increased awareness and utilization of programs available to assist borrowers having difficulties meeting their payment obligations, offset by customer usage of loan modification programs subject to TDR exclusion pursuant to the CARES Act. As of December 31, 2020, there were approximately $101 million and $73 million, or 1.01% and 1.02%, of private student and personal loan receivables, respectively, restructured through a loan modification program that were exempt from the TDR designation pursuant to the CARES Act.
We believe loan modification programs are useful in assisting customers experiencing financial difficulties and help to prevent defaults. We plan to continue to use loan modification programs as a means to provide relief to customers experiencing temporary financial difficulties. See Note 4: Loan Receivables to our consolidated financial statements for further description of our use of loan modification programs to provide relief to customers experiencing financial hardship.
Modified and Restructured Loans
For information regarding modified and restructured loans, see “- Delinquencies,” “- Impact of COVID-19 on Loan Quality, “- COVID-19 Pandemic Response and Impact - Loan Receivables” and Note 4: Loan Receivables to our consolidated financial statements.
Maturities and Sensitivities of Loan Receivables to Changes in Interest Rates
Our loan portfolio had the following maturity distribution(1) (dollars in millions):
(1) Because of the uncertainty regarding loan repayment patterns, the above amounts have been calculated using contractually required minimum payments. Historically, actual loan repayments have been higher than such minimum payments and, therefore, the above amounts may not necessarily be indicative of our actual loan repayments.
At December 31, 2020, approximately $41.1 billion of our loan portfolio due after one year had interest rates tied to an index and approximately $25.5 billion were fixed-rate loans.
Other Income
The following table presents the components of other income (dollars in millions):
(1)Net of rewards, including Cashback Bonus rewards, of $1.9 billion, $1.9 billion and $1.8 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Total other income decreased $138 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily driven by a decrease in discount and interchange revenue, other income and loan fee income, partially offset by gains on equity investments. Net discount and interchange revenue decreased as a result of a decline in sales volume due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Other income decreased due to a non-recurring write-down of certain real estate facilities. Loan fee income decreased primarily due to lower late fees and cash advance fees. Gains on equity investments increased primarily from sales during the year.
Other Expense
The following table represents the components of other expense (dollars in millions):
Total other expense increased $126 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by employee compensation and benefits, information processing and communications and other expense. Employee compensation and benefits increased as a result of higher average salaries, a larger headcount base, and a voluntary early retirement program which was initiated in the fourth quarter of 2020. The increase in information processing and communications was due to non-recurring software write-offs and investments in infrastructure. The increase in other expense was primarily due to a COVID-19 related non-cash impairment charge on the Diners Club business in the second quarter of 2020 and charges for penalties and restitution in connection with the student loan business. This was offset by a decrease in marketing costs due to COVID-19 related expense reductions in brand advertising for card.
Income Tax Expense
The following table reconciles our effective tax rate to the United States federal statutory income tax rate:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, income tax expense decreased $584 million, or 66.5%, and the effective income tax rate decreased 2.4 percentage points percent as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in income tax expense was primarily driven by a decrease in pretax income. The effective tax rate decreased primarily due to tax credits having a higher rate benefit on lower pretax income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Impact of COVID-19 on Liquidity and Capital
We entered the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 with strong capital and liquidity positions sized to allow us to maintain normal operations during extended periods of financial market stress and disruptions to wholesale and retail funding sources. Our reserves of high-quality liquid assets and access to diverse funding channels allowed us to refrain from issuing debt while certain wholesale funding markets experienced disruptions and wider credit spreads, particularly during the second quarter of 2020. Moreover, our direct-to-consumer deposit balance increased substantially during the second and third quarters of 2020 as investors sought safe-haven assets. Consequently, our cash and other liquid assets balances have increased materially since the onset of the pandemic, curtailing our need for wholesale funding.
We remain well-capitalized with capital ratios in excess of regulatory minimums and took prudent actions to preserve and augment our capital when the macroeconomic and operating environment turned uncertain. Of note, we suspended our plans to purchase shares of our common stock through the end of 2020, took actions to reduce our exposures to higher-risk segments of our credit portfolio and issued preferred stock during the second quarter of 2020. We have also completed numerous stress tests to assess the impact of a severe economic downturn on our capital and liquidity and maintain ample amounts of both to ensure we remain well-capitalized and funded while continuing to serve our customers and extend special accommodations to those who need it.
The United States’ economy is recovering from a severe recession as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Considerable uncertainty exists about the path of recovery as the virus continues to spread throughout the United States while vaccines are not yet widely available. As a result, we plan to maintain prudent liquid asset and capital buffers as long as heightened uncertainty around the macroeconomic and financial operating environment persists.
Funding and Liquidity
We seek to maintain stable, diversified and cost-effective funding sources and a strong liquidity profile in order to fund our business and repay or refinance our maturing obligations under both normal operating conditions and periods of economic or financial stress. In managing our liquidity risk, we seek to maintain a prudent liability maturity profile and ready access to an ample store of primary and contingent liquidity sources. Our primary funding sources include direct-to-consumer and brokered deposits, public term asset-backed securitizations and other short- and long-term borrowings. Our primary liquidity sources include a liquidity portfolio comprised of highly liquid, unencumbered assets, including cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and investment securities and secured borrowing capacity through private term asset-backed securitizations and Federal Home Loan Bank advances. In addition, we have unused borrowing capacity with the Federal Reserve discount window, which provides another source of contingent liquidity.
Funding Sources
Deposits
We offer deposit products to customers through two channels: (i) through direct marketing, internet origination and affinity relationships (“direct-to-consumer deposits”) and (ii) indirectly through contractual arrangements with securities brokerage firms (“brokered deposits”). Direct-to-consumer deposits include online savings accounts, certificates of deposit, money market accounts, IRA certificates of deposit and checking accounts, while brokered deposits include certificates of deposit and sweep accounts. At December 31, 2020, we had $63.5 billion of direct-to-consumer deposits and $13.4 billion of brokered and other deposits.
Credit Card Securitization Financing
We securitize credit card receivables as a source of funding. We access the asset-backed securitization market using the Discover Card Master Trust I (“DCMT”) and the Discover Card Execution Note Trust (“DCENT”). In connection with our securitization transactions, credit card receivables are transferred to DCMT. DCMT has issued a certificate representing the beneficial interest in its credit card receivables to DCENT. We issue DCENT DiscoverSeries notes in both public and private transactions through DCENT, which are collateralized by the beneficial interest certificate held by DCENT. From time to time, we may add credit card receivables to DCMT to create sufficient funding capacity for future securitizations while managing seller’s interest. We retain significant exposure to the performance of the securitized credit card receivables through holdings of the seller’s interest and subordinated classes of DCENT DiscoverSeries notes. At December 31, 2020, we had $10.6 billion of outstanding public asset-backed securities and $6.1 billion of outstanding subordinated asset-backed securities that had been issued to our wholly-owned subsidiaries.
The securitization structures include certain features designed to protect investors. The primary feature relates to the availability and adequacy of cash flows in the securitized pool of receivables to meet contractual requirements, the insufficiency of which triggers early repayment of the securities. We refer to this as “economic early amortization,” which is based on excess spread levels. Excess spread is the amount by which income received with respect to the securitized credit card receivables during a collection period, including interest collections, fees and interchange, exceeds the fees and expenses of DCENT during such collection period, including interest expense, servicing fees and charged-off receivables. In the event of an economic early amortization, which would occur if the excess spread fell below 0% on a three-month rolling average basis, we would be required to repay all outstanding securitized borrowings using available collections received with respect to the securitized credit card receivables. For the three months ended December 31, 2020, the DiscoverSeries three-month rolling average excess spread was 13.71%. The period of ultimate repayment would be determined by the amount and timing of collections received.
Through our wholly-owned indirect subsidiary, Discover Funding LLC, we are required to maintain an interest in a contractual minimum level of receivables in DCMT in excess of the face value of outstanding investors’ interests. This minimum interest is referred to as the minimum seller’s interest. The required minimum seller’s interest in the pool of trust receivables is set at approximately 7% in excess of the total investors’ interests, which includes interests held by third parties as well as those interests held by us. If the level of receivables in DCMT were to fall below the required minimum, we would be required to add receivables from the unrestricted pool of receivables, which would increase the amount of credit card receivables restricted for securitization investors. A decline in the amount of the excess seller’s interest could occur if balance repayments and charge-offs exceeded new lending on the securitized accounts or as a result of changes in total outstanding investors’ interests. Seller’s interest exhibits seasonality as higher receivable balance repayments tend to occur in the first calendar year quarter. If we could not add enough receivables to satisfy the minimum seller’s interest requirement, an early amortization (or repayment) of investors’ interests would be triggered.
An early amortization event would impair our liquidity and may require us to utilize our available non-securitization related contingent liquidity or rely on alternative funding sources, which may or may not be available at the time. We have several strategies we can deploy to prevent an early amortization event. For instance, we could add additional receivables to DCMT, which would reduce our available borrowing capacity at the Federal Reserve discount window. As of December 31, 2020, there were $27.3 billion of credit card receivables in DCMT and no accounts were added to those restricted for securitization investors for the year ended December 31, 2020. Alternatively, we could employ structured discounting, which was used effectively in 2009 to bolster excess spread and mitigate early amortization risk.
The following table summarizes expected contractual maturities of the investors’ interests in credit card securitizations, excluding those that have been issued to our wholly-owned subsidiaries (dollars in millions):
The “AAA(sf)” and “Aaa(sf)” ratings of the DCENT DiscoverSeries Class A Notes issued to date has been based, in part, on an FDIC rule, which created a safe harbor that provides that the FDIC, as conservator or receiver, will not use its power to disaffirm or repudiate contracts, seek to reclaim or recover assets transferred in connection with a securitization, or recharacterize assets transferred in connection with a securitization as assets of the insured depository institution, provided such transfer satisfies the conditions for sale accounting treatment under previous GAAP. Although the implementation of FASB Accounting Standards Codification Topic 860, Transfers and Servicing, no longer qualified certain transfers of assets for sale accounting treatment, the FDIC approved a final rule that preserved the safe-harbor treatment applicable to revolving trusts and master trusts, including DCMT, so long as those trusts would have satisfied the original FDIC safe harbor if evaluated under GAAP pertaining to transfers of financial assets in effect prior to December 2009. Other legislative and regulatory developments may, however, impact our ability or desire to issue asset-backed securities in the future.
Federal Home Loan Bank Advances
During the fourth quarter of 2020, Discover Bank became a member bank of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago, one of 11 Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs) that, along with the Office of Finance, compose the Federal Home Loan Bank System. The FHLBs are government-sponsored enterprises of the United States of America chartered to improve the availability of funds to support home ownership. As such, senior debt obligations of the FHLBs feature the same credit ratings as United States Treasury securities and are considered high-quality liquid assets for bank regulatory purposes. Consequently, the FHLBs enjoy consistent capital markets access during nearly all macroeconomic and financial market conditions and low funding costs, which they pass on to their member banks when they borrow advances. Thus, we consider FHLB advances a stable and reliable funding source for Discover Bank for both normal and contingency purposes. We intend to pledge our home loans to the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago and periodically borrow advances against them. Under certain stressed conditions, we could also pledge our liquidity portfolio securities and borrow against them at a modest reduction to their value.
Other Long-Term Borrowings-Student Loans
At December 31, 2020, $130 million of remaining principal balance was outstanding on securitized debt assumed as part of our acquisition of The Student Loan Corporation. Principal and interest payments on the underlying student loans will reduce the balance of these secured borrowings over time.
Other Long-Term Borrowings-Corporate and Bank Debt
The following table provides a summary of Discover Financial Services (Parent Company) and Discover Bank outstanding fixed-rate debt (dollars in millions):
Certain Discover Financial Services senior notes require us to offer to repurchase the notes at a price equal to 101% of their aggregate principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest in the event of a change of control involving us and a corresponding ratings downgrade to below investment grade.
Short-Term Borrowings
As part of our regular funding strategy, we may from time to time borrow short-term funds in the federal funds market or the repurchase (“repo”) market through repurchase agreements. Federal funds are short-term, unsecured loans between banks or other financial entities with a Federal Reserve account. Funds borrowed in the repo market are short-term, collateralized loans, usually secured with highly-rated investment securities such as United States Treasury bills or notes, or federal agency mortgage bonds or debentures. At December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding balances in the federal funds market or under repurchase agreements.
Additional Funding Sources
Private Asset-Backed Securitizations
We have access to committed borrowing capacity through privately placed asset-backed securitizations. At December 31, 2020, we had total committed capacity of $6.0 billion, none of which was drawn. While we may utilize funding from these private securitizations from time to time for normal business operations, their committed nature also makes them a reliable contingency funding source. Therefore, we reserve some undrawn capacity, informed by our liquidity stress test results, for potential contingency funding needs. We also seek to ensure the stability and reliability of these securitizations by staggering their maturity dates, renewing them approximately one year prior to their scheduled maturity dates and periodically drawing them in operational tests and for seasonal funding needs.
Federal Reserve
Discover Bank has access to the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia’s discount window. As of December 31, 2020, Discover Bank had $32.9 billion of available borrowing capacity through the discount window based on the amount and type of assets pledged, primarily consumer loans. We have no borrowings outstanding under the discount window and reserve this capacity as a source of contingent liquidity.
Funding Uses
Our primary uses of funds include the extensions of loans and credit, primarily through Discover Bank; the purchase of investment securities for our liquidity portfolio; working capital; and debt and capital service. We assess funding uses and liquidity needs under stressed and normal operating conditions, considering primary uses of funding, such as on-balance sheet loans and contingent uses of funding, such as the need to post additional collateral for derivatives positions. In order to anticipate funding needs under stress, we conduct liquidity stress tests to assess the impact of idiosyncratic, systemic and hybrid (idiosyncratic and systemic) scenarios with varying levels of liquidity risk reflecting a range of stress severity.
Credit Ratings
Our borrowing costs and capacity in certain funding markets, including those for securitizations and unsecured senior and subordinated debt, may be affected by the credit ratings of DFS, Discover Bank and the securitization trusts. Downgrades in these credit ratings could result in higher interest expense on our unsecured debt and asset securitizations, as well as higher credit enhancement requirements for both our public and private asset securitizations. In addition to increased funding costs, deterioration in credit ratings could reduce our borrowing capacity in the unsecured debt and asset securitization capital markets.
We also maintain agreements with certain of our derivative counterparties that contain provisions that require DFS and Discover Bank to maintain an investment grade credit rating from specified major credit rating agencies. If its credit ratings were to fall below investment grade, Discover Bank would be required to post additional collateral, which would have been $0 million as of December 31, 2020. DFS (Parent Company) had no outstanding derivatives as of December 31, 2020, and therefore, no collateral was required.
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, rating agencies have cited their expectation that the banking industry will experience heightened loan delinquencies and charge-offs given recent deterioration in the labor market. During the second quarter of 2020, Moody’s, Standard and Poor’s and Fitch Ratings affirmed our credit ratings; Standard and Poor’s and Fitch changed the outlook on our senior unsecured credit ratings from “stable,” to “negative,” while Moody’s retained a “stable” outlook on our credit ratings. Our credit ratings and outlooks on our debt have not changed since. A rating outlook reflects an agency's opinion regarding the likely rating direction over the medium term-often a period of about a year-but also indicates the agency's belief that the issuer's credit profile is consistent with its current rating level at that point in time. The table below reflects our current credit ratings and outlooks:
(1)An “sf” in the rating denotes rating agency identification for structured finance product ratings.
A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities, may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
Liquidity
We seek to ensure that we have adequate liquidity to sustain business operations, fund asset growth and satisfy debt obligations under stressed and normal operating conditions. In addition to the funding sources discussed in the previous section, we also maintain highly liquid, unencumbered assets in our liquidity portfolio that we expect to be able to convert to cash quickly and with little loss of value using either the repo market or outright sales.
We maintain a liquidity risk and funding management policy, which outlines the overall framework and general principles we follow in managing liquidity risk across our business. The policy is approved by the Board of Directors with implementation responsibilities delegated to the Asset and Liability Management Committee (the “ALCO”). Additionally, we maintain a liquidity management framework document, which outlines the general strategies, objectives and principles we utilize to manage our liquidity position and the various liquidity risks inherent in our business model. We seek to balance the trade-offs between maintaining too much liquidity, which may be costly, with having too little liquidity, which could cause financial distress. Liquidity risk is centrally managed by the ALCO, which is chaired by our Treasurer and has cross-functional membership. The ALCO monitors the liquidity risk profiles of DFS and Discover Bank and oversees any actions Corporate Treasury may take to ensure that we maintain ready access to our funding sources and sufficient liquidity to meet current and projected needs. In addition, the ALCO and our Board of Directors regularly review our compliance with our liquidity limits at DFS and Discover Bank, which are established in accordance with the liquidity risk appetite set by our Board of Directors.
We employ a variety of metrics to monitor and manage liquidity. We utilize early warning indicators (“EWIs”) to detect emerging liquidity stress events and a reporting and escalation process that is designed to be consistent with regulatory guidance. The EWIs include both idiosyncratic and systemic measures and are monitored on a daily basis and reported to the ALCO regularly. A warning from one or more of these indicators triggers prompt review and decision-making by our senior management team and, in certain instances, may lead to the convening of a senior-level response team and activation of our contingency funding plan.
In addition, we conduct liquidity stress tests regularly and ensure contingency funding is in place to address potential liquidity shortfalls. We evaluate a range of stress scenarios that are designed in accordance with regulatory requirements, including idiosyncratic, systemic and a combination of such events that could impact funding sources and our ability to meet liquidity needs. These scenarios measure the projected liquidity position at DFS and Discover Bank
across a range of time horizons by comparing estimated contingency funding needs to available contingent liquidity.
Our primary contingent liquidity sources include our liquidity portfolio securities, which we could sell, repo or borrow against at the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago, and private securitizations with unused borrowing capacity. In addition, we have unused borrowing capacity with the Federal Reserve discount window, which provides an additional source of contingent liquidity. We seek to maintain sufficient liquidity to be able to satisfy all maturing obligations and fund business operations for at least 12 months in a severe stress environment. In such an environment, we may also take actions to curtail the size of our balance sheet, which would reduce the need for funding and liquidity.
At December 31, 2020, our liquidity portfolio is comprised of highly liquid, unencumbered assets, including cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and investment securities. Cash and cash equivalents were primarily in the form of deposits with the Federal Reserve and United States Treasury bills. Short-term investments were primarily comprised of United States Treasury bills with contractual maturities greater than 90 days but less than one year at the time of acquisition. Investment securities primarily included debt obligations of the United States Treasury and residential mortgage-backed securities (“RMBS”) issued by United States government housing agencies or government-sponsored enterprises. These investments are considered highly liquid and we expect to have the ability to raise cash by selling them, utilizing repurchase agreements or pledging certain of these investments to access secured funding. The size and composition of our liquidity portfolio may fluctuate based upon the size of our balance sheet as well as operational requirements, market conditions and interest rate risk management policies. For instance, our liquidity portfolio grew materially during 2020 as our customer deposits increased and our loan balances declined, reflecting consumers’ response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
At December 31, 2020, our liquidity portfolio and undrawn credit facilities were $63.3 billion, which was $7.0 billion higher than the balance at December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the average balance of our liquidity portfolio was and $24.6 billion and $18.1 billion, respectively.
(1)Cash in the process of settlement and restricted cash are excluded from cash and cash equivalents for liquidity purposes.
(2)Excludes $117 million and $121 million of United States Treasury securities that have been pledged as swap collateral in lieu of cash as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(3)See “- Additional Funding Sources” for additional information.
Bank Holding Company Liquidity
The primary uses of funds at the unconsolidated DFS level include debt service obligations (interest payments and return of principal) and capital service and management activities, which include dividend payments on capital instruments and the periodic repurchase of shares of our common stock. Our primary sources of funds at the bank holding company level include the proceeds from the issuance of unsecured debt and capital securities, as well as dividends from our subsidiaries, particularly Discover Bank. Under periods of idiosyncratic or systemic stress, the bank holding company could lose or experience impaired access to the capital markets. In addition, our regulators have the discretion to restrict dividend payments from Discover Bank to the bank holding company.
We utilize a measure referred to as Number of Months of Pre-Funding to determine the length of time Discover Financial Services can meet upcoming funding obligations including common and preferred stock dividend payments and debt service obligations using existing cash resources. In prudently managing this metric, we structure our debt
maturity schedule to minimize the amount of debt maturing within a short period of time. See Note 9: Long-Term Borrowings to our consolidated financial statements for further information regarding our debt.
Capital
Our primary sources of capital are the earnings generated by our businesses and the proceeds from issuances of capital securities. We seek to manage capital to a level and composition sufficient to support the growth and risks of our businesses and to meet regulatory requirements, rating agency targets and debt investor expectations. Within these constraints, we are focused on deploying capital in a manner that provides attractive returns to our stockholders. The level, composition and utilization of capital are influenced by changes in the economic environment, strategic initiatives and legislative and regulatory developments.
Under regulatory capital requirements adopted by the Federal Reserve and the FDIC, DFS, along with Discover Bank, must maintain minimum levels of capital. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can result in the initiation of certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could limit our business activities and have a direct material effect on our financial position and operating results. We must meet specific capital requirements that involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities and certain off-balance sheet items, as calculated under regulatory guidance and regulations. Current or future legislative or regulatory reforms, such as the impacts of CECL, may require us to hold more capital or adversely impact our capital level. We consider the potential impacts of these reforms in managing our capital position.
DFS and Discover Bank are subject to regulatory capital requirements that became effective January 2015 under final rules issued by the Federal Reserve and the FDIC to implement the provisions under the Basel Committee’s December 2010 framework (“Basel III rules”). The Basel III rules require DFS and Discover Bank to maintain minimum risk-based capital and leverage ratios and define what constitutes capital for purposes of calculating those ratios. Under Basel III rules for regulatory capital, DFS and Discover Bank are classified as “Standardized Approach” entities, defined as United States banking organizations with consolidated total assets over $50 billion but not exceeding $250 billion and consolidated total on-balance sheet foreign exposures less than $10 billion.
As of January 1, 2019, thresholds within the Basel III rules are fully phased in with the exception of certain transition provisions that were frozen pursuant to regulations issued in November 2017. Pursuant to a final rule issued in July 2019, the transition provisions that were previously frozen will be replaced with new permanent thresholds as discussed below. Additionally, on March 27, 2020, federal bank regulatory agencies announced an interim and now final rule that allows banks that have implemented CECL the option to delay for two years the estimated impact of CECL on regulatory capital, followed by a three-year transition period. For purposes of calculating regulatory capital, we have elected to defer recognition of the estimated impact of CECL on regulatory capital for two years in accordance with the final rule; after that period of deferral, the estimated impact of CECL on regulatory capital will be phased in over a three-year period beginning in 2022. We estimate that electing this option raised our Common Equity Tier 1 ("CET1") capital ratios in 2020. For additional information regarding the risk-based capital and leverage ratios, see Note 17: Capital Adequacy to our consolidated financial statements.
On March 4, 2020, the Federal Reserve announced the SCB final rule, which imposes limitations on our capital distributions if we do not maintain our capital ratios above stated regulatory minimum ratios based on the results of supervisory stress tests. We participated in the CCAR supervisory stress test in 2020 and received our SCB of 3.5%, which primarily reflects the difference between our actual CET1 ratio as of the fourth quarter of 2019 and our projected minimum CET1 ratio based on the Federal Reserve’s models in its nine-quarter Severely Adverse stress scenario. The SCB became effective October 1, 2020. Under this rule, we are required to assess whether our planned capital actions are consistent with the effective capital distributions limitations that will apply on a pro-forma basis throughout the planning horizon. In December 2020, the Federal Reserve notified Discover Bank and other large banks that it reserves the right to recalculate their SCBs based on the results of the most recent round of capital stress tests. If it chooses to exercise this right, the Federal Reserve will notify those banks of its intent by March 31, 2021. See "- Regulatory Environment and Developments - Banking - Capital Standards and Stress Testing" for additional information.
The Basel III rules provide for certain threshold-based deductions from and adjustments to CET1 to the extent that any one such category or all such categories in the aggregate exceed certain percentages of CET1. In July 2019, federal banking regulators issued a final rule that, among other things, revised certain capital requirements for Standardized Approach banks by raising the 10% of CET1 deduction threshold for certain items to 25% and eliminating the 15% combined deduction threshold applying to these items. These changes became effective for all Standardized Approach banking institutions in April 2020.
Basel III rules also require disclosures relating to market discipline. This series of disclosures is commonly referred to as "Pillar 3." The objective is to increase transparency of capital requirements for banking organizations. We are required to make prescribed regulatory disclosures on a quarterly basis regarding our capital structure, capital adequacy, risk exposures and risk-weighted assets. We make the Pillar 3 disclosures publicly available on our website in a report called "Basel III Regulatory Capital Disclosures."
At December 31, 2020, DFS and Discover Bank met the requirements for “well-capitalized” status under Regulation Y and the prompt corrective action rules, respectively, exceeding the regulatory minimums to which they were subject under the applicable rules. Additionally, we are subject to regulatory requirements imposed by the Federal Reserve as part of its stress testing framework and CCAR program. Refer to "- Regulatory Environment and Developments" for more information.
We disclose tangible common equity, which represents common equity less goodwill and intangibles. Management believes that common stockholders’ equity excluding goodwill and intangibles is meaningful to investors as a measure of our true net asset value. As of December 31, 2020, tangible common equity is not formally defined by GAAP or codified in the federal banking regulations and, as such, is considered to be a non-GAAP financial measure. Other financial services companies may also disclose this measure and definitions may vary, so we advise users of this information to exercise caution in comparing this measure for different companies.
The following table provides a reconciliation of total common stockholders’ equity (a GAAP financial measure) to tangible common equity (dollars in millions):
(1)Total common stockholders’ equity is calculated as total stockholders’ equity less preferred stock.
Discover is required to submit a capital plan and submit to supervisory stress tests as part of the Federal Reserve’s CCAR process. On April 6, 2020, we submitted our annual capital plan to the Federal Reserve covering the period July 1, 2020, to June 30, 2021. On June 25, 2020, we received the results of that stress test. Given the severe, pandemic-induced economic recession, the Federal Reserve required us, along with all other CCAR firms, to prepare and submit a second capital plan in November 2020, in response to another capital stress test reflecting macroeconomic conditions since the COVID-19 outbreak. We received the results of that second capital plan in December 2020. In conjunction with those results, the Federal Reserve extended certain limits on the capital distribution of CCAR banks, as discussed below.
We recently declared a quarterly cash dividend on our common stock of $0.44 per share, payable on March 4, 2021 to holders of record on February 18, 2021, which is consistent with the quarterly amount paid throughout 2020. In light of the current economic downturn, the Federal Reserve required all large banks participating in the CCAR supervisory stress tests to cap common stock dividends at the lower of the prior quarter’s dividend or the average of a firm’s net income over the preceding four quarters. We also recently declared a semi-annual cash dividend on our Series C and Series D preferred stock. The Series C preferred stock pays a dividend of $2,750 per share, equal to $27.50 per depositary share, payable on April 30, 2021 to holders of record on April 15, 2021, which is consistent with the amount paid in the second and fourth quarters of 2019 and 2020. The Series D preferred stock pays a dividend of $4,611 per share, equal to $46.11 per depositary share, payable on March 23, 2021 to holders of record on March 8, 2021. The series D preferred dividend includes a $30.63 semi-annual dividend plus $15.48 for a long first dividend period.
Our old share repurchase program, which had $1.2 billion of remaining authorization, expired on September 30, 2020. In January 2021, our Board of Directors approved a new share repurchase program authorizing up to $1.1 billion of share repurchases. The program expires on December 31, 2021. Our decision to repurchase shares of common stock will depend on our financial results, prevailing and expected economic conditions, potential regulatory limitations and other considerations. For example, the Federal Reserve is currently restricting CCAR banks from paying common stock dividends and share repurchases that would exceed an amount equal to the average of a firm’s net income over the preceding four calendar quarters. Share repurchases under the program may be made
through a variety of methods, including open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or other purchases, including block trades, accelerated share repurchase transactions, or any combination of such methods. Having suspended share repurchases early in 2020 in recognition of the pandemic-induced economic downturn, we repurchased no common stock during the three months ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased approximately 4 million shares, or 1.4% of our outstanding common stock as of December 31, 2019, for $320 million.
The amount and size of any future dividends and share repurchases will depend upon our results of operations, financial condition, capital levels, cash requirements, future prospects and other factors, such as the impact of CECL. The declaration and payment of future dividends, as well as the amount thereof, are subject to the discretion of our Board of Directors. Holders of our shares of common stock are subject to the prior dividend rights of holders of our preferred stock or the depositary shares representing such preferred stock outstanding. No dividend may be declared or paid or set aside for payment on our common stock if full dividends have not been declared and paid on all outstanding shares of preferred stock in any dividend period. In addition, as noted above, banking laws and regulations and our banking regulators may limit our ability to pay dividends and make share repurchases, including limitations on the extent to which our banking subsidiary can provide funds to us through dividends, loans or otherwise. Further, current or future regulatory reforms may require us to hold more capital or adversely impact our capital level. There can be no assurance that we will declare and pay any dividends or repurchase any shares of our common stock in the future.
Certain Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Guarantees
Guarantees are contracts or indemnification agreements that contingently require us to make payments to a guaranteed party based on changes in an underlying asset, liability, or equity security of a guaranteed party, rate or index. Also included in guarantees are contracts that contingently require the guarantor to make payments to a guaranteed party based on another entity’s failure to perform under an agreement. Our guarantees relate to transactions processed on the Discover Network and certain transactions processed by PULSE and Diners Club. See Note 18: Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding our guarantees.
Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities and Commitments
In the normal course of business, we enter into various contractual obligations that may require future cash payments. Contractual obligations include deposits, long-term borrowings, operating lease obligations, interest payments on fixed-rate debt, purchase obligations and other liabilities. Our future cash payments associated with our contractual obligations are summarized below (dollars in millions):
(1)Deposits do not include interest payments because payment amounts and timing cannot be reasonably estimated as certain deposit accounts have early withdrawal rights and the option to roll interest payments into the balance.
(2)Deposits due in less than one year include deposits with indeterminate maturities.
(3)See Note 9: Long-Term Borrowings to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion. Total future payment of interest charges for the floating-rate notes is estimated to be $109 million as of December 31, 2020, utilizing the current interest rates as of that date.
(4)Purchase obligations for goods and services include payments under, among other things, consulting, outsourcing, data, advertising, sponsorship, software license, telecommunications agreements and global acceptance contracts. Purchase obligations also include payments under rewards program agreements with merchants. Purchase obligations at December 31, 2020, reflect the minimum purchase obligation under legally binding contracts with contract terms that are both fixed and determinable. These amounts exclude obligations for goods and services that already have been incurred and are reflected on our consolidated statement of financial condition.
(5)Other liabilities include our expected benefit payments associated with our pension plan, the contingent liability associated with our other investments accounted for under the equity method and a commitment to purchase certain when-issued mortgage-backed securities under an agreement with the Delaware State Housing Authority as part of our community reinvestment initiatives.
As of December 31, 2020, our consolidated statement of financial condition reflects a liability for unrecognized tax benefits of $56 million and approximately $15 million of accrued interest and penalties. Since the ultimate amount and timing of any future cash settlements cannot be predicted with reasonable certainty, the estimated income tax obligations about which there is uncertainty have been excluded from the contractual obligations table. See Note 15: Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements for further information concerning our tax obligations.
We extend credit for consumer loans, primarily arising from agreements with customers for unused lines of credit on certain credit cards and certain other loan products, provided there is no violation of conditions established in the related agreement. At December 31, 2020, our unused credit arrangements were approximately $213.7 billion. These arrangements, substantially all of which we can terminate at any time and which do not necessarily represent future cash requirements, are periodically reviewed based on account usage, customer creditworthiness and loan qualification. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, we guarantee payment on behalf of subsidiaries relating to contractual obligations with external parties. The activities of the subsidiaries covered by any such guarantees are included in our consolidated financial statements.