ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes, and other financial information included in this report.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains not only statements that are historical facts, but also statements that are forward-looking. Forward-looking statements are, by their very nature, uncertain and risky. Forward-looking statements are often identified by words like: “believe”, “expect”, “estimate”, “anticipate”, “intend”, “project” and similar expressions, or words that, by their nature, refer to future events. You should not place undue certainty on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this prospectus. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from historical results or our predictions. These risks and uncertainties include international, national, and local general economic and market conditions; our ability to sustain, manage, or forecast growth; our ability to successfully make and integrate acquisitions; new product development and introduction; existing government regulations and changes in, or the failure to comply with, government regulations; adverse publicity; competition; the loss of significant customers or suppliers; fluctuations and difficulty in forecasting operating results; change in business strategy or development plans; business disruptions; the ability to attract and retain qualified personnel; the ability to protect technology; the risk of foreign currency exchange rate; and other risks that might be detailed from time to time in our filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this prospectus.
Although the forward-looking statements in this annual report on Form 10-K reflect the good faith judgment of our management, such statements can only be based on facts and factors currently known by them. Consequently, and because forward-looking statements are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties, the actual results and outcomes may differ materially from the results and outcomes discussed in the forward-looking statements. You are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in herein and in our other reports as we attempt to advise interested parties of the risks and factors that may affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations and prospects.
Our financial statements are stated in United States Dollars (USD or US$) and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. All references to “common stock” refer to the common shares in our capital stock.
Overview
Deep Green Waste & Recycling, Inc. (f/k/a Critic Clothing, Inc.) (“Deep Green”, the “Company”, “we”, “us”, or “our”) is a publicly quoted shell company seeking to create value for its shareholders by seeking to acquire other operating entities for growth in return for shares of our common stock.
The Company was organized as a Nevada Corporation on August 24, 1995 under the name of Evader, Inc. On May 25, 2012, the Company filed its Foreign Profit Corporation Articles of Domestication to change the domicile of the Company from Nevada to Wyoming. On November 4, 2015, the Company filed an Amendment to its Articles of Incorporation to change the name of the Company to Critical Clothing, Inc. and on August 28, 2017 an Amendment was filed to change the Company name to Deep Green Waste & Recycling, Inc.
Deep Green was a full-service waste & recycling company that managed services to and logistics for large commercial properties throughout the continental U.S. The Company served retail malls and shopping centers, multi-family apartment and townhome communities, hospitals, hotels, correctional institutions, office parks and more. Our unique value proposition was in the design and execution of end-to-end waste management programs for our clients. Our programs not only saved money on direct waste disposal, lower administrative costs and equipment costs, but they also provided income from direct recycling rebates. We had a presence in over 30 states across all regions of the United States and served approximately 300 commercial customers.
On August 10, 2017, our majority shareholder and our board of directors approved an amendment to our Articles of Incorporation for the purpose of approving a reverse split of one to one thousand in which each shareholder will be issued one common share in exchange for every one thousand common shares of their currently issued common stock. Prior to approval of the reverse split, we had a total of 99,997,102,862 issued and outstanding shares of common stock, par value $0.0001. On September 27, 2017, the effective date of the reverse split, we had a total of 99,997,102 issued and 90,697,102 outstanding shares of common stock, par value $0.0001. Please see NOTE H - CAPITAL STOCK for further information.
On August 24, 2017, the Company entered into an Agreement of Conveyance, Transfer and Assignment of Assets and Assumption of Obligations (the “Agreement”) with St. James Capital Management, LLC. Under the terms of the Agreement, the Company transferred and assigned all of the assets of the Company related to its extreme sports apparel design and manufacturing business in exchange for the assumption of certain liabilities and cancellation of 3,000,000,000 shares of common stock of the Company.
On August 24, 2017, the Company entered into a Merger Agreement (the “Merger Agreement”) with Deep Green Acquisition, LLC, a Georgia limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”) and Deep Green Waste and Recycling, LLC, a privately held Georgia limited liability company (“Deep Green Waste”). In connection with the closing of this merger transaction, Merger Sub merged with and into Deep Green Waste (the “Merger”) on August 24, 2017, with the filing of Articles of Merger with the Georgia Secretary of State.
On October 1, 2017, the Company acquired Compaction and Recycling Equipment Inc (CARE), a Portland, Oregon based company that sells and services waste and recycling equipment. The Company purchased 100% of the common stock for $902,700, of which $586,890 was paid in cash at closing and a promissory note was executed in the amount of $315,810. The note pays simple interest at the rate of 7% per annum on the outstanding balance due, amortized over forty-eight months and payable in quarterly installments, with the first payment being due on the first day of the first month following 90 days after closing.
On October 1, 2017, the Company acquired Columbia Financial Services Inc (CFSI), a Portland, Oregon based company that finances the purchases of waste and recycling equipment. Deep Green purchased 100% of the common stock for $597,300, of which $418,110 was paid in cash at closing and a promissory note was executed in the amount of $179,190. The note pays simple interest at the rate of 7% per annum on the outstanding balance due, amortized over forty-eight months and payable in quarterly installments, with the first payment being due on the first day of the first month following 90 days after closing.
On August 7, 2018, the Company entered into an Agreement of Conveyance, Transfer and Assignment of Subsidiaries and Assumption of Obligations (the “Agreement”) with Mirabile Corporate Holdings, Inc. Under the terms of the Agreement, the Company transferred all capital stock of its two wholly owned subsidiaries, Compaction and Recycling Equipment, Inc. and Columbia Financial Services, Inc., to Mirabile Corporate Holdings, Inc. in exchange for the assumption and cancellation of certain liabilities.
On February 8, 2021, the Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary DG Research, Inc. (the “Buyer”), entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Amwaste, Inc. (the “Seller”). Under the terms of the Agreement, the Buyer has agreed to purchase from the Seller certain assets (the “Assets”) utilized in the Seller’s waste management business located in Glynn County, Georgia. In consideration for the purchase of the Assets, the Buyer shall pay the seller $150,000 and issue the Seller 2,000,000 shares of the Company’s restricted common stock. The Buyer shall remit $50,000 at Closing and shall issue the Seller a Promissory Note (the “Note”) in the amount of $110,000. The Note principal shall be reduced by $10,000 if the Note is paid in full on or before March 8, 2021. The Note is secured by the Assets purchased through the Agreement. The transaction closed on February 11, 2021. At Closing, the Buyer remitted the $50,000 payment. On February 16, 2021, the Company issued the Seller the 2,000,000 shares of restricted common stock.
Results of Operations
Operating Revenues
Since our inception on August 24, 1995, we have generated minimal revenue from our operations. We cannot guarantee we will be successful in our business operations. Our business is subject to risks inherent in the establishment of a new business enterprise, including the financial risks associated with the limited capital resources currently available to us and risks associated with the implementation of our business strategies.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we generated $- and $- in revenue, respectively.
Operating Expenses and Net Loss
Our operating expenses were $471,991 and $41,403 during fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We anticipate that our cost of revenues will increase in 2021 and for the foreseeable future as we expand our operations in the waste and recycling sector.
We incurred $0 and $0 in advertising expenses during fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We incurred $149,619 and $0 in officer compensation during fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company anticipates that it will need to expand its management team with future acquisitions or joint ventures.
Loss from Operations
The Company’s loss from operations increased to $471,991 for fiscal year 2020 from $41,403 in 2019, an increase of $430,588.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other income (expenses) included derivative liability income, loss on conversions of notes payable and interest expense in the amount of ($260,579) during fiscal year 2020 as compared to ($50,973) during fiscal year 2019, an increase of $209,606. The increase in other income (expenses) in fiscal year 2020 was largely attributable to the loss on conversions of notes payable and increase in interest expense.
Net Income (Loss)
For the fiscal year ended 2020, our net loss increased to ($732,570), as compared to a net loss of ($92,376) for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $640,194. The increase in net loss was largely attributable to the increase in officer compensation, professional and consulting fees and loss on note.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
At December 31, 2020, the Company had cash of $757 and total current assets of $757 compared with cash of $735 and total current assets of $3,410 at December 31, 2019. The decrease in total current assets is attributable to a decrease in cash at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had total current liabilities of $4,373,037 compared to $4,025,359 at December 31, 2019. The increase in total current liabilities was largely attributable to an increase in the current portion of long-term debt, increase in accrued expenses and accrued interest as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
The overall working capital deficit increased from $4,021,949 at December 31, 2019 to $4,372,280 at December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows
Cashflow from Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company used cash of $131,453 in operating activities compared to cash used of $959 from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used from operating activities was largely attributable to an increase in accrued expenses, accrued interest and loss on conversions of notes payable.
Cashflow from Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company used cash of $- in investing activities compared to cash used of $- from investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cashflow from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $131,475 compared to $- for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company received $123,000 from the issuance of notes payable and $8,475 from officer loans.
We currently have no external sources of liquidity, such as arrangements with credit institutions or off-balance sheet arrangements that will have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition or immediate access to capital.
We are dependent on our product sales to fund our operations and may require the sale of additional common stock to maintain operations. Our officers and directors have made no written commitments with respect to providing a source of liquidity in the form of cash advances, loans, and/or financial guarantees.
If we are unable to raise the funds required to fund our operations, we will seek alternative financing through other means, such as borrowings from institutions or private individuals. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise the capital we need for our operations from the sale of our securities. We have not located any sources for these funds and may not be able to do so in the future. We expect that we will seek additional financing in the future. However, we may not be able to obtain additional capital or generate sufficient revenues to fund our operations. If we are unsuccessful at raising sufficient funds, for whatever reason, to fund our operations, we may be forced to cease operations. If we fail to raise funds, we expect that we will be required to seek protection from creditors under applicable bankruptcy laws.
Convertible Debentures
a) On January 13, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Sylios Corp (hereinafter “Sylios”) wherein the Company issued to Sylios a Convertible Promissory Note (the “Note”) in the amount of $23,000 ($3,000 OID). The Note has a term of one (1) year (due on January 13, 2021) and bears interest at 8% annually. As part and parcel of the foregoing transaction, Sylios was issued a warrant granting the holder the right to purchase up to 262,500 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $0.04 for a term of 5-years. As part of the Note, the Company executed a Registration Rights Agreement (the “RRA”) dated January 13, 2020. Among other things, the RRA provides for the Company to file a Registration Statement with the SEC covering the resale of shares underlying the Note and the warrant and to have declared effective such Registration Statement. In the event that the Company doesn’t meet the registration requirements provided for in the RRA, the Company is obligated to pay to Sylios certain payments for such failures. The transaction closed on January 16, 2020. In addition, 6,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock have been reserved at Transfer Online, the Company’s transfer agent, for Sylios for the issuance upon the conversion of the Note into shares of the Company’s common stock. On March 6, 2020, the Company executed an Acknowledgement of the Assignment Agreement (the “Agreement”) entered into between Armada Investment Fund, LLC (“Assignee”) and Sylios Corp (“Assignor”) dated March 6, 2020. Under the terms of the Agreement, the Assignor assigned all of its rights under the Securities Purchase Agreement, Convertible Promissory Note, Stock Purchase Warrant Agreement and Registration Rights Agreement all dated January 13, 2020 issued by the Company to the Assignee. On March 12, 2020, the Company reissued the Assignee a Convertible Promissory Note in the amount of $23,000 and a Stock Purchase Warrant Agreement granting the holder the right to purchase 262,500 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.04 for a term of 5-years from the original issue date. Please see NOTE F- CONVERTIBLE NOTES PAYABLE for further information.
b) On June 23, 2020, the Company issued GPL Ventures LLC (“GPL”) a Convertible Promissory Note (the “Note”) in the amount of One Hundred Thousand and NO/100 Dollars ($100,000). The Note is convertible, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity (June 23, 2021) at the option of the holder at the Conversion Price that shall equal the lesser of a) $0.01 or b) Sixty Percent (60%) of the lowest Trading Price (defined below) during the Valuation Period (defined below), and the Conversion Amount shall be the amount of principal or interest electively converted in the Conversion Notice. The total number of shares due under any conversion notice (“Notice Shares”) will be equal to the Conversion Amount divided by the Conversion Price. “Trading Price” means, for any security as of any date, any trading price on the OTC Markets, or other applicable trading market (the “OTCBB”) as reported by a reliable reporting service (“Reporting Service”) mutually acceptable to Maker and Holder (i.e. Bloomberg) or, if the OTCBB is not the principal trading market for such security, the price of such security on the principal securities exchange or trading market where such security is listed or traded. The “Valuation Period” shall mean twenty (20) Trading Days, commencing on the first Trading Day following delivery and clearing of the Notice Shares in Holder’s brokerage account, as reported by Holder (“Valuation Start Date”). The Note has a term of one (1) year and bears interest at 10% annually. The Company and GPL also entered into a Registration Rights Agreement (“RRA”) that provides for the Company to file a Registration Statement with the SEC covering the resale of shares underlying the Note and the warrant and to have declared effective such Registration Statement. In the event that the Company doesn’t meet the registration requirements provided for in the RRA, the Company is obligated to pay GPL certain payments for such failures. Please see NOTE F- CONVERTIBLE NOTES PAYABLE for further information.
Notes in General
The Convertible Notes are convertible into shares of common stock of the Company based upon a discount to the market price. The conversion terms of these Convertible Notes are based upon a discount to the then-prevailing average of the lowest trading bid prices (as described above for each separate note) and, as a result, the lower the stock price at the time the holders convert the Convertible Notes, the more shares of our common stock the holders will receive. The number of shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of these Convertible Notes is indeterminate. If the trading price of our common stock is lower when the conversion price of these Convertible Notes is determined, we would be required to issue a higher number of shares of our common stock, which could cause substantial dilution to our stockholders. In addition, if the holders opt to convert these Convertible Notes into shares of our common stock and sell those shares it could result in an imbalance of supply and demand for our common stock and resulting in lower trading prices for our common stock as reported by the OTC Pink Sheets. The further our stock price declines, the further the adjustment of the conversion price will fall and the greater the number of shares we will have to issue upon conversion.
In addition, the number of shares issuable upon conversion of the Convertible Note is potentially limitless. While the overall ownership of each individual Holder at any one moment may be limited to 9.99% of the issued and outstanding shares of our common stock, each holder may be free to sell any shares into the market that have previously been issued to them, thereby enabling them to convert the remaining portion of these Convertible Notes.