ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This section should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, attached as Exhibit 99.1 to this report.
Liquidity, Capital Resources, and Financial Results
Overview
The Company’s intent was and is to construct a casino resort and other amenities on the Diamondhead, Mississippi Property unilaterally or, in conjunction with one or more joint venture partners. However, the Company has been unable to date, to obtain financing to move the project forward and/or enter into a joint venture partnership. Due to its lack of financial resources and certain law suits filed against it, the Company has been forced to explore other alternatives, including a sale of part or all of the Property. The Company’s preference is to sell only part of the Property inasmuch as this would appear to be in the best interest of the stockholders of the Company. However, there can be no assurance the Company will be able to sell only part of the Property. The Company intends to continue to pursue a joint venture partnership and/or other financing while seeking a viable purchaser for part or all of the Property.
Liquidity
The Company has incurred continued losses over the years and certain conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company has had no operations since it ended its gambling cruise ship operations in 2000. Since that time, the Company has concentrated its efforts on the development of its Diamondhead, Mississippi Property. The development of the Diamondhead Property is dependent on obtaining the necessary capital, through equity and/or debt financing, unilaterally, or in conjunction with one or more partners, to master plan, design, obtain permits for, construct, staff, open, and operate a casino resort. In the past, the Company has been able to sustain itself through various short term borrowings, however, as of as of December 31, 2020, the Company had cash of $88,711, while accounts payable and accrued expenses totaled $9,562,809 and the Company had an accumulated deficit of $41,773,364. Therefore, in order to sustain itself, it is imperative that the Company secure a source of funds to provide further working capital as the Company does not have sufficient cash on hand.
Management of the Company believes it will be difficult to secure suitable financing that would allow it to continue to pursue ultimate development of the Property. Therefore, on March 25, 2019, Mississippi Gaming Corporation entered into a brokerage agreement with an unrelated third party to seek a buyer for all or part of the Property or, alternatively, to seek a joint venture partner for the project. The brokerage agreement has expired, but the Company continues to work with the broker on the same terms that applied under the contract.
The above conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
COVID-19
The Company had no casino or other operations in 2020 when COVID-19 surfaced. Therefore, the Company did not experience the adverse consequences that other casino companies experienced from COVID-19 based on their cessation of casino-related operations. However, as a result of COVID, the Company’s sole employee, its President, was unable to travel domestically or internationally to meet with potential investors or potential joint venture partners or to meet with outside, independent contractors. The extent to which COVID-19 may have affected the market for financing new construction in the hospitality, hotel and casino industries given the impact of COVID-19 on this segment of the economy is unknown. The Company did not incur any extraordinary expenses as a result of COVID-19, nor did it obtain any loans under the CARES Act.
Financial Results and Analysis
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company recorded a net loss applicable to common shareholders of $2,325,145 for the year ending December 31, 2020 and a net loss applicable to common shareholders of $1,377,616 for the year ending December 31, 2019. The Company expects continued losses for the foreseeable future. General and administrative expenses incurred totaled $695,056 and $652,882 for the years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The table below depicts the major categories comprising those expenses:
The amount reported as payroll includes amounts not actually paid to employees, but accrued and payable to employees. The Company accrued salary payable to only one employee in 2020, the President and CEO of the Registrant, who also served as a Director, Chief Financial Officer, Treasurer and Secretary of the Registrant and held various positions in the Registrant’s subsidiaries.
The increase in fines and penalties was due to ESOP penalties incurred in 2020. The Company recorded stock-based compensation expense of $831,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income and Expense
Interest expense incurred totaled $625,642 and $599,784 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $25,858. The increase in 2020 is primarily attributable to the impact of accrued interest on unpaid wages which continues to accrue yearly, the impact from new borrowings arising during the year ended December 31, 2020 and amortization of debt discount in 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a $4,200 loss pertaining to the change in fair value of the stock issuance liability.
In the first quarter of 2019, the Company received $36,000 in proceeds from a litigation settlement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Management Agreement
On June 19, 1993, two subsidiaries of the Company, Casino World Inc. and Mississippi Gaming Corporation, entered into a Management Agreement with Casinos Austria Maritime Corporation (CAMC). Subject to certain conditions, under the Management Agreement, CAMC would operate, on an exclusive basis, all of the Company’s proposed dockside gaming casinos in the State of Mississippi, including any operation fifty percent (50%) or more of which is owned by the Company or its affiliates. Unless terminated earlier pursuant to the provisions of the Agreement, the Agreement terminates five years from the first day of actual Mississippi gaming operations and provides for the payment of an annual operational term management fee of 1.2% of all gross gaming revenues between zero and $100,000,000; plus 0.75% of gross gaming revenue between $100,000,000 and $140,000,000; plus 0.5% of gross gaming revenue above $140,000,000; plus two percent of the net gaming revenue between zero and $25,000,000; plus three percent of the net gaming revenue above twenty-five million dollars $25,000,000. The Company believes this Agreement is no longer in effect. However, there can be no assurance that CAMC will not attempt to maintain otherwise which would lead to litigation.
Brokerage Agreement
On March 25, 2019, Mississippi Gaming Corporation, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and the title owner of the Diamondhead Property (the “Owner”), entered into an agreement with an unrelated commercial real estate brokerage firm to sell all or part of the Diamondhead, Mississippi Property or, alternatively, to find a joint venture partner for the project. The agreement provides for an exclusive right to sell all or part of the Property beginning March 25, 2019 and ending October 31, 2019, unless extended by the parties. The agreement provides for a commission equal to three percent (3%) of the gross sales price for property sold if the Buyer does not have a broker or four percent (4%) of the gross sales price of property sold if the Buyer does have a broker, in which case the commission due will be split between the brokers. In the event the Owner consummates and closes a deal with a Joint Venture Partner introduced to the Owner by the broker, the Owner will pay the broker a commission equal to four percent (4%) of the amount contributed by the Joint Venture Partner as its capital contribution. This will not apply in the event the Owner consummates a deal with a Joint Venture Partner who is not introduced to the Owner by the broker. The agreement does not apply to loans obtained by or on behalf of the Owner using the Property as collateral or as security for a loan. The agreement also provides for a reduced commission to the broker in the event of a sale to certain potential purchasers already involved in discussions with the Owner. The brokerage agreement has expired, but the Company continues to work with the broker on the same terms that applied under the contract.
There are no other off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues and expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources, that are material to our stockholders.
Related Party
In July, 2017, the Chairman of the Board paid $67,628 for all property taxes due, together with all interest due thereon, to Hancock County, Mississippi for an approximate 400-acre tract of land (“the Diamondhead Property”), owned by Mississippi Gaming Corporation, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. In 2018, the Chairman advanced additional funds totaling $205,250 to the Company. In 2019, the Chairman advanced additional funds totaling $125,396 to the Company. In 2020, the Chairman advanced additional funds totaling $69,679 to the Company. The conditions of the notes under which the Chairman agreed to make the foregoing payments and advances are discussed in full detail in Note 8 of attached consolidated financial statements.
Of particular note to those conditions is item (v) which calls for the Chairman to be indemnified for any loss sustained on the sale of certain common stock sold to cover the property taxes paid. The Chairman has identified the common stock sold and has provided the Company with the documentation required to document the sale of said stock and to calculate the contingent future loss, if any, on said stock.
Had the Company paid the note in full at December 31, 2020 in addition to the principal and interest due, the Company would not have been liable for any additional funds to indemnify the Chairman pursuant to the terms of the notes.
There are no other off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues and expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources, that are material to our stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of long-lived assets is measured by comparing the carrying amount of the assets to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows projected to be generated by the assets. If such assets are considered impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount the carrying value exceeds the fair value of such assets determined by appraisal, discounted cash flow projections, or other means.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company follows the provisions of ASC Topic 820 “Fair Value Measurements” for financial assets and liabilities. This standard defines fair value, provides guidance for measuring fair value and requires certain disclosures. The standard discusses valuation techniques, such as the market approach (comparable market prices), the income approach (present value of future income or cash flow), and the cost approach (cost to replace the service capacity of an asset or replacement cost). The standard utilizes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value into three broad levels. The following is a brief description of those three levels:
Level 1: Observable inputs such as quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Input other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly. These include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets and quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active.
Level 3: Unobservable input that reflects management’s own assumptions.
Financial instruments included in current assets and liabilities are reported in the consolidated balance sheets, which approximate fair value due to their short term nature.
The fair value measurement of the derivative indemnification liability at December 31, 2020 and 2019 was developed using Level 1 inputs.
The fair value measurement of the stock issuance liability was developed using Level 1 inputs as the liability was valued using quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
In determining the fair value of options and warrants granted or modified, the Company uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, consistent with the provisions of ASC Topic 718. Valuations are determined using the weighted-average assumptions of dividend yield, expected volatility and risk-free interest rates.
Option valuation models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected stock price volatility. The Company uses projected volatility rates, which are based upon historical volatility rates, trended into future years. Because the Company’s employee stock options have characteristics significantly different from those of traded options and because changes in the subjective input assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate, in management’s opinion, the existing models do not necessarily provide a reliable single measure of the fair value of the Company’s options.