ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
In this Item 7, we discuss and analyze our consolidated results of operations for the past three fiscal years and other factors that may affect our future financial performance. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, and Selected Financial Data contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Environment
The performances of the U.S. and international equity markets, as well as the U.S. fixed income market, have a direct impact on our operations and financial position.
Equity Markets
The year 2020 was challenging due to the global spread of COVID-19 and related pandemic. Economic activity ground to a halt as countries hardest hit by the pandemic faced closing businesses, spending declines, and record unemployment levels. Despite unprecedented economic and market disruption, global equities posted positive returns in excess of 16% in 2020 (as measured by the MSCI All Country World Index) and U.S. stocks returned in excess of 18% (as measured by the S&P 500® Index), a remarkable advance given the economic backdrop. Technology stocks were clear winners in 2020 as the work from home era took hold. Online retailers also did well, benefiting from a shift to online shopping in the wake of the pandemic. Energy stocks struggled as oil demand and prices fell on weak economic and transportation activity. In the second half of the year, central bank liquidity, fiscal stimulus, and optimism of rapid-to-market COVID-19 vaccines provided stocks a welcome tailwind.
Fixed Income Markets
Throughout 2020, Federal Reserve and U.S. Treasury intervention played a key role in the fixed income markets. In the first quarter of 2020, the Federal Reserve cut rates in response to signs of a slowing economy exacerbated by an oil production glut as OPEC and Russia failed to come to terms on production cuts. Starting in mid-March, as it became clear the coronavirus pandemic would result in wide scale business shutdowns, central banks globally moved quickly and decidedly to provide liquidity and support while governments directed stimulus support to citizens and businesses facing economic uncertainty. Corporate bond purchasing programs initiated by the U.S. government were barely utilized but served as the impetus for a historic pace of debt issuance in both investment grade and high yield corporate credit markets. The Bloomberg Barclays U.S. Aggregate Bond Index returned 7.5%, second only to 2019 for its best performance since 2002, while the Bloomberg Barclays Investment Grade Corporate Index returned 9.9%, its second-best year since 2009. The ICE BofA U.S. High Yield Index returned 7.1%, rebounding from the worst first quarter’s performance (down 12.7%) since 2008.
Industry Update
Ongoing trends in the investment management industry, including the shift toward private market investments, downward fee pressure, industry consolidation, rising demand for ESG, and expanding conversations around DEI continued in 2020 and do not show any signs of abating.
Investor dollars continue moving toward private markets and less liquid vehicles as investors seek higher returns and lower correlation, contributing to a decline in the number of publicly traded companies. At the same time, investors continue to seek lower cost alternatives to acquire their beta exposure, often utilizing passive exchange-traded funds (“ETFs”), which in turn drives performance of some of the largest publicly traded companies held by broad indexes, making it a difficult environment for active managers to outperform.
The COVID-19 pandemic saw a reduction in travel, which resulted in increased use of technology-based communications. Investors also responded to the pandemic and other social justice events in 2020 by requesting greater clarity on ESG strategies as well as greater transparency on diversity initiatives and commitments.
Consolidation continued, especially in the consulting and wealth management arenas. In fact, over the past five years, we have seen a large number of decision makers leave the market. Some have left the industry all together, some required a liquidity event as a transition of ownership was needed, while others pursued growth and scale via mergers and acquisitions. We
continue to see moves away from individual decision-making structures in favor of decision-making teams or outsourcing investment decisions to professional buyer groups such as home offices or outsourced chief investment officers, and we expect net new flows to be driven heavily by these groups going forward.
When you consider these trends in combination with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the asset management industry’s own life cycle, you get a glimpse into the “new normal” in which asset managers operate. We believe Diamond Hill is well positioned to navigate these changing tides and adapt to the evolving industry landscape. We continue to believe we can deliver market-beating returns over a full market cycle through active management. Our commitment to managing our portfolios with a strict capacity discipline helps protect our ability to deliver excellent investment outcomes for clients. Our long-standing relationships with professional buyer groups enable us to reach investors who share our long-term perspective. Helping clients achieve their desired investment outcomes is our priority, and we believe our commitment to capacity discipline, alignment of interests with our clients and strong investment results will result in a successful and sustainable future.
Investment Results
It is important to note the past decade has seen a lengthy period of dominance for growth over value stocks, with the performance differential becoming particularly wide over the past three years. In the 10 years ended December 31, 2020, the Russell 3000 Growth Index annualized 16.9% versus 10.4% for the Russell 3000 Value Index. In 2020, the growth index returned 38.3% to the value index’s 2.9% - a performance gap that eclipses any single calendar year since the inception of the Russell 3000 Growth and Value indices in 1995. Because of our valuation-discipline, many clients choose to measure performance against value indices.
The following is a summary of the investment returns for each of our equity strategies as of December 31, 2020, relative to their respective core and value indices, as applicable.
________________________
- Composite returns are net of fees.
- Index returns do not reflect any fees.
The following is a summary of the investment returns for each of our fixed income strategies as of December 31, 2020, relative to their respective passive benchmarks.
________________________
- Composite returns are net of fees.
- Index returns do not reflect any fees.
Key Financial Performance Indicators
There are a variety of key performance indicators that we monitor to evaluate our business results. The following table presents the results of certain key performance indicators over the past three fiscal years:
(a) Net operating income, as adjusted, and operating profit margin, as adjusted, are non-GAAP (as defined below) performance measures. See Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measure section within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Assets Under Management
Our revenue is derived primarily from investment advisory and administration fees. Investment advisory and administration fees paid to us are generally based on the value of the investment portfolios we manage and fluctuate with changes in the total value of our AUM. We recognize revenue when we satisfy the performance obligations under the terms of a contract with a client.
Our revenues are highly dependent on both the value and composition of AUM. The following is a summary of our AUM by product and investment objective, and a roll-forward of the change in AUM, for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
(a) Certain of the Funds own shares of the Diamond Hill Short Duration Securitized Bond Fund. The Company reduces its total AUM by these investments held in this affiliated fund.
Equity flows were mixed in 2020. Our Large Cap and Mid Cap strategies had combined net inflows of $1.6 billion. However, these net inflows were more than offset by the net outflows in our Long-Short, Small Cap and Small-Mid Cap strategies, which collectively had outflows of $1.8 billion.
Our fixed income strategies continued to see strong growth in 2020 as each of the strategies has met long-term performance objectives compared to peers and benchmarks. Our focused marketing and branding efforts over the past couple years, along with strong performance, led to combined net inflows of $1.8 billion, with each of the strategies attracting at least $200 million in net inflows.
Model Delivery Programs
We provide strategy-specific model portfolios to sponsors of model delivery programs. We do not have discretionary investment authority over individual client accounts in model delivery programs. Therefore, these assets are not included in our AUM. We provide updated model portfolios to the program sponsors on a periodic basis. We are paid for our services by the program sponsor at a pre-determined rate based on assets in the program. Model delivery program assets were $1.1 billion, $0.9 billion, and $0.5 billion as of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following is a discussion of our consolidated results of operations.
(a) Net operating income, as adjusted, and operating profit margin, as adjusted, are non-GAAP (as defined below) performance measures. See Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measure section within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Summary Discussion of Consolidated Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2020, compared with
Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $10.2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a decrease in the average advisory fee rate from 0.59% to 0.54% year-over-year, which was partially offset by a 1% increase in average AUM. The decrease in average advisory fee rate was driven by an increase in the mix of assets held in lower fee rate strategies.
Operating profit margin was 36% for the year ended December 31, 2020, and 35% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating profit margin, as adjusted, was 38% for the year ended December 31, 2020, and 39% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating profit margin, as adjusted, excludes deferred compensation expense (benefit) from operating income because it is offset by an equal amount in investment income below net operating income on the income statement and thus has no effect on net income attributable to the Company. We believe this non-GAAP measure helps the reader to understand our core operating results and increases comparability period-to-period. See the "Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measures" section below in Part II. Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We expect that our operating margin will fluctuate from period to period based on various factors, including revenues, investment results, employee performance, staffing levels, gains and losses on investments held in deferred compensation plans,
the ongoing impact of COVID-19, and development of investment strategies, products, and channels. We compensate portfolio managers based on long-term performance, so when revenue and long-term performance are misaligned, operating margins can fluctuate materially.
We recognized $6.6 million in investment income for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with investment income of $30.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in market appreciation year over year was due to a lower average investment balance throughout the year and lower returns on the investments.
Income tax expense decreased $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in income tax expense was primarily due to a decrease in DHCM's income before taxes, which was partially offset by an increase in our effective tax rate from 23.8% to 26.8% year-over-year. The increase in our effective tax rate in 2020 was primarily due to excess tax deficits on the vesting of restricted stock awards of $0.6 million in 2020 and the $1.0 million benefit attributable to redeemable noncontrolling interests in 2019.
We generated net income attributable to common shareholders of $38.7 million ($12.03 per diluted share) for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with net income attributable to common shareholders of $55.0 million ($15.99 per diluted share) for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to decreased revenues and a decrease in investment income.
See the “Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measures” section below in Part II, Item 7, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Summary Discussion of Consolidated Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2019, compared with Year Ended December 31, 2018
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019, decreased $9.0 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to a decrease in the average advisory fee rate from 0.62% to 0.59% year-over-year and a 1% decrease in average AUM. The decrease in average advisory fee rate was driven by an increase in the mix of assets held in lower fee rate strategies.
Operating profit margin was 35% for the year ended December 31, 2019, down from 49% for the year ended December 31, 2018. Operating profit margin, as adjusted, was 39% for the year ended December 31, 2019, down from 47% for the year ended December 31, 2018. Operating profit margin, as adjusted, excludes deferred compensation expense (benefit) from operating income because it is offset by an equal amount in investment income below net operating income on the income statement and thus has no effect on net income attributable to the Company. We believe this non-GAAP measure helps the reader to understand our core operating results and increases comparability period to period. See the "Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measures" section below in Part II. Item 7, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We expect that our operating margin will fluctuate from period to period based on various factors, including revenues, investment results, employee performance, staffing levels, gains and losses on investments held in deferred compensation plans, and development of investment strategies, products, or channels. We compensate portfolio managers based on long-term performance, so when revenue and long-term performance are misaligned, operating margins can fluctuate materially.
We recognized $30.5 million in investment income for the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to market appreciation from our investments, compared with investment losses of $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, largely due to market depreciation on our investments.
Income tax expense was consistent from the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The impact of the increase of pre-tax income was fully offset by the reduction in the effective rate from 28.7% to 23.8% year-over-year. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to uncertain state tax positions of approximately $3.0 million recorded in 2018.
We generated net income attributable to common shareholders of $55.0 million ($15.99 per diluted share) for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared with net income attributable to common shareholders of $47.4 million ($13.48 per diluted share) for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to an increase in investment income, which was partially offset by the decrease in net operating income.
See the "Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measures" section below in Part II. Item 7, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue
Revenue for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Investment Advisory Fees. Investment advisory fees decreased by $8.9 million, or 7%, from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020. Investment advisory fees are calculated as a percentage of the market value of client accounts at contractual fee rates, which vary by investment product. The decrease in investment advisory fees was driven by a reduction in the average advisory fee rate from 0.59% in 2019 to 0.54% in 2020, which was partially offset by an increase of 1% in average AUM year over year. The decrease in average advisory fee rate was driven by an increase in the mix of assets held in lower fee rate strategies during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the average advisory fee rates for equity and fixed income strategies were 0.57% and 0.40%, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the average advisory fee rates for equity and fixed income strategies were 0.61% and 0.41%, respectively.
Mutual Fund Administration Fees. Mutual fund administration fees decreased $1.4 million, or 16%, from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020. Mutual fund administration fees include administration fees received from the Funds, which are calculated as a percentage of the Funds' average AUM. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in sub-transfer agent and servicing fees paid by us on behalf of the Funds. In addition, there was a 1% decrease in the Funds' average AUM from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenue for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 compared with Year Ended December 31, 2018
Investment Advisory Fees. Investment advisory fees decreased by $7.3 million, or 5%, from the year ended December 31, 2018, to the year ended December 31, 2019. Investment advisory fees are calculated as a percentage of the market value of client accounts at contractual fee rates, which vary by investment product. The decrease in investment advisory fees was driven by a reduction in the average advisory fee rate from 0.62% in 2018 to 0.59% in 2019 and a decrease of 1% in average AUM year over year. The decrease in average advisory fee rate was driven by an increase in the mix of assets held in lower fee rate strategies during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the average advisory fee rates for equity and fixed income strategies were 0.61% and 0.41%, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2018, the average advisory fee rates for equity and fixed income strategies were 0.63% and 0.48%, respectively.
Mutual Fund Administration Fees. Mutual fund administration fees decreased $1.7 million, or 16%, from the year ended December 31, 2018 to the year ended December 31, 2019. Mutual fund administration fees are calculated as a percentage of average Funds’ AUM. The decrease was due to reductions in the administration fee rates received from the Funds, a 4% decrease in average Funds’ AUM in 2019 and an increase in administrative expenses paid on behalf of the Funds. The table below summarizes the decreases in the administration fee rates during the periods indicated:
Expenses
Expenses for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Compensation and Related Costs, Excluding Deferred Compensation Expense. Employee compensation and benefits decreased by $2.0 million from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is primarily due to decreases in severance expense of $1.6 million and in restricted stock expense of $1.0 million. These decreases were partially offset by increases in salary and related benefits of $0.2 million and in incentive compensation of $0.4 million. On average, we had 126 full-time equivalent employees for 2020, compared to 128 for 2019. Incentive compensation expense can fluctuate significantly period over period as we evaluate investment performance, individual performance, Company performance and other factors.
Deferred Compensation Expense (Benefit). Deferred compensation expense was $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to deferred compensation expense of $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, mostly due to a decrease in market appreciation on our deferred compensation investments period over period. The gain on deferred compensation plan investments increases deferred compensation expense and is included in operating income. Deferred compensation expense is offset by an equal amount in investment income below net operating income on the consolidated statements of income statement, and thus has no impact on net income attributable to us.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased by $2.3 million, or 17%, from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due a non-recurring $1.1 million refund received in 2020 related to our Ohio commercial activity tax, which is a gross receipts tax, and therefore, is not included in income taxes, as well as decreases in corporate recruiting fees of $0.8 million, and in travel and related expenses period over period.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $0.1 million, or 2%, from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in spending related to our customer relationship management system and related external data costs of $0.9 million. This increase was largely offset by a reduction in sales and marketing travel and related expense of $0.8 million.
Mutual Fund Administration. Mutual fund administration expenses increased by 1% from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020. Mutual fund administration expense consists of both variable and fixed expenses. The variable expenses are based on Fund AUM levels and the number of shareholder accounts.
Expenses for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 compared with Year Ended December 31, 2018
Compensation and Related Costs, Excluding Deferred Compensation Expense. Employee compensation and benefits increased by $4.3 million from the year ended December 31, 2018, to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is due to increases in salary and related benefits of $3.0 million and incentive compensation of $1.3 million. On average, we had 128 full-time equivalent employees for 2019, compared to 120 for 2018. Incentive compensation expense can fluctuate significantly period over period as we evaluate investment performance, individual performance, Company performance and other factors.
Deferred Compensation Expense (Benefit). Deferred compensation expense was $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to market appreciation on our deferred compensation investments compared to deferred compensation (benefit) of $(2.1) million for the year ended December 31, 2018, from market depreciation on our deferred compensation investments. The gain (loss) on deferred compensation plan investments increases (decreases) deferred compensation expense (benefit) and is included in operating income. Deferred compensation expense is offset by an equal amount in investment
income below net operating income on the consolidated statements of income statement, and thus, has no impact on net income attributable to us.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased by $1.6 million, or 14%, from the year ended December 31, 2018, to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily due to increases in corporate recruiting fees of $1.0 million, market research and data expense of $0.3 million, and software expense of $0.3 million.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $0.6 million, or 12%, from the year ended December 31, 2018, to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to our branding and public relations initiatives and additional sales data costs. For each of the years ended December 31, 2019, and 2018, approximately 56% and 65%, respectively, of sales and marketing expense is related to revenue sharing payments made to third-party financial intermediaries.
Mutual Fund Administration. Mutual fund administration expenses decreased by $0.3 million, or 9%, from the year ended December 31, 2018, to the year ended December 31, 2019. Mutual fund administration expenses consist of both variable and fixed expenses. The variable expenses are based on Fund AUM and the number of shareholder accounts. The decrease was primarily due to a reduction in outsourced administrative services for the Funds, which were brought in-house during 2018, as well as a 4% decrease in average Funds’ AUM from the year ended December 31, 2018, to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Our current financial condition is highly liquid, with a significant amount of our assets comprised of cash and cash equivalents, investments, accounts receivable, and other current assets. Our main source of liquidity is cash flows from operating activities, which are generated from investment advisory and mutual fund administration fees. Cash and cash equivalents, investments held directly by DHCM, accounts receivable, and other current assets represented $205.1 million and $211.1 million of total assets as of December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We believe these sources of liquidity as well as our continuing cash flows from operating activities will be sufficient to meet our current and future operating needs for the next 12 months.
Throughout 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic created uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, and could continue to do so in 2021, which may impact our ability to access capital and liquidity and the terms under which we can do so. We will continue to assess our liquidity needs as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy, the financial markets, and our operations continues to evolve.
Uses of Liquidity
In line with our primary objective to fulfill our fiduciary duty to clients and secondary objective to achieve an adequate long-term return for shareholders, we anticipate our main uses of cash will be for operating expenses and seed capital to fund new and existing investment strategies.
Our board of directors and management regularly review various factors to determine whether we have capital in excess of that required for the business and the appropriate use of any excess capital. The factors considered include our investment opportunities, capital needed for investment strategies, and share repurchase opportunities.
In September 2018, our board of directors approved the 2018 Repurchase Program authorizing the purchase of up to $50.0 million of our common shares. Under the 2018 Repurchase Program, we repurchased 28,361 of our common shares during the first two months of 2020 for a total of $4.0 million, which exhausted the $50.0 million authorized.
On February 27, 2020, the board of directors approved the 2020 Repurchase Program authorizing management to repurchase up to and additional $50 million of our common shares. Under the 2020 Repurchase Program, we repurchased 129,389 of our common shares during the year ended December 31, 2020, for a total of $14.6 million. As of December 31, 2020, $35.4 million remains available for repurchases under the 2020 Repurchase Program. The authority to repurchase shares may be exercised from time to time as market conditions warrant, is subject to regulatory constraints, and will expire two years from the date of board approval, or upon the earlier repurchase in full of the authorized amount of shares. The timing, amount, and other terms and conditions of any repurchases will be determined by management in its discretion based on a variety of factors, including the market price of such shares, corporate considerations, general market and economic conditions, legal requirements, and the expected and continued impact of COVID-19.
The following table summarizes the quarterly repurchase transactions made under the 2020 Repurchase Program since its inception:
Fiscal 2020 was the 13th consecutive year that we paid a special dividend. We paid out special dividends of $12.00, $9.00, and $8.00 during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The 2020, 2019, and 2018 special dividends reduced shareholders’ equity by $38.0 million, $30.3 million, and $28.1 million, respectively.
On October 27, 2020, our board of directors approved a special cash dividend of $12.00 per share paid on December 4, 2020, to shareholders of record as of November 25, 2020. This dividend reduced shareholders' equity by approximately $38.0 million.
On October 27, 2020, our board of directors also approved the initiation of a regular quarterly dividend beginning the first of quarter 2021. Subject to approval each quarter by our board of directors and compliance with applicable law, we expect to pay a regular quarterly dividend of $1.00 per share. Going forward, at the end of each year, our board of directors will decide whether to pay an additional special dividend. Although we currently expect to pay the aforementioned dividends, depending on the circumstances and the board of directors’ judgment, we may not pay such dividends as described.
Working Capital
As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of approximately $168.9 million, compared to $176.7 million as of December 31, 2019. Working capital includes cash, accounts receivable, investments, direct investments in the Diamond Hill International Fund and the Diamond Hill Global Fund (together the "Consolidated Funds”), and other current assets of DHCM, net of accounts payable and accrued expenses, accrued incentive compensation, deferred compensation and other current liabilities of DHCM.
We had no debt and we believe our available working capital is sufficient to cover current expenses and presently anticipated capital expenditures.
Below is a summary of investments as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(a) In October 2020, the Diamond Hill Research Opportunities Fund merged into the Diamond Hill Long-Short Fund.
Cash Flow Analysis
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are calculated by adjusting net income to reflect other significant operating sources and uses of cash, certain significant non-cash items, such as share-based compensation, and timing differences in the cash settlement of operating assets and liabilities. We expect that cash flows provided by operating activities will continue to serve as our primary source of working capital in the near future.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities totaled $59.8 million. Cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by net income of $38.2 million, the add back of share-based compensation of $7.7 million, depreciation of $1.0 million, net redemptions of securities held in the underlying investment portfolios of the Consolidated Funds of $3.2 million, and the cash impact of timing differences in the settlement of assets and liabilities of $12.7 million. These cash inflows were partially offset by net gains on investments of $3.0 million. Absent the operating cash flows of the Consolidated Funds, cash flows from operations would have been approximately $57.3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities totaled $57.0 million. Cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by net income of $59.8 million, the add back of share-based compensation of $9.1 million, depreciation of $1.2 million, net redemptions of securities held in the underlying investment portfolios of the Consolidated Funds of $6.3 million, and the cash impact of timing differences in the settlement of assets and liabilities of $1.7 million. These cash inflows were partially offset by net gains on investments of $21.1 million. Absent the operating cash flows of the Consolidated Funds, cash flow from operations would have been approximately $53.5 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by operating activities totaled $28.1 million. The changes in net cash provided by operating activities were primarily driven by net income of $46.3 million, the add back of share-based compensation of $8.9 million and depreciation of $1.2 million, net losses on investments of $14.3 million, and the cash impact of timing differences in the settlement of assets and liabilities of $9.6 million. These cash inflows were partially offset by the net purchases of trading securities held in the underlying investment portfolio of the Consolidated Funds of $52.2 million. Absent the operating cash flows of the Consolidated Funds, cash flow from operations would have been approximately $79.9 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Our cash flows from investing activities consist primarily of capital expenditures and purchases and redemptions in our investment portfolio.
Cash flows provided by investing activities totaled $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash provided was primarily due to proceeds from the redemption of investments totaling $25.7 million. These proceeds were partially offset by corporate investment purchases of $14.9 million and property and equipment purchases (primarily capitalized software) of $2.5 million.
Cash flows provided by investing activities totaled $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The cash provided was primarily due to proceeds from the redemption of investments totaling $48.6 million. These proceeds were partially offset by corporate investment purchases of $14.4 million and property and equipment purchases of $0.7 million. The remaining change in reported cash flows from investing activities was attributable to $22.7 million in net cash that was removed from our balance sheet due to the de-consolidation of our investment in an exchange traded fund during the period.
Cash flows used in investing activities totaled $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The cash used was primarily due to corporate investment purchases of $6.3 million and property and equipment purchases of $0.8 million. These cash outflows were partially offset by proceeds from the redemptions of investments of $2.9 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Our cash flows from financing activities consist primarily of the payment of special dividends, the repurchase of our common shares, shares withheld related to employee tax withholding and distributions to, or contributions from, redeemable non-controlling interest holders.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities totaled $62.9 million, consisting of the payment of special dividends of $38.0 million, the repurchase of our common shares of $18.6 million, $1.9 million of shares withheld related to employee tax withholding, and net redemptions from redeemable non-controlling interest holders of $4.3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in financing activities totaled $59.1 million, consisting of the payment of special dividends of $30.3 million, the repurchase of our common shares of $38.7 million, and $1.4 million of shares withheld related to employee tax withholding. These financing outflows were partially offset by net subscriptions received from redeemable non-controlling interest holders of $11.3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in financing activities totaled $16.0 million, consisting of the payment of special dividends of $28.1 million, the repurchase of our common shares of $7.2 million, and $1.9 million of shares withheld related to employee tax withholding. These financing outflows were partially offset by net subscriptions received from redeemable non-controlling interest holders of $21.2 million.
Supplemental Consolidated Cash Flow Statement
The following table summarizes the condensed cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 that are attributable to Diamond Hill and to the Consolidated Funds, and the related eliminations required in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Selected Quarterly Information
Our unaudited quarterly results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are summarized below:
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents a summary of our future obligations under the terms of lease commitments, contractual purchase obligations, and deferred compensation obligations as of December 31, 2020. Other purchase obligations include contractual amounts that will be due for the purchase of services to be used in our operations, such as mutual fund sub-administration, sales data costs, and investment related research software. These obligations may be cancellable at earlier times than those indicated and, under certain circumstances, may involve termination fees. Because these obligations are primarily of a normal recurring nature, we expect to fund them from future cash flows from operations. Deferred compensation obligations include compensation that will be paid out in future years and which will be funded by the related deferred compensation investments currently held on our consolidated balance sheets (see Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements). The information presented does not include operating expenses or capital expenditures that will be committed in the normal course of operations in 2021 and future years:
Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measures
As supplemental information, we are providing performance measures that are based on methodologies other than U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“non-GAAP”). We believe the non-GAAP measures below are useful measures of our core business activities, are important metrics in estimating the value of an asset management business and may enable more appropriate comparison to our peers. These non-GAAP measures should not be a substitute for financial measures calculated in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and may be calculated differently by other companies. The following schedule reconciles GAAP measures to non-GAAP measures for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
(1) Gains (losses) on deferred compensation plan investments, net: The gain (loss) on deferred compensation plan investments, which increases (decreases) deferred compensation expense included in operating income, is removed from operating income in the calculation because it is offset by an equal amount in investment income (loss) below net operating income on the income statement, and thus has no impact on net income attributable to us.
(2) Net operating income, as adjusted: This non-GAAP measure represents our net operating income adjusted to exclude the impact on compensation expense of gains and losses on investments in the deferred compensation plan.
(3) Tax provision on net operating income, as adjusted: This non-GAAP measure represents the tax provision excluding the impact of investment related activity and is calculated by applying the unconsolidated effective tax rate to net operating income, as adjusted.
(4) Net operating income, as adjusted, after tax: This non-GAAP measure deducts from the net operating income, as adjusted, the tax provision on net operating income, as adjusted.
(5) Net operating income, as adjusted after tax per diluted share: This non-GAAP measure was calculated by dividing the net operating income, as adjusted after tax, by diluted weighted average shares outstanding.
(6) Operating profit margin, as adjusted: This non-GAAP measure was calculated by dividing the net operating income, as adjusted, by total revenue.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not have any obligation under a guarantee contract, or a retained or contingent interest in assets or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support for such assets, or any other obligation, contingent or otherwise, under a contract that would be accounted for as a derivative instrument or arising out of a variable interest.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Consolidation. We consolidate all subsidiaries and certain investments in which we have a controlling interest. We are generally deemed to have a controlling interest when we own the majority of the voting interest of a voting rights entity (“VRE”) or are deemed to be the primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity (“VIE”). A VIE is an entity that lacks sufficient equity to finance its activities, or any entity whose equity holders do not have defined power to direct the activities of the entity normally associated with an equity investment. Our analysis to determine whether an entity is a VIE or a VRE involves judgment and considers several factors, including an entity’s legal organization, equity structure, the rights of the investment holders, our ownership interest in the entity, and our contractual involvement with the entity. We continually review and reconsider our VIE or VRE conclusions upon the occurrence of certain events, such as changes to our ownership interest, or amendments to contract documents.
Provisions for Income Taxes. The objectives of accounting for income taxes are to recognize the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in an entity’s financial statements or tax returns. Judgment is required in assessing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns.
Revenue Recognition on Performance-Based Advisory Contracts. We have certain investment advisory contracts in which a portion of the fees are based on investment performance achieved in the respective client portfolio in excess of a specified hurdle rate. These fees are calculated based on client investment results over rolling five-year periods. We record performance-based fees at the end of the contract measurement period because the performance-based fees earned are constrained based on movements in the financial markets.
Revenue Recognition when Acting as an Agent vs. Principal. The Funds have selected and contractually engaged certain vendors to fulfill various services to benefit the Funds’ shareholders or to satisfy regulatory requirements of the Funds. These services include, among others, required fund shareholder mailings, registration services, and legal and audit services. DHCM, in fulfilling a portion of its role under the administration agreement with the Funds, acts as agent to pay these obligations of the Funds. Each vendor is independently responsible for fulfillment of the services it has been engaged to provide and negotiates fees and terms with the management and board of trustees of the Funds. The fee that the Funds pay to DHCM is reviewed annually by the Funds’ board of trustees and specifically considers the contractual expenses that DHCM pays on behalf of the Funds. As a result, DHCM is not involved in the delivery or pricing of these services and bears no risk related to these services. Revenue has been recorded net of these Fund expenses, as appropriate for this agency relationship.