Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
General
The following discussion provides an analysis of our results of operations and reasons for material changes for 2020 as compared to 2019 and should be read together with the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For a detailed discussion of year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018, please refer to “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” contained in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2020.
The financial tables appearing in Management's Discussion and Analysis present amounts in millions of dollars that are rounded from our consolidated financial statements presented in thousands of dollars. As a result, the tables may not foot or cross foot due to rounding.
The first International House of Pancakes restaurant opened in 1958 in Toluca Lake, California. Shortly thereafter, the Company's predecessor began developing and franchising additional restaurants. The Company was incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware in 1976 with the name IHOP Corp. In November 2007, the Company completed the acquisition of Applebee's International, Inc., which became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. Effective June 2, 2008, the name of the Company was changed to DineEquity, Inc. and on February 20, 2018, the name of the Company was changed to Dine Brands Global, Inc.SM (“Dine Brands Global,” “we” or “our”). Through various subsidiaries (see Exhibit 21, Subsidiaries of Dine Brands Global, Inc.), we own, franchise and operate the Applebee's Neighborhood Grill + Bar® (“Applebee's”) concept in the bar and grill segment within the casual dining category of the restaurant industry and we own and franchise the International House of Pancakes® (“IHOP”) concept in the family dining category of the restaurant industry. References herein to Applebee's® and IHOP® restaurants are to these two concepts, whether operated by franchisees, area licensees or us.
Domestically, IHOP restaurants are in all 50 states and the District of Columbia, while Applebee's restaurants are located in every state except Hawaii. Internationally, IHOP restaurants are in two United States territories and nine countries; Applebee's restaurants are in two United States territories and 11 countries. With over 3,400 restaurants combined, the substantial majority of which are franchised, we believe we are one of the largest full-service restaurant companies in the world. The June 15, 2020 issue of Nation's Restaurant News reported that IHOP and Applebee's were the largest restaurant systems in the family dining and casual dining categories, respectively, in terms of United States system-wide sales during 2019.
We have a 52/53 week fiscal year ending on the Sunday nearest to December 31 of each year. For convenience, in this annual report on Form 10-K, we refer to all fiscal years as ending on December 31 and all interim fiscal quarters as ending on March 31, June 30 and September 30 of the respective fiscal year. There were 53 calendar weeks in our 2020 fiscal year ended January 3, 2021 and our fiscal 2020 fourth quarter contained 14 calendar weeks. There were 52 calendar weeks in our 2019 and 2018 fiscal years that ended on December 29, 2019 and December 30, 2018, respectively.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared a global pandemic related to the outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus, designated “COVID-19.” Initially, federal, state, local and international governments reacted to the COVID-19 pandemic by encouraging or requiring social distancing, instituting shelter-in-place orders, and requiring, in varying degrees, reduced operating hours, restaurant dine-in and/or indoor dining limitations, capacity limitations or other restrictions that largely limited restaurants to off-premise sales (take-out and delivery) in the early months of the pandemic. Over the course of 2020, certain of these restrictions on indoor dining were relaxed as incidents of infection from the initial outbreak declined, but many of the restrictions were reinstituted as incidents of infection surged. The nature, degree and duration of the restrictions varied by individual geographic area.
Since the onset of the pandemic in March 2020, we have taken numerous actions to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company, its operations and its franchisees, as discussed below:
•We drew down a total of $220 million from our revolving credit facility. Including approximately $3 million in letters of credit, $223 million of the total $225 million available under our revolving facility has been utilized. We had no immediate need for additional liquidity, but in light of then-current market conditions and uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we drew on the revolving facility to maximize our financial flexibility. We plan to repay the $220 million drawn on the revolving credit facility in the month of March 2021.
•We have stopped repurchasing our common stock and our Board of Directors did not declare a dividend for the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020. We will reevaluate our capital allocation strategy as industry conditions improve and normal restaurant operations resume, in consideration of our current and forecast earnings, financial condition, cash requirements and other factors. Prior to taking these actions, we used cash totaling $53.8 million for dividends and stock repurchases in 2020 as compared to using cash of $156.6 million for dividends and stock repurchases in 2019.
•We voluntarily increased the interest reserve set aside for our securitized debt, from the required $16.4 million to $32.8 million. We also voluntarily accelerated the funding of interest on our securitized debt with the redirection of cash receipts within the securitization structure. As of the date of this report, the interest payments on long-term debt due March 5, 2021 and June 5, 2021 have been fully funded.
•We have reduced discretionary costs, limited new hiring and significantly reduced the use of independent contractors. At the outset of the pandemic, we temporarily furloughed certain team members across various functional groups in our restaurant support centers and company-operated restaurants and curtailed the hours of substantially all of the hourly restaurant associates at our company-operated restaurants. Most hourly restaurant associates at our company-operated restaurants returned to work following re-opening of those restaurants, and there were no team members from the restaurant support centers remaining on furlough as of December 31, 2020. Our General & Administrative (“G&A”) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $18.0 million lower than the prior year.
•We offered Applebee's franchisees the opportunity to defer payment of their royalty, advertising and other fees, primarily for the months of March and April. A total of 30 franchisees representing 94% of Applebee’s restaurants have deferred payments totaling $33.4 million. Repayment of deferred amounts, scheduled over up to nine months, began in the third quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance was approximately $13.7 million, with five franchisees having repaid their deferred balances in full.
•We offered IHOP franchisees the opportunity to defer their royalty, advertising, equipment rent and sublease rent payments, primarily for the months of March and April. Initially, 193 franchisees representing 58% of IHOP restaurants deferred payments totaling $24.1 million. Including subsequent deferrals made on a case-by case basis, the deferral program totaled $27.4 million. Repayment of deferred amounts, scheduled over up to 36 weeks, began in the third quarter of 2020. In certain instances, repayments were temporarily paused for up to 60 days. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance was approximately $15.4 million, with 56 franchisees having repaid their deferred balances in full.
•We received rent deferrals and abatements on properties we lease of approximately $11 million, primarily related to rent deferrals for properties on which IHOP restaurants are located. As of December 31, 2020, the deferred rent balance was approximately $5 million, the significant majority of which is due to be paid in 2021.
•We allowed franchisees to defer their development obligations for up to 15 months and we allowed franchisees to defer their 2020 unit remodel obligations until the end of 2022.
•We have worked with our franchisees to offer a limited menu and to modify their operating hours in a manner that optimizes the functionality of their restaurants. Our expectation is restaurants will return to normal operating hours as sales return to pre-pandemic levels.
•We hired external consultants to work with franchisees in assessing their financial health and to better understand performance variability. We began this process in the third quarter of 2020 working closely with key franchise leaders.
In March 2020, in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, Standard & Poor's (“S&P”) placed the Company on “credit watch-negative” with respect to its 2019 Class A-2 Notes. In September 2020, S&P removed the Company from the credit watch and reaffirmed the BBB rating of the 2019 Class A-2 Notes.
The significance of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in our performing impairment assessments of our long-lived assets, goodwill and other intangible assets. As a result of these assessments, we recorded impairment charges of $123.7 million in the second fiscal quarter of 2020. See “Consolidated Results of Operations - Fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018 - Impairment and Closure Costs” for further discussion of the impairments. Additional impairment and closure charges of $8.1 million were recorded during the fourth fiscal quarter of 2020, primarily related to closure of IHOP restaurants.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Among the various provisions in the CARES Act, the Company is utilizing the payroll tax deferrals and has claimed an Employee Retention Credit. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has deferred the payment of $3.1 million of payroll taxes, of which 50% is due to be paid by December 31, 2021 and the remaining 50% is due to be paid by December 31, 2022. The Company also has claimed an Employee Retention Credit of $0.6 million as of December 31, 2020. The Company did not receive any form of loan pursuant the Paycheck Protection Program established under the CARES Act. Other than the deferrals and credits noted above, the Company did not receive financial aid pursuant to assistance programs offered by the federal government related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The severity of the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company's business will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, how long the pandemic will last, whether/when recurrences of the virus may arise, what restrictions on restaurant operations may be enacted or re-enacted, the availability and acceptance of vaccines, the timing and extent of customer re-engagement with the Company's brands and, in general, what short- and long-term impact on consumer discretionary spending the COVID-19 pandemic might have on the Company and the restaurant industry as a whole, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Overview of 2020 Performance
Key Performance Indicators
In evaluating the performance of each restaurant concept, we consider the key performance indicators to be the system-wide sales percentage change, the percentage change in domestic system-wide same-restaurant sales (“domestic same-restaurant sales”), net franchise restaurant development/reduction and the change in total effective restaurants. Changes in both domestic same-restaurant sales and in the number of Applebee's and IHOP restaurants will impact our system-wide retail sales that drive franchise royalty revenues. Net franchise restaurant development/reduction also impacts franchise revenues in the form of initial franchise fees and, in the case of IHOP restaurants, sales of proprietary pancake and waffle dry mix and, where applicable, rental payments under leases that partially may be based on a percentage of their sales.
An overview of our key performance indicators for the year ended December 31, 2020 is as follows:
________________________________________
(1) Franchise and area license restaurant closings, net of openings, during the year ended December 31, 2020.
(2) Change in the weighted average number of franchise, area license and company-operated restaurants open during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the weighted average number of those open during the same period of 2019.
The Applebee's and IHOP sales percentage decreases for the year ended December 31, 2020 were due to a decrease in domestic same-restaurant sales primarily as a result of the effects of COVID-19, as well as a decrease in total effective restaurants. The decrease in total effective restaurants for each brand reflects both a net reduction in franchise restaurants due to permanent closures, net of openings, and the weighted effect of restaurants temporarily closed during the course of the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $247.0 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary reasons for the decrease are summarized as follows:
Each of these material changes resulted in some manner from impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenues and cash flows of our franchise, company-operated restaurant and rental operations were significantly affected by the varying degrees of limitations imposed on restaurant operations throughout the majority of 2020. The impacts of the pandemic were considered a potential indicator of impairment which required interim tests of impairment of our goodwill, intangible assets and long-lived assets that resulted in impairment charges of $123.7 million recorded in the second quarter of 2020. To partially mitigate the impact on cash flow, management undertook actions to reduce G&A, such as the furloughing of employees noted above.
Our 2020 effective tax rate of 4.2% applied to pretax book loss was significantly different than the statutory Federal income tax rate of 21% primarily because a $92.2 million impairment of goodwill incurred in the second quarter is not deductible for income tax purposes and therefore has no associated tax benefit. See Note 16 - Income Taxes, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation between our effective rate and the statutory Federal income tax rate.
Restaurant Data - System-wide Sales and Domestic Same-Restaurant Sales
The following table sets forth for each of the past three years the number of Effective Restaurants in the Applebee’s and IHOP systems and information regarding the percentage change in sales at those restaurants compared to the same periods in the prior two years. Sales at restaurants that are owned by franchisees and area licensees are not attributable to the Company and, as such, the percentage changes in sales presented below are based on non-GAAP sales data. However, we believe that presentation of this information is useful in analyzing our revenues because franchisees and area licensees pay us royalties and advertising fees that are generally based on a percentage of their sales, and, where applicable, rental payments under leases that partially may be based on a percentage of their sales. Management also uses this information to make decisions about future plans for the development of additional restaurants as well as evaluation of current operations.
_________________________________
(a)“Global Effective Restaurants” are the weighted average number of restaurants open in a given fiscal period, adjusted to account for restaurants open for only a portion of the period. Information is presented for all Effective Restaurants in the Applebee’s and IHOP systems, domestic and international, which includes restaurants owned by franchisees and area licensees as well as those owned by the Company.
(b)“System-wide sales” are retail sales at Applebee’s restaurants operated by franchisees and IHOP restaurants operated by franchisees and area licensees, as reported to the Company, in addition to retail sales at company-operated restaurants. Sales at restaurants that are owned by franchisees and area licensees are not attributable to the Company. An increase or decrease in franchisees' reported sales will result in a corresponding increase or decrease in our royalty revenue. ales at company-operated restaurants and unaudited reported sales for Applebee's domestic franchise restaurants, IHOP franchise restaurants and IHOP area license restaurants for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 and were as follows:
(c)“Sales percentage change” reflects, for each category of restaurants, the percentage change in sales in any given fiscal year compared to the prior fiscal year for all restaurants in that category.
(d)“Domestic same-restaurant sales change” reflects the percentage change in sales in any given fiscal year, compared to the same weeks in the prior year, for domestic restaurants that have been operated throughout both fiscal years that are being compared and have been open for at least 18 months. Because of new restaurant openings and restaurant closures, the domestic restaurants open throughout the fiscal years being compared may be different from year to year.
(e)The Applebee's franchise sales percentage change for 2019 was impacted by the acquisition of 69 franchise restaurants in December 2018 now reported as company-operated.
(f)IHOP system-wide same-restaurant sales data includes area license restaurants beginning in 2019
Domestic Same-Restaurant Sales Trends
Applebee’s domestic same-restaurant sales decreased 17.6% for the three months ended December 31, 2020 from the same period in 2019. The decrease primarily was due to a significant decline in customer traffic as a result of the effects of COVID-19, partially offset by an increase in average check. Applebee's same-restaurant sales for the fourth quarter of 2020 outperformed the casual dining segment of the restaurant industry. Based on data from Black Box Intelligence, a restaurant sales reporting firm (“Black Box”), the casual dining segment of the restaurant industry experienced a decrease in same-restaurant sales during the fourth quarter of 2020 resulting from a large decline in customer traffic that was somewhat offset by an increase in average customer check. The primary reason for the performance differential between Applebee's and the casual dining segment during the fourth quarter of 2020 was the increase in average customer check, as Applebee's increase in average customer check was larger than that of the casual dining segment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Applebee’s domestic same-restaurant sales decreased 22.4%. This decrease for the full year 2020 was due to a significant decline in customer traffic as a result of the effects of COVID-19, partially offset by an increase in average check. Applebee's same-restaurant sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 underperformed the casual dining segment of the restaurant industry. Based on data from Black Box, the casual dining segment experienced a decrease in same-restaurant sales due to a decline in customer traffic that was slightly offset by an increase in average customer check. The primary reason for the performance differential between Applebee's and the casual dining segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was the decrease in traffic, as Applebee's decrease in traffic was larger than that of the casual dining segment.
Applebee’s system-wide domestic same-restaurant sales had significant variability over the course of fiscal 2020. This variability was due to several factors. Restrictions on indoor dining were relaxed after the incidents of infection from the initial outbreak of COVID-19 declined, but the restrictions were reinstituted in varying degrees during the fourth quarter of 2020 as incidents of the virus surged in individual geographic areas. Another factor was the Company's return to national media advertising in July 2020 after having temporarily discontinued its national advertising programs in March 2020. Other factors were the resilience of the consumers' desire to patronize restaurants as dine-in restrictions were lifted and the retention of off-premise sales.
As shown in the following table, prior to the large-scale initiation of restrictions on restaurant operations, Applebee's began 2020 with positive domestic same-restaurant sales. For the first 10 weeks of the first quarter of fiscal 2020, Applebee's domestic same-restaurant sales increased 3.2%, primarily due to an increase in customer traffic as well as an increase in average customer check. During March and April, virtually all Applebee's restaurants were limited to off-premise sales or were temporarily closed. After reaching a low point in same-restaurant sales in April 2020, Applebee's experienced progressive improvement in same-restaurant sales for the months of May through October 2020. However, as incidents of the virus surged in the fourth quarter and restrictions on restaurant operations were reinstituted, the trend of improvement in same-restaurant sales reversed for the months of November and December.
The following table reflects the impact of restaurant dine-in restrictions on Applebee's domestic restaurant operations by month since dine-in restrictions were first instituted:
* In most instances, limited to 50% capacity or less and/or reduced operating hours
While Applebee's off-premise sales as a percentage of Applebee's total sales have declined from the April 2020 peak as restrictions on in-restaurant dining were relaxed, off-premise sales as a percentage of Applebee's total sales have increased compared to pre-pandemic levels.
Off-premise sales as % total Applebee's domestic sales
* Same-restaurant sales data includes area license restaurants beginning in 2019
IHOP’s domestic same-restaurant sales decreased 30.1% for the three months ended December 31, 2020 from the same period in 2019. The decrease primarily was due to a significant decline in customer traffic as a result of the effects of COVID-19, as well as a slight decrease in average check. IHOP's same-restaurant sales for the fourth quarter of 2020 underperformed the family dining segment of the restaurant industry. Based on data from Black Box, the family dining segment of the restaurant industry experienced a decrease in same-restaurant sales during the fourth quarter of 2020 resulting from a large decline in customer traffic that was partially offset by an increase in average customer check. The primary reason for the performance differential between IHOP and the family dining segment during the fourth quarter of 2020 was the change in average customer check, as IHOP experienced a small decrease in average customer check while the family dining segment reported an increase in average check. The breakfast category, in general, has experienced larger transaction declines than other dayparts.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, IHOP's domestic same-restaurant sales decreased 32.8% due to a significant decline in customer traffic as a result of the effects of COVID-19, partially offset by a slight increase in average check. IHOP's same-restaurant sales for the fourth quarter of 2020 underperformed the family dining segment of the restaurant industry. Based on data from Black Box, for the full year of 2020, the family dining segment experienced a decrease in same-restaurant sales resulting from a large decline in customer traffic that was partially offset by an increase in average customer check. The reason for the performance differential between IHOP and the family dining segment during 2020 was the change in average check as IHOP experienced a smaller increase in average customer check than the family dining segment, partially offset by a smaller decrease in traffic.
IHOP’s system-wide domestic same-restaurant sales had significant variability over the course of fiscal 2020. This variability was due to several factors. Restrictions on indoor dining were relaxed as incidents of infection from the initial outbreak of COVID-19 declined, but the restrictions were reinstituted in varying degrees during the fourth quarter of 2020 as incidents of infection from the virus surged in individual geographic areas. Another factor was the Company's return to national media advertising in July 2020 after having temporarily discontinued its national advertising programs in March 2020. Other factors were the resilience of the consumers' desire to patronize restaurants as dine-in restrictions were lifted and the retention of off-premise sales.
As shown in the following table, prior to the large-scale initiation of restrictions on restaurant operations, IHOP began 2020 with positive domestic same-restaurant sales for the month of January. For the first 10 weeks of the first quarter of fiscal 2020, IHOP's domestic same-restaurant sales decreased 0.6%. During March and April, the significant majority of IHOP restaurants were limited to off-premise sales or were temporarily closed. After reaching a low point in same-restaurant sales in April 2020, IHOP experienced progressive improvement in same-restaurant sales for the months of May through September 2020. However, as incidents of the virus surged in the fourth quarter and restrictions on restaurant operations were reinstituted, the trend of improvement in same-restaurant sales reversed for the months of October, November and December.
The following table reflects the impact of restaurant dine-in restrictions on IHOP's domestic restaurant operations by month since dine-in restrictions were first instituted:
* In most instances, limited to 50% capacity or less and/or reduced operating hours
While IHOP off-premise sales as a percentage of IHOP total sales have declined from the April 2020 peak as restrictions on in-restaurant dining were relaxed, off-premise sales as a percentage of IHOP total sales have increased compared to pre-pandemic levels.
Off-premise sales as % total IHOP domestic sales
Net Franchise Restaurant Development
The total number of Applebee's restaurants open at December 31, 2020 declined 4.3% from the number open at December 31, 2019, as franchisees opened six new restaurants but closed 82 restaurants. The total number of IHOP restaurants open at December 31, 2020 decreased 3.7% from the number open at December 31, 2019, as IHOP franchisees and area licensees opened 27 restaurants in 2020 but closed 96 restaurants.
Internationally, franchisees of both brands opened 11 restaurants and closed 51, a net decrease of 40 international restaurants. This international development activity is included in the total activity for each brand cited above.
In response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our franchisees, we allowed our franchisees to defer their development obligations for up to 15 months.
Restaurant closures can occur for a variety of reasons that may differ for each restaurant and for each franchisee. Closures generally fall into one of two categories: restaurants in older locations whose retail, residential and traffic demographics have changed unfavorably over time, and restaurants with non-viable unit economics. Our franchisees are independent businesses and their decisions to close restaurants, both temporarily and permanently, can be impacted by numerous factors that are outside of our control, including but not limited to, the impact of COVID-19 on individual franchisees as well as franchisees' agreements with their lenders and landlords.
The following tables present Applebee's and IHOP restaurant development and franchising activity over the past three years:
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
(a) In December 2018, the Company acquired 69 Applebee's restaurants from a former franchisee.
The closures presented in the tables above represent permanent closures of restaurants. Temporary closures, which can occur for a variety of reasons, are not reflected as reductions in these tables and temporarily closed restaurants are included in the summary counts at the beginning and end of each period shown. However, temporary closures are reflected in the weighted calculation of Effective Restaurants presented in the preceding Restaurant Data tables.
As previously disclosed, we and certain of our IHOP franchisees evaluated the long-term viability of certain IHOP restaurants in light of individual restaurant-level economics impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. When we began the evaluation process, we expected it could result in the closure of up to 100 restaurants over the next six months. The evaluation process been completed. As of December 31, 2020, we closed 14 restaurants in the fourth quarter of 2020 and, while the final extent and timing of additional closures remains subject to change, we currently anticipate the completion of the evaluation process could result in the closure of up to 27 additional IHOP restaurants. We have recorded costs of approximately $13.5 million related to these 41 restaurants during the fourth quarter of 2020, primarily charges for impairment and provisions for bad debt and deferred rent.
Closures of Applebee's and IHOP restaurants adversely impact our system-wide retail sales that drive our franchise royalty revenues as well as, in the case of IHOP restaurants, sales of proprietary pancake and waffle dry mix. Further, with certain restaurants, we own or lease the underlying property and sublease it to the applicable franchisee. Thus, our rental income also could be adversely affected due to our obligation to make rental or other payments for such properties.
Consolidated Results of Operations - Fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018
The tables in the following section of this Form 10-K present information from our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive (Loss) Income for our 2020, 2019 and 2018 fiscal years. A detailed discussion of year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 can be found below. For a detailed discussion of year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018, please refer to “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” contained in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Additional Events Impacting Comparability of Financial Information
53rd week in Fiscal 2020
Our fiscal year ends on the Sunday nearest to December 31 of each year. Every five or six years, our fiscal year contains 53 calendar weeks. Our 2020 fiscal year contained 53 calendar weeks, whereas fiscal 2019 and 2018 each contained 52 calendar weeks. The estimated impact of the 53rd week on fiscal 2020 results of operations was additional revenue of $14.4 million, additional gross profit of $4.7 million and a decrease in loss before income taxes of $2.2 million. Our fiscal 2021 will contain 52 calendar weeks.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
As discussed under Liquidity and Capital Resources of the Company - Long-term Debt, we refinanced our long-term debt in 2019 and recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $8.3 million. There was no similar transaction in 2020.
Financial Review
Our 2020 total revenue decreased $220.9 million compared to 2019. The decrease in franchise and company restaurant operations revenues primarily was due to a significant decline in customer traffic at our restaurants resulting from measures put in place by various jurisdictions of local, state, national and international governmental entities to mitigate the spread of the COVID-19 virus, as well as changes in consumer behavior resulting therefrom. Rental operations revenue was also impacted by COVID-19 effects, primarily due to a decline in rent paid based on a percentage of franchisees' retail sales. Interest income from financing operations was not impacted significantly by the COVID-19 pandemic, with the expected progressive decline due to repayments of outstanding balances. Total revenue was favorably impacted by approximately $14.4 million due to a 53rd week in fiscal 2020.
Our 2020 total gross profit decreased $134.1 million compared to 2019, primarily due to the revenue declines related to the pandemic as cited above as well a $13.1 million increase in bad debt expense. Total gross profit was favorably impacted by approximately $4.7 million due to a 53rd week in fiscal 2020.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
(1) Effective Franchise Restaurants are the weighted average number of franchise and area license restaurants open in a given fiscal period, adjusted to account for franchise and area license restaurants open for only a portion of the period.
(2) Total franchise revenue excluding advertising
Our total franchise revenue decreased $181.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019, due to changes in the following components:
•Applebee's franchise revenue decreased 23.7% compared to 2019. Approximately $32.9 million of the decline was due to a decrease of 22.6% in domestic franchise same-restaurant sales primarily caused by the adverse impact on customer traffic of COVID-19-related mitigation measures and changes in consumer behavior. Additionally, revenue decreased $3.8 million due to permanent domestic restaurant closures and $3.2 million due to temporary domestic restaurant closures. Applebee's international revenues declined $3.1 million, primarily due to a decline in same-restaurant sales as well as a $0.6 million decrease due to temporary closures and a $0.2 million due to permanent restaurant closures. These unfavorable changes were partially offset by additional revenue from the 53rd week of approximately $2.4 million, a decrease in domestic delivery credits that reduce royalty revenue and an increase in international franchise fees.
•IHOP franchise revenue decreased 30.0% compared to 2019, primarily due to lower royalty and pancake and waffle dry mix revenues resulting from a 32.8% decrease in domestic franchise same-restaurant sales primarily caused by the adverse impact on customer traffic of COVID-19-related mitigation measures and changes in consumer behavior. Additionally, revenue decreased $7.5 million due to temporary domestic restaurant closures. IHOP's international revenues declined $4.4 million, due primarily to a decline in same-restaurant sales as well as a $0.5 million decrease due to temporary and permanent restaurant closures. These unfavorable changes were partially offset by additional revenue from the 53rd week of approximately $3.0 million, as well as by a $3.5 million increase in franchise fees (primarily termination and forfeited franchise fees). and a decrease in domestic delivery credits that reduce royalty revenue.
•Advertising revenue decreased $81.5 million compared to 2019, as discussed by brand below.
Our 2020 total franchise expenses decreased $73.8 million compared to 2019, due to changes in the following components:
•Applebee's franchise expenses increased $2.7 million, primarily due to a $3.5 million increase in bad debt expense. Bad debt expense for 2020 was $3.3 million as compared to a bad debt recovery of $0.2 million in 2019.
•IHOP franchise expenses increased $3.3 million, primarily due to a $9.6 million increase in bad debt expense, partially offset by a decrease in purchases of pancake and waffle dry mix. IHOP bad debt expense for 2020 was $9.4 million compared to a bad debt recovery of $0.2 million in 2019. Bad debt expense for 2020 included $2.9 million related to the restaurant closures discussed above under IHOP Restaurant Development Activity.
•Advertising expenses decreased $79.8 million, due to a corresponding decrease in advertising revenue, partially offset by the net change in advertising deficit between 2020 and 2019, as discussed below.
Gross profit as a percentage of total revenue decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily because of the $13.1 million increase in bad debt expense.
Advertising revenue and expense by brand for fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
Applebee's advertising revenue and expense for 2020 decreased 24.6% compared to 2019, primarily due to the decrease of 22.6% in domestic franchise same-restaurant sales, as well as a $4.3 million decrease due to permanent domestic restaurant closures and a $3.5 million decrease due to temporary domestic restaurant closures. These unfavorable changes were partially offset by additional revenue from the 53rd week of approximately $2.6 million. IHOP's advertising revenue and expense for 2020 decreased by 34.7% and 33.6%, respectively, compared to 2019, primarily due to the decrease of 32.8% in domestic franchise same-restaurant sales, as well as a decrease due to temporary and permanent restaurant closures. These unfavorable changes were partially offset by additional revenue from the 53rd week of approximately $1.6 million.
It is our accounting policy to recognize any deficiency in advertising fee revenue compared to advertising expenditure, or recovery of a previously recognized deficiency in advertising fee revenue compared to advertising expenditure, in the fourth quarter of our fiscal year. In 2020, international marketing expenditures exceeded revenues by approximately $0.5 million. In 2019, IHOP advertising revenue exceeded advertising expenditures by $1.3 million, due to the recovery of a deficit that previously had been recognized in 2018.
Rental operations relate primarily to IHOP franchise restaurants that were developed under the Previous IHOP Business Model described under Item 1. - Business. Rental income includes revenue from operating leases and interest income from direct financing leases. Rental expenses are costs of prime operating leases and interest expense on prime finance leases on certain franchise restaurants.
Rental segment revenue decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to a $7.4 million decrease in rental income based on a percentage of franchisees' retail sales, a $2.9 million decrease in base rent due to restaurant closures and lease buy-outs and a progressive decline of $1.6 million in interest income as direct financing leases were repaid. These unfavorable changes were partially offset by additional revenue from the 53rd week of approximately $2.0 million. Rental segment expenses for 2020 decreased compared to the same period of the prior year primarily due to a $1.8 million decrease in rent paid based on a percentage of franchisees' retail sales, $1.4 million decrease in interest expense as finance lease obligations are repaid and a $1.1 million decrease in depreciation expense, partially offset by a $3.4 million provision for losses related to the restaurant closures discussed above under IHOP Restaurant Development Activity.
Financing operations relate primarily to IHOP franchise restaurants that were developed under the Previous IHOP Business Model described under Item 1. - Business. Financing operations revenue primarily consists of interest income from the financing of IHOP franchise fees and equipment leases, as well as from several notes receivable from Applebee's franchisees. We also may sell equipment associated with IHOP franchise restaurants we have reacquired when those restaurants are subsequently refranchised to a new franchisee. Financing expenses are primarily the cost of the restaurant equipment sold.
Financing revenues decreased $1.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The change was due to a $1.1 million decrease in IHOP interest income due to the decline in interest income from the financing of franchise fees and equipment leases as note balances were repaid as well as a decrease in interest income on Applebee's notes from franchisees.
___________________________________________________________________________________________________
(1) Related to 69 Applebee's company-operated restaurants.
(2) Costs associated with IHOP restaurants in the process of being refranchised.
(3) Calculated for Applebee's company-operated restaurants only. Percentages calculated on actual amounts, not rounded amounts presented above.
In December 2018, we acquired 69 Applebee's restaurants in North Carolina and South Carolina from a former Applebee's franchisee. The slight decrease in effective restaurants for 2020 reflects the temporary closure of seven restaurants for a short period of time in April 2020 in compliance with state and local COVID-19-related mitigation measures. The restaurants were limited to off-premise sales at several points during the year. Due in large part to these restrictions, same-restaurant sales decreased 19.1% for 2020 compared to 2019. The comparison of gross profit for Applebee's company-operated restaurants as a percentage of revenue for 2020 as compared to 2019 was adversely impacted by the COVID-19-related operating constraints described above. These unfavorable impacts were partially offset by additional revenue and gross profit from the 53rd week of approximately $2.6 million and $0.2 million, respectively.
In addition, Company segment restaurant expenses for 2020 include approximately $1.9 million of costs associated with certain IHOP restaurants while in the process of being refranchised. From time to time, we have operated IHOP restaurants reacquired from franchisees on a temporary basis until those restaurants are refranchised and we may reacquire both IHOP and Applebee's restaurants on a temporary basis in the future. There were three such IHOP restaurants under temporary operation at December 31, 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses Favorable
(Unfavorable) Variance Favorable
(Unfavorable) Variance
2020 2019 2018
(In millions)
G&A expenses $ 144.8 $ 18.0 $ 162.8 $ 3.9 $ 166.7
G&A expenses for 2020 decreased 11.1% compared to 2019, primarily due to a $13.0 million decrease in personnel-related costs, a $5.6 million decrease in travel costs and a $0.9 million decrease in consumer research, partially offset by a $1.0 million increase in depreciation primarily related to capitalized software projects. The decline in personnel-related costs was primarily due to lower costs of salaries and benefits, related in large part to the furloughing of approximately one-third of team members across various functional groups in our restaurant support centers for approximately six months, as well as lower costs of equity-based and other incentive compensation. G&A expenses for 2020 included approximately $1.2 million of costs due to the 53rd week. Included in total G&A expenses for 2020 were $4.3 million of expenses related to company-operated restaurants, as compared to $5.3 million in 2019. The decrease primarily was due to lower personnel-related costs.
The Company evaluates its goodwill and the indefinite-lived Applebee's tradename for impairment annually in the fourth quarter of each year or on an interim basis if events or changes in circumstances between annual tests indicate a potential impairment. Definite-lived intangible assets and long-lived tangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable based on estimated undiscounted future cash flows.
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly spreading
outbreak of COVID-19. In the second quarter of 2020, we noted that our common stock had recovered less of its early March 2020 (pre-pandemic) market value than the overall U.S. stock market had recovered. We also assessed several months of data as to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations and, in turn, assessed the impact that might have on the risk premium incorporated into the discount rate. Based on these developments, we performed an interim quantitative test of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment in the second quarter of 2020. In determining fair value, the Company utilized valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs to the extent possible. The fair value technique used in this instance is classified as Level 3, where unobservable inputs are used when little or no market data is available.
In performing the quantitative test for impairment of goodwill, we used the income approach method of valuation that includes the discounted cash flow method and the market approach that includes the guideline public company method to determine the fair value of goodwill. Significant assumptions made by management in estimating fair value under the discounted cash flow model include future trends in sales, operating expenses, overhead expenses, depreciation, capital expenditures and changes in working capital, along with an appropriate discount rate based on our estimated cost of equity capital and after-tax cost of debt, incorporating a risk premium deemed appropriate in light of current conditions. Significant assumptions used to determine fair value under the guideline public company method include the selection of guideline companies and the valuation multiples applied.
In performing the impairment review of the tradename, we used the relief of royalty method under the income approach method of valuation. Significant assumptions used to determine fair value under the relief of royalty method include future trends in sales, a royalty rate and a discount rate to be applied to the forecast revenue stream.
As a result of performing the quantitative test of impairment, the Company recognized an impairment of Applebee's goodwill of $92.2 million and an impairment of Applebee's tradename of $11.0 million in the second quarter of 2020.
The majority of the impairment was due to an increase in the assessed risk premium incorporated in the discount rate. These assets are at risk of additional impairment in the future in the event of sustained downward movement in the Company's stock price, downward revisions of long-term performance assumptions, increases in the assumed long-term discount rate or an increase in the corporate tax rate.
We performed our annual test of goodwill and intangible assets for impairment on a qualitative basis in the fourth quarter of 2020. In performing that analysis we considered, among other things, the market value of our stock, absolute and relative to peers, and the Company's operating performance compared to forecast results that had been used in performing the impairment analyses during the second quarter of 2020 discussed above. We concluded there were no indicators of additional impairment subsequent to the second quarter of 2020 and therefore, a quantitative test of impairment was not necessary in the fourth quarter of 2020.
The long-lived asset impairment of $22.3 million related to 29 Applebee's company-operated restaurants and 41 IHOP franchisee-operated restaurants for which the carrying amount exceeded the undiscounted cash flows The impairment recorded represented the difference between the carrying value and the estimated fair value. Approximately $15.1 million of the total impairment related to operating lease right-of-use assets that had been recorded in 2019 upon adoption of new accounting guidance for leases codified in Accounting Standards Topic 842, while $7.2 million related to impairments of land, building, leasehold improvements and finance leases. The impairments by individual property varied in amount, ranging from the largest single-property impairment of $1.3 million to less than $5,000.
An impairment of $3.3 million was recognized related to the reacquired franchise rights intangible asset recorded in the purchase price allocation of the December 2018 acquisition of 69 Applebee's restaurants from a former franchisee.
Approximately $1.6 million of the $3.0 million of closure charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to seven IHOP restaurants closed during 2020, with the remainder primarily related to adjustments to the reserve for IHOP and Applebee's restaurants closed prior to 2020. Approximately $0.5 million of the $1.5 million of closure charges for the year ended December 31, 2019 related to two IHOP and one Applebee's restaurant closed during 2019, with the remainder primarily related to adjustments to the reserve for IHOP and Applebee's restaurants closed prior to 2019.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net increased $6.5 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to increased interest expense on $220.0 million borrowed under our Revolver in March 2020 and additional interest of approximately $1.2 million due to the 53rd week in 2020. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for additional discussion related to the Revolver borrowing.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets primarily relates to franchising rights arising from the November 2007 acquisition of Applebee's and reacquired franchise rights arising from the December 2018 acquisition of 69 Applebee's restaurants from a former franchisee. Amortization expense decreased $0.8 million in 2020 as compared to 2019 due to the impairment of reacquired franchise rights noted above. See Note 7 - Other Intangible Assets, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Loss (Gain) on Disposition of Assets
The loss on disposition of assets for 2020 primarily related to termination of 12 IHOP restaurant leases and the disposition of capitalized software no longer in use. There were no individually significant gains or losses on disposition of assets during 2019 or 2018.
The income tax provision will vary from period to period for two primary reasons: a change in pretax book income and a change in the effective tax rate. Changes in our pretax book income between 2020 and 2019 are addressed in the preceding sections of “Consolidated Results of Operations - Fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018.”
The 2020 effective tax rate of 4.2% applied to pretax book loss was significantly different than the statutory Federal income tax rate of 21% primarily because of the $92.2 million impairment of goodwill incurred in the second quarter, which is not deductible for income tax purposes and therefore has no associated tax benefit. See Note 16 - Income Taxes, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation between our effective rate and the statutory Federal income tax rate.
The 2019 effective tax rate of 24.6% applied to pretax book income was higher than the statutory Federal tax rate of 21% primarily due to tax expense associated with unrecognized tax benefits and state and local income taxes, offset by the recognized benefit from general business credits.
The 2018 effective tax rate of 27.4% applied to pretax book income was higher than the statutory Federal tax rate of 21% primarily due to additional tax expense associated with unrecognized tax benefits related to an IRS audit and state and local income taxes, offset by applying a lower state tax rate applied to the deferred tax balances.
As of each reporting date, we consider new evidence, both positive and negative, that could impact our view with regards to future realization of deferred tax assets. As of December 31, 2020, management determined that it is more likely than not that the benefits from foreign tax credit carryforward and certain state deferred tax assets, including net operating loss carryforwards, from the Applebee’s company-operated restaurants will not be realized. In recognition of this risk, management recorded a valuation allowance of $3.0 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources of the Company
COVID-19 Pandemic
As discussed in preceding sections of the MD&A, the measures put in place by various governmental entities to help contain the spread of the COVID-19 virus had a significant adverse impact on our restaurant and rental operations over the last ten months of 2020. In response to the numerous uncertainties related to the pandemic, we took several actions to mitigate the effects on our liquidity, as discussed below:
•We drew down a total of $220 million from our revolving credit facility. Including approximately $3 million in letters of credit, $223 million of the total $225 million available under our revolving facility has been utilized. We had no immediate need for additional liquidity, but drew on the revolving facility to maximize our financial flexibility. We plan to repay the $220 million drawn on the revolving credit facility in the month of March 2021.
•We have stopped repurchasing our common stock and our Board of Directors did not declare a dividend for the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020. Prior to taking these actions, we used cash totaling $53.8 million for dividends and stock repurchases in 2020, as compared to using cash of $156.6 million for dividends and stock
repurchases in 2019. We will reevaluate our capital allocation strategy as industry conditions improve and normal restaurant operations resume.
•We offered Applebee's franchisees the opportunity to defer payment of their royalty, advertising and other fees, and IHOP franchisees the opportunity to defer payment of their royalty, advertising, equipment rent and sublease rent payments, primarily for the months of March and April. Including a small amount of additional deferrals offered on a case-by-case basis, franchisees deferred a total of approximately $60 million of payments. In general, repayments will take place over nine months and began in the third quarter of 2020. At December 31, 2020, approximately $29 million of such deferred payments were outstanding.
•We voluntarily increased the interest reserve set aside for our securitized debt, from the required $16.4 million to $32.8 million. We also voluntarily accelerated the funding of interest on our securitized debt with the redirection of cash receipts within the securitization structure. As of the date of this report, the interest payments on long-term debt due March 5, 2021 and June 5, 2021 have been fully funded and are included in current restricted cash.
•We have reduced discretionary costs, limited new hiring and significantly reduced the use of independent contractors. At the outset of the pandemic, we temporarily furloughed certain team members across various functional groups in our restaurant support centers and company-operated restaurants and also curtailed the hours of substantially all of the hourly restaurant associates at our company-operated restaurants. Most of the hourly restaurant associates at our company-operated restaurants returned to work following the re-opening of those restaurants, and there were no team members from the restaurant support centers remaining on furlough as of December 31, 2020. Our G&A expenses for the ended December 31, 2020 were $18.0 million lower than the same period of the prior year.
Our total cash balances as of the past five fiscal quarter ends were as follows:
December 31, 2019 March 31, 2020 June 30, 2020 September 30, 2020 December 31, 2020
(In millions)
Cash and cash equivalents $ 116.1 $ 344.6 $ 278.5 $ 309.3 $ 383.4
Restricted cash, current 40.7 34.2 31.2 47.5 39.9
Restricted cash, non-current 15.7 16.4 32.8 32.8 32.8
Total $ 172.5 $ 395.2 $ 342.5 $ 389.6 $ 456.1
The increase in total cash balances from December 31, 2019 to March 31, 2020 is primarily due to the draw-down of $220 million from our revolving credit facility in March 2020. The decrease in total cash balances from March 31, 2020 to June 30, 2020 is primarily due to the impact on our operations of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as to our offering franchisees the opportunity to defer payments due to us as noted above. The increase in total cash balances from June 30, 2020 to September 30, 2020 reflects the improvement in operations as restrictions on in-restaurant dining became more relaxed and the commencement of collections of amounts deferred by franchisees discussed above. The increase in total cash balances from September 30, 2020 to December 31, 2020 reflects higher sales in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the third quarter (including a 14th week in the fourth quarter), a $12.3 million tax refund received and collections of amounts deferred by franchisees discussed above.
We believe that our cash on hand, cash flow from operations, and the actions taken to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic discussed above will provide us with adequate liquidity for at least the next twelve months.
Long-Term Debt
On June 5, 2019, Applebee’s Funding LLC and IHOP Funding LLC (the “Co-Issuers”), each a special purpose, wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of the Company, issued two tranches of fixed rate senior secured notes, the Series 2019-1 4.194% Fixed Rate Senior Secured Notes, Class A-2-I (“Class A-2-I Notes”) in an initial aggregate principal amount of $700 million and the Series 2019-1 4.723% Fixed Rate Senior Secured Notes, Class A-2-II (“Class A-2-II Notes”) in an initial aggregate principal amount of $600 million (the “Class A-2-II Notes” and, together with the Class A-2-I Notes, the “2019 Class A-2 Notes”). The 2019 Class A-2 Notes were issued pursuant to an offering exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
The Co-Issuers also replaced their existing revolving financing facility, the 2018-1 Variable Funding Senior Notes, Class A-1 (“2018 Class A-1 Notes”), with a new revolving financing facility, the 2019-1 Variable Funding Senior Notes, Class A-1 (the “2019 Class A-1 Notes”), on substantially the same terms as the 2018 Class A-1 Notes in order to conform the term of the 2019 Class A-1 Notes to the anticipated repayment dates for the 2019 Class A-2 Notes. The 2019 Class A-1 Notes and the 2019 Class A-2 Notes are referred to collectively herein as the “New Notes.”
The New Notes were issued in a securitization transaction pursuant to which substantially all the domestic revenue-generating assets and domestic intellectual property, as further described below, held by the Co-Issuers and certain other special-purpose, wholly-owned indirect subsidiaries of the Company (the “Guarantors”) were pledged as collateral to secure the New Notes.
2019 Class A-2 Notes
The New Notes were issued under a Base Indenture, dated as of September 30, 2014, and amended and restated as of June 5, 2019 (the “Base Indenture”), and the related Series 2019-1 Supplement to the Base Indenture, dated June 5, 2019 (the “Series 2019-1 Supplement”), among the Co-Issuers and Citibank, N.A., as the trustee (in such capacity, the “Trustee”) and securities intermediary. The Base Indenture and the Series 2019-1 Supplement (collectively, the “Indenture”) will allow the Co-Issuers to issue additional series of notes in the future subject to certain conditions set forth therein.
While the 2019 Class A-2 Notes are outstanding, payment of principal and interest is required to be made on the Class A-2 Notes on a quarterly basis. The payment of principal on the 2019 Class A-2 Notes may be suspended when the leverage ratio for the Company and its subsidiaries is less than or equal to 5.25x. Exceeding the leverage ratio of 5.25x does not violate any covenant related to the New Notes.
Our leverage ratio exceeded 5.25x as of June 30, 2020 and has remained greater than 5.25x since then. As of December 31, 2020, the Company's leverage ratio was 7.20x. Accordingly, we made a principal payment in the fourth quarter of 2020 and will continue to make principal payments until the leverage ratio is less than 5.25x.
We may voluntarily repay the New Notes at any time; however, if we repay the New Notes prior to certain dates we would be required to pay make-whole premiums. As of December 31, 2020, the make-whole premium associated with voluntary prepayment of the Class A-2-I Notes was approximately $35 million; this amount declines each quarter to zero in June 2022. As of December 31, 2020, the make-whole premium associated with voluntary prepayment of the Class A-2-II Notes was approximately $74 million; this amount declines each quarter to zero in June 2024. We would also be subject to a make-whole premium in the event of a mandatory prepayment required following a Rapid Amortization Event or certain asset dispositions. The mandatory make-whole premium requirements are considered derivatives embedded in the New Notes that must be bifurcated for separate valuation. We estimated the fair value of these derivatives to be immaterial as of December 31, 2020, based on the probability-weighted discounted cash flows associated with either event.
The legal final maturity of the 2019 Class A-2 Notes is in June 2049, but it is anticipated that, unless earlier prepaid to the extent permitted under the Indenture, the Class A-2-I Notes will be repaid in June 2024 (the “Class A-2-I Anticipated Repayment Date”) and the Class A-2-II Notes will be repaid in June 2026 (the “Class A-2-II Anticipated Repayment Date”). If the Co-Issuers have not repaid or refinanced the Class A-2-I Notes by the Class A-2-I Anticipated Repayment Date or the Class A-2-II Notes by the Class A-2-II Anticipated Repayment Date, then additional interest will accrue on the Class A-2-I Notes and the Class A-2-II Notes, as applicable, at the greater of: (A) 5.0% and (B) the amount, if any, by which the sum of the following exceeds the applicable Class A-2 Note interest rate: (x) the yield to maturity (adjusted to a quarterly bond-equivalent basis) on the applicable anticipated repayment date of the United States Treasury Security having a term closest to 10 years plus (y) 5.0%, plus (z) 2.15% for the Class A-2-I Notes and 2.64% for the Class A-2-II Notes.
In March 2020, in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, Standard & Poor's (“S&P”) placed the Company on “credit watch-negative” with respect to our 2019 Class A-2 Notes. In September 2020, S&P removed the Company from the credit watch and reaffirmed the “BBB” rating of the 2019 Class A-2 Notes.
2019 Class A-1 Notes
The Co-Issuers also entered into a revolving financing facility, the 2019 Class A-1 Notes, that allows for drawings up to $225 million of variable funding notes and the issuance of letters of credit. The 2019 Class A-1 Notes were issued under the Indenture. Drawings and certain additional terms related to the 2019 Class A-1 Notes are governed by the 2019 Class A-1 Note Purchase Agreement, dated June 5, 2019, among the Co-Issuers, certain special-purpose, wholly-owned indirect subsidiaries of the Company, each as a Guarantor, the Company, as manager, certain conduit investors, financial institutions and funding agents, and Barclays Bank PLC, as provider of letters of credit, swingline lender and administrative agent (the “Purchase Agreement”).
The 2019 Class A-1 Notes will be governed, in part, by the Purchase Agreement and by certain generally applicable terms contained in the Indenture. The applicable interest rate under the 2019 Class A-1 Notes depends on the type of borrowing by the Co-Issuers. The applicable interest rate for advances is generally calculated at a per annum rate equal to the commercial paper funding rate or one-, two-, three- or six-month Eurodollar Funding Rate, in either case, plus 2.15%. The applicable interest rate for swingline advances and unreimbursed draws on outstanding letters of credit is a per annum base rate equal to the sum of (a) 1.15% plus (b) the greatest of (i) the Prime Rate in effect from time to time, (ii) the Federal Funds Rate in effect from time to time plus 0.50% and (iii) the one-month Eurodollar Funding Rate plus 1.00%. There is no upfront fee for the 2019 Class A-1 Notes. There is a fee of 50 basis points on any unused portion of the 2019 Class A-1 Notes facility. Undrawn face amounts of
outstanding letters of credit that are not cash collateralized accrue a fee of 2.15% per annum. It is anticipated that the principal and interest on the 2019 Class A-1 Notes will be repaid in full on or prior to the quarterly payment date in June 2024 (the “2019 Class A-1 Anticipated Repayment Date”), subject to two additional one-year extensions at the option of the Company upon the satisfaction of certain conditions.
Management Agreement
Under the terms of the Management Agreement, dated September 30, 2014, as amended and restated as of September 5, 2018, as further amended and restated as of June 5, 2019 and as amended by that certain Amendment No. 1 to Management Agreement dated November 21, 2019, among the Company, the Securitization Entities, Applebee’s Services, Inc., International House of Pancakes, LLC and the Trustee, the Company will act as the manager with respect to the Securitized Assets. The primary responsibilities of the manager will be to perform certain franchising, distribution, intellectual property and operational functions on behalf of the Securitization Entities with respect to the Securitized Assets pursuant to the Management Agreement. The manager will be entitled to the payment of the weekly management fee, as set forth in the Management Agreement and will be subject to the liabilities set forth in the Management Agreement. The Company, as Manager, voluntarily began waiving its receipt of the weekly management fee in April, 2020 and this waiver remains in place as of December 31, 2020.
Covenants and Restrictions
The New Notes are subject to a series of covenants and restrictions customary for transactions of this type, including: (i) that the Co-Issuers maintain specified reserve accounts to be used to make required payments in respect of the New Notes, (ii) provisions relating to optional and mandatory prepayments, and the related payment of specified amounts, including specified call redemption premiums in the case of Class A-2 Notes under certain circumstances; (iii) certain indemnification payments in the event, among other things, the transfers of the assets pledged as collateral for the New Notes are in stated ways defective or ineffective and (iv) covenants relating to recordkeeping, access to information and similar matters. The New Notes are subject to customary rapid amortization events provided for in the Indenture, including events tied to failure of the Securitization Entities to maintain the stated debt service coverage ratio (“DSCR”), the sum of domestic retail sales for all restaurants being below certain levels on certain measurement dates, certain manager termination events, certain events of default and the failure to repay or refinance the Class A-2 Notes on the anticipated repayment dates. The New Notes are also subject to certain customary events of default, including events relating to non-payment of required interest, principal or other amounts due on or with respect to the New Notes, failure of the Securitization Entities to maintain the stated DSCR, failure to comply with covenants within certain time frames, certain bankruptcy events, breaches of specified representations and warranties and certain judgments.
In general, the DSCR ratio is Net Cash Flow (as defined in the Indenture) for the four quarters preceding the calculation date divided by the total debt service payments (as defined in the Indenture) of the preceding four quarters. The complete definitions of the DSCR and all calculation elements are contained in the Indenture. Failure to maintain a prescribed DSCR can trigger a Cash Flow Sweeping Event, A Rapid Amortization Event, a Manager Termination Event or a Default Event as described below. In a Cash Flow Sweeping Event, the Trustee is required to retain 50% of excess Cash Flow (as defined in the Indenture) in a restricted account. In a Rapid Amortization Event, all excess Cash Flow is retained and used to retire principal amounts of debt. In a Manager Termination Event, the Company may be replaced as manager of the assets securitized under the Indenture. In a Default Event, the outstanding principal amount and any accrued but unpaid interest can be called to become immediately due and payable. Key DSCRs are as follows:
•DSCR less than 1.75x - Cash Flow Sweeping Event
•DSCR less than 1.20x - Rapid Amortization Event
•Interest-only DSCR less than 1.20x - Manager Termination Event
•Interest-only DSCR less than 1.10x - Default Event
Our DSCR for the reporting period ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 3.3x.
During the second quarter of 2020, we voluntarily increased the interest reserve required to be set aside for our securitized debt from $16.4 million to $32.8 million, which now represents an estimated six months of interest and fees related to the 2019 Class A-2 Notes and the Revolver. During the second quarter of 2020, we voluntarily began accelerating the funding of interest on the 2019 Class A-2 Notes and the Revolver with the redirection of cash receipts within the securitization structure. As of the date of this report, the interest payments on the 2019 Class A-2 Notes and the Revolver due March 5, 2021 and June 7, 2021 have been fully funded within the securitization structure, in addition to the $32.8 million of interest reserve noted above.
Use of Credit Facilities
In March 2020, the Co-Issuers drew down a total of $220.0 million of the amount then available under the Revolver. Although the Company had no immediate need for additional liquidity, the Co-Issuers drew on the Revolver to increase the Company’s financial flexibility in light of then-current market conditions and uncertainty due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We plan to repay the $220 million drawn on the Revolver in the month of March 2021. It is anticipated that the principal and interest on any Revolver borrowings will be repaid in full on or prior to the quarterly payment date in June 2024, subject to two additional one-year extensions at the option of the Company upon the satisfaction of certain conditions. The current interest rate for borrowings under the Revolver is the three-month LIBOR rate plus 2.15% for 60% of the advances and the commercial paper funding rate of our conduit investor plus 2.15% for 40% of the advances. The interest rate on Revolver borrowings at December 31, 2020 was 2.42%. The weighted average interest rate on Revolver borrowings for the period outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2020 was 2.72%, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The U.K. Financial Conduct Authority announced in 2017 that it intends to phase out LIBOR, initially by the end of 2021. On November 30, 2020, the Federal Reserve announced that LIBOR will be phased out and eventually replaced by June 2023. In the same announcement, U. S. banks were instructed to stop writing contracts using LIBOR by the end of 2021 and all contracts using LIBOR should be amended or terminated by June 30, 2023. We do not believe that the discontinuation of LIBOR as a reference rate for our 2019 Class A-1 Notes will have a material adverse effect on our financial position or materially affect our interest expense, however, it is not possible to predict the effect of these changes, other reforms or the establishment of alternative reference rates.
At December 31, 2020, $2.8 million was pledged against the Revolver for outstanding letters of credit, leaving $2.2 million of the Revolver available for borrowing. The letters of credit are used primarily to satisfy insurance-related collateral requirements.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities is primarily driven by revenues earned and collected from our franchisees, and profit from our company-owned restaurant, rental operations and financing operations.
Cash provided by operating activities decreased $58.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The components of that change are as follows:
The change in net income primarily was due to impairments of goodwill, intangible assets and long-lived tangible assets and decreased gross profit, partially offset by lower G&A expenses, each of which was discussed in preceding sections of this MD&A.
Non-cash reconciling items (primarily impairment and closure charges, depreciation and amortization, deferred income taxes, stock-based compensation and loss on extinguishment of debt) increased $115.3 million from 2019.The increase primarily was due to impairments of goodwill, intangible assets and long-lived tangible assets totaling $129.6 million discussed in preceding sections of this MD&A.
Net changes in working capital provided cash of $37.6 million during 2020 compared to providing cash of $3.3 million during 2019. This favorable change of $34.3 million between years primarily resulted from collection of a tax refund of $12.3 million related to Internal Revenue Service audits of our tax returns for years 2014 to 2016 and an increase of $14.1 million in accrued advertising due to the timing of payments of marketing accruals.
Investing Activities
Investing activities provided net cash of $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to using net cash of $0.2 million in 2019. The components of the increase of $18.9 million are as follows:
Principal receipts from notes, equipment contracts and other long-term receivables increased $7.0 million compared to 2019 due to the early payoff of several notes. Investing cash outflows in 2020 for additions to property and equipment and loans to franchisees were lower than 2019 by $8.5 million and $5.5 million, respectively. The decrease in additions to property and equipment was primarily due to a more focused capital expenditure program as well as some impact of COVID-19.
The Company has long-term receivables for equipment and direct financing receivables as well as other notes receivable from franchisees totaling $84.6 million at December 31, 2020. The following table represents the timing of principal receipts from these receivables:
________________________________________________
(1)Equipment lease receivables extend through the year 2029.
(2)Direct financing lease receivables extend through the year 2040.
(3)Other notes receivable extend through the year 2024.
Financing Activities
Financing activities provided cash of $168.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to using cash of $182.9 million in 2019. The components of the increase of $351.3 million are as follows:
The actions noted above taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic were the primary factors underlying the change. We drew $220 million on our Revolver in 2020 as opposed to repaying the $25 million outstanding balance of the Revolver in 2019, a net change of $245 million. Additionally, we stopped repurchasing our common stock and paying dividends on common stock after the declaration of the pandemic. Prior to taking these actions, we used cash totaling $53.8 million for dividends and stock repurchases in 2020 as compared to using cash of $156.6 million for dividends and stock repurchases in 2019, conserving cash of approximately $103 million as compared to the prior year.
Adjusted Free Cash Flow
We define “adjusted free cash flow” for a given period as cash provided by operating activities, plus receipts from notes and equipment contract receivables, less additions to property and equipment. Management uses this liquidity measure in its periodic assessments of, among other things, the amount of cash dividends per share of common stock and repurchases of common stock and we believe it is important for investors to have the same measure used by management for that purpose. Adjusted free cash flow does not represent residual cash flow available for discretionary purposes.
Adjusted free cash flow is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. This non-U.S. GAAP measure is not defined in the same manner by all companies and may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. Non-U.S. GAAP measures should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, the U.S. GAAP information contained within our financial statements. Reconciliation of the cash provided by operating activities to adjusted free cash flow is as follows:
The decrease in adjusted free cash flow in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the decrease in cash provided by operating activities, partially offset by a decrease in capital expenditures, each of which was discussed in preceding sections of this MD&A.
At December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents totaled $383.4 million, including $71.6 million of cash held for gift card programs and IHOP advertising funds.
Capital Allocation
Dividends
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid dividends on common stock of $23.9 million, representing a cash dividend of $0.69 per share declared in the fourth quarter of 2019, paid in January 2020, and a cash dividend of $0.76 per share declared in the first quarter of 2020, paid in April 2020. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, our Board of Directors did not declare a dividend for the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020. See Note 12 - Stockholders' Deficit, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for dividends paid and declared in fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Share Repurchases
In February 2019, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program authorizing us to repurchase up to $200 million of our common stock (the “2019 Repurchase Program”) on an opportunistic basis from time to time in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions based on business, market, applicable legal requirements and other considerations. The 2019 Repurchase Program, as approved by the Board of Directors, does not require the repurchase of a specific number of shares and can be terminated at any time. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, we suspended repurchases of our common stock in March, 2020. See Note 12 - Stockholders' Deficit, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for dividends paid and declared in fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018.
A summary of shares repurchased under the 2019 Repurchase Program, during the year ended December 31, 2020 and cumulatively, is as follows:
We evaluate dividend payments on common stock and repurchases of common stock within the context of our overall capital allocation strategy with our Board of Directors on an ongoing basis, giving consideration to our current and forecast earnings, financial condition, cash requirements and other factors. We will continue to evaluate our capital allocation strategy as industry and overall economic conditions impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic evolve and normal restaurant operations resume.
From time to time, we also repurchase shares owned and tendered by employees to satisfy tax withholding obligations on the vesting of restricted stock awards. Shares are deemed purchased at the closing price of our common stock on the vesting date. See Part II, Item 5 for detail on all share repurchase activity during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have obligations for guarantees on certain franchisee lease agreements, as disclosed below in “Contractual Obligations and Commitments” and Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Other than such guarantees, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of SEC Regulation S-K as of December 31, 2020.
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, sales, costs or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following are our significant contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Includes interest calculated on balances as of December 31, 2020 using interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2020.
(2) Includes interest calculated on balances as of December 31, 2020 using interest rates used to calculate operating lease liability.
(3) While up to $0.8 million is expected to be paid within one year, there is no contractual obligation to do so. For the remaining liability, due to the uncertainties related to these tax matters, we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate when a cash settlement with a taxing authority will occur.
(4) This amount represents the maximum potential liability for future payment guarantees under leases that have been assigned to third-party buyers of Applebee's company-operated restaurants and expire at the end of the respective lease terms, which range from 2021 through 2048. See Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(5) Primarily used to satisfy insurance-related collateral requirements. These letters of credit expire annually, but typically are renewed in the same amount each year unless collateral requirements change.
(6) In some instances, IHOP and Applebee's may be required to guarantee their purchase of any remaining inventory of certain food and other items purchased by CSCS.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. Our significant accounting policies are comprehensively described in Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe the accounting policies discussed below are particularly important to the understanding of our consolidated financial statements and require higher degree of judgment and/or complexity in the preparation of those consolidated financial statements. In exercising those judgments, we make estimates and assumptions that affect the carrying values of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of net revenues and expenses in the reporting periods covered by the financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience, current conditions and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. We adjust such estimates and assumptions when facts and circumstances dictate. Accounting assumptions and estimates are inherently uncertain and actual results may differ materially from our estimates. Changes in estimates and judgments could significantly affect our results of operations, financial condition and cash flow in the future.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from our franchise and company-operated restaurants in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised services or goods to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive for those services or goods. Our rental and financing revenues are recognized in accordance with other U.S. GAAP accounting standards and are not subject to ASC 606.
In determining the amount and timing of revenue from contracts with customers, we make judgments as to whether uncertainty as to collectibility of the consideration that we are owed precludes recognition of the revenue on an accrual basis. These judgments are based on the facts specific to each circumstance. Primary factors considered include past payment history and our subjective assessment of the likelihood of receiving payment in the future. The timing of recognition does not require significant judgment as it is based on either the term of the franchise agreement, the month of reported sales by the franchisee or the date of product shipment, none of which require estimation.
Significant judgments with respect to rental revenues are discussed below under Leases. We do not have to make significant judgments with respect to revenues from our company-operated restaurants or our financing operations.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill and intangible assets considered to have an indefinite life (primarily the Applebee's tradename) are evaluated throughout the year to determine if indicators of impairment exist. Such indicators include, but are not limited to, events or circumstances such as a significant adverse change in our business, in the business overall climate, unanticipated competition, a loss of key personnel, adverse legal or regulatory developments or a significant decline in the market price of our common stock.
If no indicators of impairment have been noted during these preliminary assessments, we perform an assessment of goodwill and intangible assets annually in the fourth fiscal quarter. We first assess qualitatively whether it is more-likely-than-not that an impairment does not exist. Significant factors considered in this assessment include, but are not limited to, macro-economic conditions, market and industry conditions, cost considerations, the competitive environment, share price fluctuations, overall financial performance and results of past impairment tests. If we do not qualitatively determine that it is more-likely-than-not that an impairment does not exist, we perform a quantitative impairment test.
In performing a quantitative test for impairment of goodwill, we primarily use the income approach method of valuation that includes the discounted cash flow method and the market approach that includes the guideline public company method to determine the fair value of goodwill and intangible assets. Significant assumptions made by management in estimating fair value under the discounted cash flow model include future trends in sales, operating expenses, overhead expenses, depreciation, capital expenditures, changes in working capital and an estimated income tax rate, along with an appropriate discount rate based on our estimated cost of equity capital and after-tax cost of debt. Significant assumptions used to determine fair value under the guideline public company method include the selection of guideline companies and the valuation multiples applied.
In the process of a quantitative test, if necessary, of the Applebee's tradename intangible asset, we primarily use the relief of royalty method under the income approach method of valuation. Significant assumptions used to determine fair value under the relief of royalty method include future trends in sales, a royalty rate, an estimated income tax rate and a discount rate to be applied to the forecast revenue stream.
There is an inherent degree of uncertainty in preparing any forecast of future results. Future trends in system-wide sales are dependent to a significant extent on national, regional and local economic conditions, and, to a lesser extent, on global
economic conditions, particularly those conditions affecting the demographics of the guests that frequently patronize Applebee's restaurants. Accordingly, there are a number of potential events that could reasonably be expected to negatively affect the forecast of system-wide sales, including a decrease in customers' disposable income available for discretionary spending (because of circumstances such as job losses, credit constraints, higher housing costs, increased tax rates, energy costs, interest rates or other costs) or a decrease in the perceived wealth of customers (because of circumstances such as lower residential real estate values, increased foreclosure rates, increased tax rates or other economic disruptions). As a result, our business could experience a decline in sales and/or customer traffic as potential customers choose lower-cost alternatives (such as quick-service restaurants) or other alternatives to dining out. Additionally, negative trends in the availability of credit and in expenses such as interest rates and the cost of construction materials could affect our franchisees' ability to maintain and remodel existing restaurants. Any decreases in customer traffic or average customer check due to these or other reasons could reduce gross sales at franchise restaurants, resulting in lower royalty and other payments from franchisees. This could reduce the profitability of franchise restaurants, potentially impacting the ability of franchisees to make royalty payments owed to us when due (which could adversely impact our current cash flow from franchise operations) and negatively impacting franchisees’ ability to develop new restaurants (which could adversely impact our future cash flows from franchise operations). Significant increases in either the estimated income tax rate or the discount rate could adversely impact estimated fair values used in quantitative tests for impairment.
Long-Lived Assets
On a regular basis, we assess whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that potentially indicate the carrying value of long-lived assets (primarily assets related to properties and equipment leased or subleased to franchisees) may not be recoverable. We test impairment using historical cash flows and other relevant facts and circumstances as the primary basis for our estimates of future cash flows. Significant factors considered include, but are not limited to, current and forecast sales, current and forecast cash flows, the number of years the franchisee's restaurant has been in operation, its remaining lease life, and other factors which apply on a case-by-case basis. The analysis is performed at the individual restaurant level for indicators of permanent impairment. Recoverability of the Company's assets is measured by comparing the assets' carrying value to the undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated over the assets' remaining useful life or remaining lease term, whichever is less. This process requires the use of estimates and assumptions, which are subject to a high degree of judgment. If these assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges for these assets.
On a regular basis, we assess whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that potentially indicate the carrying value of intangible assets with finite lives, primarily assets related to Applebee's franchise rights. Recoverability of the asset is measured by comparing the assets' carrying value to the discounted future cash flows expected to be generated over the asset's remaining useful life. Significant factors considered include, but are not limited to, current and forecast sales, current and forecast cash flows and a discount rate to be applied to the forecast revenue stream.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses is our best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in our existing receivables; however, changes in circumstances relating to receivables may result in additional allowances in the future. We determine the allowance based on historical experience, current payment patterns, future obligations and our assessment of the ability to pay outstanding balances. The primary indicator of credit quality is delinquency, which is considered to be a receivable balance greater than 90 days past due. We continually review our allowance for credit losses. Past due balances and future obligations are reviewed individually for collectability. Account balances are charged against the allowance after all collection efforts have been exhausted and the potential for recovery is considered remote.
Leases
Our restaurants are located on (i) sites owned by us, (ii) sites leased by us from third parties and (iii) sites owned or leased by franchisees. For sites owned by or leased by us from third parties, we, in turn, sublease to our franchisees. At the inception of the lease, each property is evaluated to determine whether the lease will be accounted for as an operating or finance lease in accordance with the provisions of U.S. GAAP governing the accounting for leases.
The Company's lease agreements generally do not provide information to determine the implicit interest rate in the agreements. This requires the Company to make significant judgments in determining the incremental borrowing rate to be used in calculating operating lease liabilities as of the adoption date. The Company estimates the incremental borrowing rate primarily by reference to (i) yield rates on debt issuances by companies of a similar credit rating as the Company; (ii) U.S. Treasury rates as of the adoption or commencement date; and (iii) adjustments for differences between these rates and the lease term.
Management also makes judgments regarding the term for each restaurant property lease, which can impact the classification and accounting for a lease as finance or operating, the rent holiday and/or escalations in payment that are taken into consideration when calculating straight-line rent and the term over which the right-of-use asset (for operating leases) or equipment under finance lease is amortized. These judgments may produce materially different amounts of depreciation, amortization and rent expense than would be reported if different assumed lease terms were used.
Income Taxes
We provide for income taxes based on our estimate of federal and state income tax liabilities. We make certain estimates and judgments in the calculation of tax expense and the resulting tax liabilities and in the recoverability of deferred tax assets that arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenue and expense. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayers and respective governmental authorities. We review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available.
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities using the enacted tax rates for the effect of temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of recorded assets and liabilities. Deferred tax accounting requires that deferred tax assets be reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portions or all the net deferred tax assets will not be realized. This test requires projection of our taxable income into future years to determine if there will be taxable income sufficient to realize the tax assets. The preparation of the projections requires considerable judgment and is subject to change to reflect future events and changes in the tax laws. When we establish or reduce the valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets, our income tax expense will increase or decrease, respectively, in the period such determination is made.
FASB ASC Topic 740-10 requires that a position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return be recognized in the financial statement when it is more likely than not (i.e. a likelihood of more than 50 percent) that the position would be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities including all appeals or litigation processes, based on its technical merits. A recognized tax position is then measured on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. For each reporting period, management applies a consistent methodology to measure and adjust all uncertain tax positions based on the available information.
Legal Contingencies
We are subject to various lawsuits, administrative proceedings, audits, and claims arising in the ordinary course of business. Some of these lawsuits purport to be class actions and/or seek substantial damages. The outcomes of legal proceedings and claims brought against us are subject to significant uncertainty. An estimated loss from a loss contingency such as a legal proceeding or claim is accrued by a charge to income if it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. In determining whether a loss should be accrued we evaluate, among other factors, the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. Changes in these factors could materially impact our consolidated financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with U.S. GAAP governing share-based payments. Accordingly, we measure stock-based compensation expense at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and recognize the expense over the employee's requisite service period using the straight-line method. The fair value of each employee stock option and restricted stock award is estimated on the date of grant using an option pricing model that meets certain requirements. We currently use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of our stock-based compensation. The Black-Scholes model meets the requirements of U.S. GAAP. The measurement of stock-based compensation expense is based on several criteria including, but not limited to, the valuation model used and associated input factors, such as expected term of the award, stock price volatility, risk free interest rate and forfeiture rate. These inputs are subjective and are determined using management's judgment. If differences arise between the assumptions used in determining stock-based compensation expense and the actual factors which become known over time, we may change the input factors used in determining future stock-based compensation expense. Any such changes could impact our operations in the period in which the changes are made and in subsequent periods.
Accounting Standards Adopted in the Current Fiscal Year
See Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for a description of accounting standards we adopted in fiscal 2020.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report, for a description of newly issued accounting standards that may impact us in the future.