ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 and other information in this report, including Critical Accounting Estimates and Cautionary Information included at the end of this Item 7. The following discussion and analysis includes the results of operations for the twelve month periods ended September 2021 and September 2020. For more information regarding our business segments, see Item 1 “Business” of this Annual Report.
Business Update
While the Company experienced strong fiscal 2021 results, it remains cautious moving into fiscal 2022 and beyond based on a range of considerations including, but not limited to, those described below.
First, since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, both of our businesses have experienced an increase in demand and sales across a broad range of products. It remains unclear, however, if these demand trends will remain intact or if they will eventually revert back to more historical levels over time.
Secondly, worldwide supply chains continue to remain highly disrupted, which has impacted product availability and resulted in product pricing inflation and may impact long term demand trends.
Finally, the United States is experiencing an acute workforce shortage, which has also impacted the Company, particularly as it relates to filling warehouse and transportation roles.
All of these factors have contributed to an inflationary environment resulting in higher labor costs and an overall increase in the Company’s cost structure.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth an analysis of various components of the Company’s Statement of Operations as a percentage of sales for fiscal years 2021 and 2020:
(1) Sales are reported net of costs associated with incentives provided to retailers. These incentives totaled $30.1 million and $26.8 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
(2) Calculated based on rounded numbers as presented in the table.
SALES
Changes in sales are driven by two primary components:
(i) changes to selling prices, which are largely controlled by our product suppliers, and excise taxes imposed on cigarettes and tobacco products by various states; and
(ii) changes in the volume and mix of products sold to our customers, either due to a change in purchasing patterns resulting from consumer preferences or the fluctuation in the comparable number of business days in our reporting period.
SALES-Fiscal 2021 vs. Fiscal 2020
Sales in our Wholesale Segment increased $149.8 million during fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. Significant items impacting sales during fiscal 2021 included a $69.8 million increase in sales related to price increases implemented by cigarette manufacturers, a $65.2 million increase in sales related to higher sales volume in our tobacco, beverage, snacks, candy, grocery, health & beauty products, automotive, foodservice, and store supplies categories (“Other Products”), and a $14.8 million increase in sales related to the volume and mix of cigarette cartons sold.
Sales in our Retail Segment increased $1.3 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. Significant items impacting sales during fiscal 2021 included a $2.3 million increase in sales related to higher sales volumes in our existing stores, partially offset by a $1.0 million decrease in sales related to the closure of two non-performing stores on a comparative basis.
Sales in both of our business segments benefitted from higher consumer demand across a range of product categories.
GROSS PROFIT-Fiscal 2021 vs. Fiscal 2020
Our gross profit does not include fulfillment costs and costs related to the distribution network which are included in selling, general and administrative costs, and may not be comparable to those of other entities. Some entities may classify such costs as a component of cost of sales. Cost of sales, a component used in determining gross profit, for the wholesale and retail segments includes the cost of products purchased from manufacturers, less incentives we receive which are netted against such costs.
Gross profit in our Wholesale Segment increased $11.0 million during fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. Of this change, approximately $9.4 million related to higher sales in our Other Products category, $1.4 million related to an increase in the benefit recognized from cigarette manufacturer price increases, and a $0.2 million increase related to the volume and mix of cigarettes sold. Gross profit in our Retail Segment increased $1.8 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. This change was primarily related to higher sales and gross margins in our existing stores resulting from operational enhancements and variations in volume and product mix between the comparative periods, partially offset by the closure of two non-performing stores on a comparative basis.
OPERATING EXPENSE-Fiscal 2021 vs. Fiscal 2020
Operating expense includes selling, general and administrative expenses and depreciation. Selling, general, and administrative expenses primarily consist of costs related to our sales, warehouse, delivery and administrative departments, including purchasing and receiving costs, warehousing costs and costs of picking and loading customer orders. Our most significant expenses relate to costs associated with employees, facility and equipment leases, transportation, fuel, and insurance.
Our fiscal 2021 consolidated operating expenses increased $4.1 million as compared to fiscal 2020. Our fiscal 2021 Wholesale Segment operating expenses increased $5.9 million as compared to fiscal 2020. Significant items impacting operating expenses in our Wholesale Segment during fiscal 2021 included a $4.1 million increase in employee compensation and benefit costs resulting in part due to a highly competitive labor market which has increased wage levels
across all functional areas of the Company, particularly for warehouse associates and transportation roles. Additionally, the Company experienced a $1.3 million increase in health and other insurance costs, a $0.4 million increase in fuel costs primarily related to higher diesel fuel prices, and a $0.5 million increase in other general operating expenses. These increases were partially offset by a $0.4 million decrease in our customer bad debt expense on a comparative basis.
Our fiscal 2021 Retail Segment operating expenses decreased $1.8 million as compared to fiscal 2020. Significant items impacting operating expenses in our Retail Segment during fiscal 2021 included a $1.0 million decrease in operating expenses related to the closure of two non-performing stores on a comparative basis, a decrease of $0.5 million related to impairment charges between the comparative periods, and a $0.3 million decrease in other operating expenses.
INCOME TAX EXPENSE -Fiscal 2021 vs. Fiscal 2020
The change in the Company’s income tax rate between the comparative fiscal periods was primarily related to non-deductible compensation expense in relation to the amount of income from operations before income tax expense between the comparative periods.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s variability in cash flows from operating activities is dependent on the timing of inventory purchases and seasonal fluctuations. For example, periodically we have inventory “buy-in” opportunities which offer more favorable pricing terms. As a result, we may have to hold inventory for a period longer than the payment terms. This generates a cash outflow from operating activities which we expect to reverse in later periods. Additionally, during our peak time of operations in the warm weather months, we generally carry higher amounts of inventory to ensure high fill rates and customer satisfaction.
In general, the Company finances its operations through a credit facility agreement (the “Facility”) with Bank of America acting as the senior agent and with BMO Harris Bank (“BMO”) participating in the loan syndication. The Facility included the following significant terms at September 2021:
● A March 2025 maturity date without a penalty for prepayment.
● $110.0 million revolving credit limit.
● Loan accordion allowing the Company to increase the size of the Facility by $25.0 million.
● A provision providing an additional $10.0 million of credit advances for certain inventory purchases.
● Evergreen renewal clause automatically renewing the agreement for one year unless either the borrower or lender provides written notice terminating the agreement at least 90 days prior to the end of any original or renewal term of the agreement.
● The Facility bears interest at either the bank’s prime rate, or at LIBOR (or equivalent rate index) plus 125 - 150 basis points depending on certain credit facility utilization measures, at the election of the Company. For these purposes, in no event shall LIBOR be less than 50 basis points.
● Lending limits subject to accounts receivable and inventory limitations.
● An unused commitment fee equal to one-quarter of one percent (1/4%) per annum on the difference between the maximum loan limit and average monthly borrowings.
● Secured by collateral including all of the Company’s equipment, intangibles, inventories, and accounts receivable.
● A financial covenant requiring a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 1.0 as measured by the previous twelve month period then ended only if excess availability falls below 10% of the maximum loan limit as defined in the credit agreement. The Company’s fixed charge coverage ratio was over 1.0 for the trailing twelve months.
● Provides that the Company may use up to $3.5 million annually, on a collective basis, for the payment of dividends on its common stock, or other distributions or investments, provided the Company is not in default before or after such dividends, distributions or investments. Additionally, the Company may pay dividends on its common stock, or make other distributions or investments in excess of $3.5 million annually provided the Company meets certain excess availability and proforma fixed charge coverage ratios and is not in default before or after such dividends, distributions or investments.
The amount available for use on the Facility at any given time is subject to a number of factors including eligible accounts receivable and inventory balances that fluctuate day-to-day. Based on our collateral and loan limits as defined in the Facility agreement, the credit limit of the Facility at September 2021 was $109.5 million, of which $43.7 million was outstanding, leaving $65.8 million available.
At September 2021, the revolving portion of the Company’s Facility balance bore interest based on the bank’s prime rate and various short-term LIBOR rate elections made by the Company. The average interest rate was 1.89% at September 2021.
During fiscal 2021, our peak borrowings under the Facility were $71.7 million and our average borrowings and average availability were $44.3 million and $46.5 million, respectively. Our availability to borrow under the Facility generally decreases as inventory and accounts receivable levels increase because of the borrowing limitations that are placed on collateralized assets.
Cross Default and Co-Terminus Provisions
The Company owns real estate in Bismarck, ND, Quincy, IL, and Rapid City, SD, which is financed through a single term loan with BMO (the “Real Estate Loan”) which is also a participant lender on the Company’s revolving line of credit. The Real Estate Loan contains cross default provisions which cause it to be considered in default if the loans where BMO is a lender, including the revolving credit facility, is in default. There were no such cross defaults at September 2021. In addition, the Real Estate Loan contains co-terminus provisions which require all loans with BMO to be paid in full if any of the loans are paid in full prior to the end of their specified terms.
Dividend Payments
The Company paid cash dividends of $3.4 million, or $5.72 per common share during fiscal 2021, and $0.6 million, or $1.00 per common share during fiscal 2020.
Other
The Company has issued a letter of credit for $0.5 million to its workers’ compensation insurance carrier as part of its self-insured loss control program.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Liquidity Risk
The Company’s liquidity position is significantly influenced by its ability to maintain sufficient levels of working capital. For our Company and industry in general, customer credit risk and ongoing access to bank credit heavily influence liquidity positions.
The Company does not currently hedge its exposure to interest rate risk or fuel costs. Accordingly, significant price movements in these areas can and do impact the Company’s profitability.
While the Company believes its liquidity position going forward will be adequate to sustain operations, a precipitous change in operating environment could materially impact the Company’s future revenue stream as well as its ability to collect on customer accounts receivable or secure bank credit.
OTHER MATTERS-Critical Accounting Estimates
GENERAL
The Consolidated Financial Statements of the Company are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, which require the Company to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. The Company believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The Company believes the following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Our critical accounting estimates are set forth below and have not changed during fiscal 2021.
ALLOWANCE FOR DOUBTFUL ACCOUNTS
NATURE OF ESTIMATES REQUIRED. The allowance for doubtful accounts represents our estimate of uncollectible accounts receivable at the balance sheet date. We monitor our credit exposure on a daily basis and regularly assess the adequacy of our allowance for doubtful accounts. Because credit losses can vary significantly over time, estimating the required allowance requires a number of assumptions that are uncertain.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. We estimate our required allowance for doubtful accounts using the following key assumptions:
● Historical collections-Represented as the amount of historical uncollectible accounts as a percent of total accounts receivable.
● Specific credit exposure on certain accounts-Identified based on management’s review of the accounts receivable portfolio and taking into account the financial wherewithal of particular customers that management deems to have a higher risk of collection.
● Market conditions-We consider a broad range of industry trends and macro-economic issues which may impact the creditworthiness of our customers.
INVENTORIES
NATURE OF ESTIMATES REQUIRED. In our businesses, we carry large quantities and dollar amounts of inventory. Inventories primarily consist of finished products purchased in bulk quantities to be sold to our customers. Given the large quantities and broad range of products we carry, there is a risk that inventory may become impaired because it has become unsaleable or unrefundable, slow moving, obsolete, or because it has been discontinued. The use of estimates is required in determining either the net realizable value (for our wholesale business) or the lower of cost or market (“LCM”) under the retail method (for our retail business) of this inventory.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. We estimate our inventory obsolescence reserve at each balance sheet date based on the following criteria:
● Slow moving products-Items identified as slow moving are evaluated on a case-by-case basis for impairment.
● Obsolete/discontinued inventory-Products identified that are near or beyond their expiration dates. We may also discontinue carrying certain product lines for our customers. As a result, we estimate either the net realizable value or the LCM of this inventory as if it were to be liquidated.
● Estimated net realizable value-For our wholesale business, the net realizable value of the inventory is estimated using management’s evaluation of the congestion in the distribution channels and experience with brokers and inventory liquidators to determine the net realizable value of the inventory.
DEPRECIATION, AMORTIZATION AND IMPAIRMENT OF LONG-LIVED ASSETS, INCLUDING GOODWILL AND LEASED RIGHT-OF-USE ASSETS
Long-lived assets consist primarily of property and equipment, leased right-of-use (“ROU”) assets, intangible assets, and goodwill acquired in business combinations. Property and equipment, ROU assets and amortizable identified intangible assets are assigned useful lives ranging from 1 to 40 years. Indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill are not amortized. Impairment of the Company’s long-lived assets is assessed during the Company’s fourth fiscal quarter using both qualitative and quantitative analysis, or whenever events or circumstances change that indicate the carrying value of such long-lived assets may not be recoverable.
NATURE OF ESTIMATES REQUIRED. Management has to estimate the useful lives of the Company’s long-lived assets. In regard to the Company’s impairment analysis, the most significant assumptions include management’s estimate of the annual growth rate used to project future sales and expenses.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. For property and equipment, depreciable lives are based on our accounting policy which is intended to mirror the expected useful life of the asset. In determining the estimated useful life of ROU assets and amortizable intangible assets such as customer lists, we rely on our historical experience in addition to estimates of how long certain assets will generate cash flows. If impairment indicators arise, we then evaluate the potential impairment of property and equipment, ROU assets and amortizable identifiable intangible assets using an undiscounted future cash flow approach.
When evaluating the potential impairment of non-amortizable indefinite-lived assets and goodwill, the Company first assesses a range of qualitative factors, including but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry conditions, the competitive environment, changes in the market for the Company’s products and services, market prices, regulatory and political developments, entity specific factors such as strategy and changes in key personnel, and the overall financial performance for each of the Company’s reporting units. If after completing this assessment, the Company determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a quantitative evaluation is performed using the income approach (discounted cash flow method).
A discounted cash flow methodology requires the estimation of a wide range of factors including but not limited to: (i) forecasting future earnings and cash flows (ii) determining the discount rate applicable to the earnings stream being discounted, and (iii) computing a terminal value at some point in the future. These estimations require significant judgment and include making assumptions such as sales growth rates including the addition of new retail stores, future store profitability, planned capital expenditures, our ability to control costs, the successful implementation of initiatives designed to enhance sales and improve inventory management, gross profit estimates, macroeconomic conditions, industry conditions, the competitive environment, changes in the market for the Company’s products and services, regulatory and political developments, entity specific factors such as strategy and changes in key personnel, working capital requirements, weighted average cost of capital, and current and anticipated operating conditions. The use of different assumptions or estimates for future cash flows could produce different results.
The Company’s retail reporting unit recorded ROU asset and fixed asset impairment charges of approximately $0.5 million during fiscal 2020 (See Notes 1 and 4). These impairment charges arose from a range of considerations including, but not limited to, heightened competition in the industry, retail sector market conditions, and earning shortfalls which impacted the Company’s projections of future cash flows to be generated from such assets. To the extent that management's estimates of future performance for the Company’s retail reporting unit are not realized, our business plans for future operations change, or if there is a further deterioration in the macro retailing operating environment, the future assumptions used in calculating the fair value of assets in the retail unit could differ and result in additional impairment charges.
Goodwill recorded on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet represents amounts allocated to its wholesale reporting unit which totaled $4.4 million at both September 2021 and September 2020. The Company determined that the estimated fair value of its wholesale reporting unit exceeded its carrying value at both September 2021 and September 2020.
INSURANCE
The Company’s insurance for workers’ compensation, general liability and employee-related health care benefits are provided through high-deductible or self-insured programs. As a result, the Company accrues for its workers’ compensation liability based upon claim reserves established with the assistance of a third-party administrator, which are then trended and developed. The reserves are evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Due to the uncertainty involved with the realization of claims incurred but unreported, management is required to make estimates of these claims.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. In order to estimate our reserve for incurred but unreported claims we consider the following key factors:
Employee Health Insurance Claims
● Historical claims experience-We review loss runs for each month to calculate the average monthly claims experience.
● Lag period for reporting claims-Based on our analysis, our experience is such that we have a minimum of a one month lag period in which claims are reported.
Workers’ Compensation Insurance Claims
● Historical claims experience-We review prior years’ loss runs to estimate the average annual expected claims and review monthly loss runs to compare our estimates to actual claims.
● Lag period for reporting claims-We review claims trends and use standard insurance industry loss models to develop reserves on reported claims in order to estimate the amount of incurred but unreported claims.
INCOME TAXES
The Company accounts for its income taxes by recording taxes payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. These expected future tax consequences are measured based on provisions of tax law as currently enacted; the effects of future changes in tax laws are not anticipated. Future tax law changes, such as a change in the corporate tax rate, could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
On a periodic basis, we assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and establish a related valuation allowance as appropriate. In performing our evaluation, we consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, to determine whether, based on the weight of the evidence, a valuation allowance is needed. Evidence used includes information about our current financial position and our results of operations for the current and preceding years, as well as all currently available information about future years, including our anticipated future performance, the reversal of deferred tax liabilities and tax planning strategies. When appropriate, we record a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets to offset future tax benefits that may not be realized.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. In determining whether a valuation allowance is appropriate, we consider whether it is more likely than not that all or some portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized, based in part upon management’s judgments regarding future events.
In making that estimate we consider the following key factors:
● our current financial position;
● historical financial information;
● future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences;
● future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards;
● taxable income in prior carryback years; and
● tax planning strategies.
REVENUE RECOGNITION
We recognize revenue in both our Wholesale Segment and our Retail Segment when the performance obligation is satisfied, which is the point at which control of the promised goods or services are transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods and services. For the majority of our customer arrangements, control transfers to customers at a point-in-time when goods have been delivered, as that is generally when legal title, physical possession and risks and rewards of goods and services transfers to the customer. Sales are shown net of returns, discounts, and sales incentives to customers.
NATURE OF ESTIMATES REQUIRED. We estimate and reserve for anticipated sales discounts. We also estimate and provide a reserve for anticipated sales incentives to customers when earned under established program requirements.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. We estimate the sales reserves using the following criteria:
● Sales discounts-We use historical experience to estimate the amount of accounts receivable that will not be collected due to customers taking advantage of authorized term discounts.
● Volume sales incentives-We use historical experience in combination with quarterly reviews of customers’ sales progress in order to estimate the amount of volume incentives due to the customers on a periodic basis.
Our estimates and assumptions for each of the aforementioned critical accounting estimates have not changed materially during the periods presented, nor are we aware of any reasons that they would be reasonably likely to change in the future.
ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments”, which introduces a forward-looking approach, based on expected losses, to estimate credit losses on certain types of financial instruments, including trade receivables. The estimate of expected credit losses will require entities to incorporate considerations of historical information, current information and reasonable and supportable forecasts. This ASU also expands the disclosure requirements to enable users of financial statements to understand the entity’s assumptions, models and methods for estimating expected credit losses. This guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022 (fiscal 2024 for the Company) with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently reviewing this ASU and its potential impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-04, “Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting.” The amendments in this update provide optional guidance for a limited period of time to ease the potential burden in accounting for (or recognizing the effects of) reference rate reform on financial reporting as the market transitions from the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) and other interbank offered rates to alternative reference rates. The amendments in this update were effective upon issuance for all entities through December 31, 2022. The Company is currently reviewing this ASU and its potential impact on our consolidated financial statements.
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and other sections, contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties and which reflect management’s current beliefs and estimates of future economic circumstances, industry conditions, Company performance and financial results. Forward-looking statements include information concerning the possible or assumed future results of operations of the Company and those statements preceded by, followed by or that include the words “future,” “position,” “anticipate(s),” “expect(s),” “believe(s),” “see,” “plan,” “further improve,” “outlook,” “should” or similar expressions. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward- looking statements are not guarantees of future performance or results. They involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions.
It should be understood that the following important factors, in addition to those discussed elsewhere in this document, could affect the future results of the Company and could cause those results to differ materially from those expressed in our forward-looking statements:
● risks associated with the Company’s business model which since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic has experienced both higher sales volumes and labor costs, and the related risk of sales returning to more historical levels without the Company being able to offset increases in its cost structure,
● risks associated with the threat or occurrence of epidemics or pandemics (such as COVID-19) or other public health issues, including the continued health of our employees and management, the imposition of governmental orders restricting our operations and the activities of our employees, suppliers and customers and the reduced demand for our goods and services, in particular, disruptions to our supply chain or our ability to procure products or fulfill orders due to disruptions in our warehouse operations, or increased credit risk from customer credit defaults resulting from an economic downturn,
● risks associated with the acquisition of assets or new businesses or investments in equity investees by either of our business segments including, but not limited to, risks associated with purchase price and business valuation risks,
vendor and customer retention risks, employee and technology integration risks, and risks related to the assumption of certain liabilities or obligations,
● increasing competition and market conditions in our wholesale and retail health food businesses and any associated impact on the carrying value and any potential impairment of assets (including intangible assets) within those businesses,
● that our repositioning strategy for our retail business will not be successful,
● risks associated with opening new retail stores,
● if online shopping formats such as Amazon™ continue to grow in popularity and further disrupt traditional sales channels, it may present a significant direct risk to our brick and mortar retail business and potentially to our wholesale distribution business,
● the potential impact that ongoing, decreasing, or changing trade tariffs and trade policies may have on our product costs or on consumer disposable income and demand,
● increasing product and operational costs resulting from ongoing COVID-19 related supply chain disruptions, an intensely competitive labor market with a limited pool of qualified workers, and higher incremental costs associated with the handling and transportation of certain product categories such as foodservice,
● increases in state and federal excise taxes on cigarette and tobacco products and the potential impact on demand, particularly as it relates to current legislation under consideration which could significantly increase such taxes,
● higher commodity prices and general inflation which could impact food ingredient costs and demand for many of the products we sell,
● regulations, potential bans and/or litigation related to the manufacturing, distribution, and sale of certain cigarette, tobacco, and e-cigarette/vaping products by the United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”), state or local governmental agencies, or other parties,
● increases in inventory carrying costs and customer credit risks,
● changes in pricing strategies and/or promotional/incentive programs offered by cigarette and tobacco manufacturers,
● demand for the Company’s products, particularly cigarette, tobacco and e-cigarette/vaping products,
● risks that product manufacturers may begin selling directly to convenience stores and bypass wholesale distributors,
● changes in laws and regulations and ongoing compliance related to health care and associated insurance,
● increasing health care costs for both the Company and consumers and its potential impact on discretionary consumer spending,
● decreased availability of capital resources,
● domestic regulatory and legislative risks,
● poor weather conditions, and the adverse effects of climate change,
● consolidation trends within the convenience store, wholesale distribution, and retail health food industries,
● natural disasters and domestic or political unrest, or any restrictions, regulations, or security measures implemented by governmental bodies in response to these items,
● other risks over which the Company has little or no control, and any other factors not identified herein.
Changes in these factors could result in significantly different results. Consequently, future results may differ from management’s expectations. Moreover, past financial performance should not be considered a reliable indicator of future performance. Any forward-looking statement contained herein is made as of the date of this document. Except as required by law, the Company undertakes no obligation to publicly update or correct any of these forward-looking statements in the future to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of material events or changes in future operating results, financial conditions or business over time.