ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with Part II, Item 6, “Selected Financial Data” and our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. See “Forward-Looking Statements” and Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors”.
Business Overview
We are a leading omni-channel sporting goods retailer offering an extensive assortment of authentic, high-quality sports equipment, apparel, footwear and accessories. In addition to DICK’S Sporting Goods stores, we own and operate Golf Galaxy and Field & Stream specialty stores, as well as GameChanger, a youth sports mobile app for video streaming, scorekeeping, scheduling and communications. We also offer our products through an eCommerce platform that is integrated with our store network, providing our customers, to whom we refer as our athletes, with expertise as well as the convenience of a 24-hour storefront. When used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, unless the context otherwise requires or specifies, any reference to “year” is to our fiscal year.
Our profitability is primarily influenced by the growth in consolidated same store sales, our number of store locations and selling square footage, the continued integration of eCommerce with brick and mortar stores, the strength of our gross profit margins and our ability to manage expenses. We have grown from 644 DICK'S Sporting Goods stores at the end of fiscal 2015 to 728 DICK’S Sporting Goods stores at the end of fiscal 2020. Our current real estate strategy has resulted in a reduction in the rate at which we open new stores in recent years. We intend to continue this strategy over the next few years, which will allow us to continue to leverage the significant flexibility within our existing real estate portfolio to capitalize on future real estate opportunities as leases come up for renewal. We deploy an insourced eCommerce platform, which allows for continued innovation and enhancements to our eCommerce websites and applications, new releases of our mobile and tablet apps, and the development of omni-channel capabilities that integrate our online presence with our brick and mortar stores, including ship-from-store; buy-online, pick-up in store and multi-channel marketing campaigns. We also implemented curbside pickup and returns as additional alternatives for our athletes in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our eCommerce sales penetration to total net sales increased from approximately 10% in fiscal 2015 to approximately 16% in fiscal 2019, and since the COVID-19 pandemic began in March 2020, eCommerce sales growth further accelerated. In fiscal 2020, eCommerce sales, which includes curbside pickup, increased 100% compared to fiscal 2019 and accounted for approximately 30% of total net sales.
Industry Challenges
The retail industry as a whole is dynamic, and sporting goods retail in particular has faced significant disruption in recent years, as several sporting goods retailers have gone out of business. Vendors have broadened their distribution into department stores and family footwear channels while continuing to grow their direct to consumer business. We have responded to these challenges by reallocating floor space to growing categories while focusing on driving profitable sales, emphasizing a refined merchandise assortment that delivers newness, innovation and exclusivity. We have also made strategic investments in our supply chain, digital capabilities, athlete experience, vertical brands and employees, to whom we refer as teammates, to support these efforts and have focused on increasing productivity, while eliminating non-essential expenses, which has enabled us to fund our future strategic investments.
COVID-19 Update
In response to the public health crisis posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, and in compliance with state and local regulations, we prioritized the health and safety of our teammates and athletes and temporarily closed our stores to the public. All stores had re-opened by the end of June 2020. We also closed our customer support center, using our business continuity plans to operate our corporate support functions under remote work arrangements, which remain in place.
During the period of store closures, we continued to serve our athletes through our eCommerce platform, which experienced accelerated sales growth following our temporary store closures. We leveraged our store network for ship-from-store and curbside pickup capabilities, which allowed us to sell through inventory in stores and provide service to our athletes who preferred to pick up their merchandise without entering our stores. We also took precautionary measures to increase and maintain our liquidity, which included reducing operating expenses, inventory receipts and capital expenditures, negotiating rent deferrals, amending our Credit Facility to increase borrowing capacity and raising additional capital by issuing $575 million of Convertible Senior Notes, among other actions.
Despite COVID-19 causing temporary store closures during March, April and May and the cancellation of many team sports seasons across the country, we experienced higher sales growth following our store re-openings in the spring. This was due in part to the strength of our omni-channel capabilities, which, coupled with our diverse category portfolio that includes golf, outdoor activities, home fitness and active lifestyle, enabled us to capitalize on favorable shifts in consumer demand. Our consolidated same store sales increased 9.9% in fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year, due in part to the acceleration of eCommerce sales growth we experienced following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Approximately 70% of online sales during fiscal 2020 were fulfilled directly by our stores, which serve as localized points of distribution, and our stores enabled 90% of our fiscal 2020 sales through online fulfillment and in-person sales.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented additional safety and cleaning protocols at our stores, distribution centers and corporate offices and provided a 15% pay premium to our store and distribution center teammates through the end of fiscal 2020. As a result of these and other actions taken to prioritize the health and well-being of our teammates and athletes, we incurred pre-tax teammate compensation and safety costs of approximately $175 million during fiscal 2020, and we anticipate approximately $30 million of COVID-related safety costs in the first half of fiscal 2021, primarily within selling, general and administrative expenses. Following the conclusion of our temporary 15% pay premium program, we transitioned store and distribution center teammates to more lasting compensation programs in fiscal 2021, including an accelerated annual merit increase and higher wage minimums.
The ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business remains uncertain, including with respect to the longer-term economic recovery and what consumer discretionary spending behavior patterns may emerge when the pandemic subsides. Therefore, we currently are not able to estimate the full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our financial condition and future results of operations, but we will continue to actively monitor its impact on our business.
Hunt Restructuring Update
We removed hunt category merchandise from approximately 135 DICK’S Sporting Goods stores through the end of fiscal 2019 and reallocated the space in these stores to a localized product or category assortment in an effort to drive growth. In connection with our announcement in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019 of a plan to remove the hunt department from an additional 440 DICK’S Sporting Goods stores, we recorded pre-tax charges totaling $57.7 million in that quarter, which included $35.7 million of non-cash impairments to a trademark and store assets, a $13.1 million write-down of inventory and an $8.9 million charge related to our exit from eight Field & Stream stores, which were subleased to a third party (collectively, “the hunt restructuring”).
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we delayed our removal of the hunt department from all planned stores in fiscal 2020. However, we expect that the project will be completed during the first half of fiscal 2021, after which the hunt department will remain in approximately 100 DICK’S Sporting Goods and Field & Stream stores.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
Senior management focuses on certain key indicators to monitor our performance including:
•Consolidated same store sales performance - Our management considers same store sales, which consists of both brick and mortar and eCommerce sales, to be an important indicator of our current performance. Same store sales results are important to leverage our costs, which include occupancy costs, store payroll and other store expenses. Same store sales also have a direct impact on our total net sales, net income, cash and working capital. A store is included in the same store sales calculation during the same fiscal period that it commences its 14th full month of operations. Stores that were permanently closed or relocated during the applicable period have been excluded from same store sales results. Each relocated store is returned to the same store sales base during the fiscal period that it commences its 14th full month of operations at the new location. See further discussion of our consolidated same store sales within Item 6. “Selected Financial Data” and in the “Results of Operations and Other Selected Data” section herein.
•Earnings before taxes and the related operating margin - Our management views earnings before taxes and operating margin as key indicators of our performance. The key drivers of earnings before taxes are same store sales, gross profit, and our ability to control selling, general and administrative expenses.
•Cash flows from operating activities - Cash flow generation supports our general liquidity needs and funds capital expenditures for our omni-channel platform, distribution and administrative facilities, costs associated with continued improvement of information technology tools, potential strategic acquisitions or investments that may arise from time-to-time and stockholder return initiatives, including cash dividends and share repurchases. We typically generate significant cash flows from operating activities in our fourth fiscal quarter in connection with the holiday selling season and sales of cold weather sporting goods and apparel. See discussion of our fiscal 2020 cash flows compared to fiscal 2019 in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section herein.
•Quality of merchandise offerings - To measure acceptance of our merchandise offerings, we monitor sell-throughs, inventory turns, gross margins and markdown rates at the department and style level. This analysis helps us manage inventory levels to reduce working capital requirements and deliver optimal gross margins by improving merchandise flow and establishing appropriate price points to minimize markdowns.
•Store productivity - To assess store-level performance, we monitor various indicators, including new store productivity, sales per square foot, store operating contribution margin and store cash flow.
Executive Summary
•Net sales increased 9.5% to $9,584.0 million in fiscal 2020 from $8,750.7 million in fiscal 2019.
◦Consolidated same store sales increased 9.9% from fiscal 2019.
◦Since the COVID-19 pandemic began, eCommerce sales growth has accelerated, increasing approximately 100% from fiscal 2019. eCommerce sales penetration was approximately 30% of total net sales in fiscal 2020 compared to approximately 16% of total net sales in fiscal 2019.
•Earnings per diluted share was $5.72 in fiscal 2020, an increase of 71% compared to earnings per diluted share of $3.34 for the fiscal year ended February 1, 2020. Net income totaled $530.3 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $297.5 million in fiscal 2019.
◦Fiscal 2020 net income included approximately $175 million of pre-tax expenses, or $1.40 per diluted share, net of tax, of teammate compensation and safety costs resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
◦Net income in the current year also included $16.0 million of non-cash interest expense, net of tax, and earnings per diluted share included 3.5 million shares related to our Convertible Senior Notes that will be offset at conversion by our bond hedge, which together decreased current year earnings per diluted share by $0.40.
◦Fiscal 2019 net income included a charge of $50.1 million, net of tax, or $0.56 per diluted share, related to the hunt restructuring, a gain of $25.0 million, net of tax, or $0.28 per diluted share, related to the sale of two of our technology subsidiaries, a non-cash impairment charge of $11.3 million, net of tax, or $0.13 per diluted share, to reduce the carrying value of a corporate aircraft to its current fair market value, which was subsequently sold, and a benefit of $4.7 million, net of tax, or $0.05 per diluted share, from the favorable settlement of a litigation contingency that had been previously accrued.
•In addition, during fiscal 2020, we:
◦Issued the Convertible Senior Notes, which added over $500.0 million of net proceeds to our cash position;
◦Amended our revolving credit facility to increase our borrowing capacity to $1.855 billion; and
◦Declared and paid aggregate cash dividends on a quarterly basis for a total amount of $1.25 per share on our common stock and Class B common stock.
•The following table summarizes store openings and closings in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019:
(1)Includes our Golf Galaxy, Field & Stream and outlet stores. In some markets, we operate DICK’S Sporting Goods stores adjacent to our specialty concept stores on the same property with a pass-through for our athletes. We refer to this format as a “combo store” and include combo store openings within both the DICK’S Sporting Goods and specialty concept store reconciliations, as applicable.
(2)Includes our closure and sublease of four Field & Stream stores in fiscal 2020 in addition to eight in fiscal 2019.
Results of Operations
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, selected items in the Consolidated Statements of Income as a percentage of our net sales, as well as the basis point change in percentage of net sales from the prior year:
(A) Column does not add due to rounding.
Note - As retailers vary in how they record costs of operating their stores and supply chain between cost of goods sold and selling, general and administrative expenses, our gross profit rate and selling, general and administrative expenses rate may not be comparable to other retailers. For additional information regarding the types of costs classified within cost of goods sold, selling, general and administrative expenses or any other financial statement line items presented herein, refer to Note 1-Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies included in Part IV. Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended January 30, 2021 (Fiscal 2020) compared to the year ended February 1, 2020 (Fiscal 2019) is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended February 1, 2020 (Fiscal 2019) compared to the year ended February 2, 2019 (Fiscal 2018) can be found under Item 7 of Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended February 1, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 20, 2020.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Net Sales
Net sales were $9,584.0 million in fiscal 2020, a 9.5% increase from net sales of $8,750.7 million in fiscal 2019. The increase in net sales was primarily due to a $830.5 million, or 9.9%, increase in consolidated same store sales across hardlines, apparel and footwear, and included a 17.0% increase in sales per transaction offset by a 7.1% decrease in transactions. Since the COVID-19 pandemic began, eCommerce sales growth accelerated, increasing approximately 100% in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. As a result, eCommerce sales penetration increased to approximately 30% of total net sales during fiscal 2020 compared to approximately 16% of total net sales during fiscal 2019.
Income from Operations
Income from operations increased to $741.5 million in fiscal 2020 from $375.6 million in fiscal 2019.
Gross profit increased 19.4% to $3,050.7 million in fiscal 2020 from $2,554.6 million in fiscal 2019 and increased as a percentage of net sales by 264 basis points. This increase was due primarily to merchandise margin expansion and occupancy leverage, partially offset by an increase in eCommerce shipping and fulfillment costs. Merchandise margins increased 219 basis points, primarily driven by fewer promotions and last year’s $13.1 million write-down of inventory related to the restructuring of our hunt business. Our occupancy costs, which after the cost of merchandise represents the largest expense item within our cost of goods sold, are generally fixed in nature and fluctuate based on the number of stores that we operate. Occupancy costs decreased $11.2 million in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, which increased gross profit by 114 basis points. eCommerce shipping and fulfillment costs decreased gross profit by 74 basis points due primarily to sales growth and a higher penetration of eCommerce sales, as well as the full year impact of the fixed costs associated with two dedicated eCommerce fulfillment centers that were opened in the third quarter of 2019. Gross profit was reduced by approximately $23 million of COVID-related compensation and safety costs in fiscal 2020.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 5.7% to $2,298.5 million in the current year from $2,173.7 million in fiscal 2019, but decreased as a percentage of net sales by 86 basis points due primarily to the current year increase in net sales. The current year included approximately $152 million of teammate compensation and safety costs incurred in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, net of a $17 million benefit from employee retention tax credits provided by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), as well as a $30 million contribution to The DICK’S Sporting Goods Foundation to help jump-start youth sports programs struggling to return from the COVID-19 pandemic. Fiscal 2019 costs included hunt restructuring charges of $44.6 million and a $15.3 million non-cash fixed asset impairment charge to reduce the carrying value of a corporate aircraft held for sale to its fair market value, which were partially offset by a $6.4 million favorable settlement of a previously recorded litigation contingency. Apart from these enumerated items, increases in store payroll and operating expenses incurred to support the increase in net sales were offset by operating expense reductions, including advertising, during and following our temporary store closures.
Pre-opening expenses, which generally fluctuate depending on the timing and number of new store openings and relocations, increased to $10.7 million in the current year from $5.3 million in the prior year. We opened 17 new stores in fiscal 2020 compared to 12 new stores in fiscal 2019.
Gain on Sale of Subsidiaries
In fiscal 2019, we sold two technology subsidiaries for net proceeds of $40.4 million. In connection with the sale we recognized a pre-tax gain of $33.8 million.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $48.8 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $17.0 million in fiscal 2019. The increase primarily related to interest expense of approximately $36.4 million related to the Convertible Senior Notes issued in April 2020, which included non-cash amortization of $21.6 million related to the debt discount.
Other Income
Other income increased to $19.1 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $15.3 million in fiscal 2019. The increase primarily relates to changes in our deferred compensation plan investment values, which we account for by recognizing investment income or expense and recording a corresponding charge or reduction to selling, general and administrative costs.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate decreased to 25.5% in the current year compared to 27.0% in fiscal 2019, which was primarily attributable to a non-deductible trademark impairment charge of $28.3 million that we recorded in the prior year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity and capital needs have generally been met by net cash provided by operating activities, supplemented by borrowings under our senior secured revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”) as necessary. We generally utilize our Credit Facility for working capital needs based primarily on the seasonal nature of our operating cash flows, as well as to fund share buybacks, dividends and capital expenditures. Historically, our peak borrowing level has occurred early in the fourth quarter as we increase inventory in advance of the holiday selling season.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we took various actions in 2020 to preserve and fortify our liquidity, which included reducing operating expenses, inventory receipts and capital expenditures, negotiating rent deferrals, exercising the accordion feature within our Credit Facility to provide $255 million of additional borrowing capacity and issuing the Convertible Senior Notes, which added over $500 million of net proceeds to our cash position. As a result of these actions along with our fiscal 2020 operating results, we had cash and cash equivalents of nearly $1.66 billion and no borrowings outstanding on our Credit Facility at January 30, 2021.
We believe that we have sufficient cash flows from operations to operate our business for at least the next 12 months, supplemented by funds available under our Credit Facility, if necessary. We may require additional funding should we pursue strategic acquisitions or undertake share repurchases, other investments or store expansion rates in excess of historical levels.
Credit Facility
Our $1.855 billion senior revolving Credit Facility includes a maximum amount of $150 million to be issued in the form of letters of credit. Under the Credit Facility, subject to satisfaction of certain conditions, we may request an increase of up to $245 million in additional borrowing availability. See Part IV. Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules, Note 8-Revolving Credit Facility for additional details.
Credit Facility information is provided below for the following fiscal years ended (in millions):
Liquidity information is provided below as of the following dates (in millions):
Capital Allocation
We intend to allocate capital to invest in future growth, specifically growing, relocating and remodeling our store network, as well as investing in our eCommerce business and in additional technology designed to increase store productivity to deliver a continually improving omni-channel shopping experience for our athletes. We may also allocate capital to other long-term strategic investments while returning capital to stockholders through share repurchases and dividends.
Convertible Senior Notes due 2025
As of January 30, 2021, we have $575 million of Convertible Senior Notes outstanding. Cash interest accrues at a rate of 3.25% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears on April 15 and October 15. We currently anticipate that we will repay the principal amount of the Convertible Senior Notes in cash to minimize dilution, whether in connection with an early conversion of the Convertible Senior Notes or repayment at maturity, using excess cash, free cash flow and borrowings on our Credit Facility. However, we may need to pursue additional sources of liquidity to repay the Convertible Senior Notes in cash at their maturity date in April 2025 or upon early conversion, as applicable. At January 30, 2021, the stock price conditions under which the Convertible Senior Notes could be convertible at the holders’ option were met. However, the Company has not received any conversion requests through the filing date of this Form 10-K.
There can be no assurance as to the availability of capital to fund such repayments, or to the extent that capital is available through additional debt issuances or refinancing of the Convertible Senior Notes, that such capital will be available on terms that are favorable to us. See Part IV. Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules, Note 9-Convertible Senior Notes for additional details.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures are primarily allocated toward the development of our omni-channel platform, including investments in new and existing stores and eCommerce technology, while we have also strived to continuously improve our supply chain and corporate technology capabilities. In fiscal 2020, capital expenditures totaled $224.0 million on a gross basis and $167.3 million on a net basis, which includes construction allowances provided by landlords.
We anticipate that fiscal 2021 capital expenditures will be in a range of $275 to $300 million, net of construction allowances provided by landlords. We expect our investments to be focused on enhancing the athlete experience in our existing stores, including merchandise presentation, space optimization and investments to enhance the fitting and lesson experience in our golf business. Additionally, we will continue to invest in technology that supports the athlete experience and teammate productivity, as well as in new store development.
Approximately two-thirds of our DICK’S Sporting Goods stores will be up for lease renewal at our option over the next five years, and we plan to leverage the significant flexibility within our existing real estate portfolio to capitalize on future real estate opportunities over the near and intermediate terms.
Share Repurchases
We may repurchase shares from time-to-time to offset dilution or when market conditions are favorable. On March 16, 2016, our Board of Directors authorized a five-year share repurchase program of up to $1.0 billion of our common stock, under which we have repurchased a total of $968.8 million of common stock through January 30, 2021.
On June 12, 2019, our Board of Directors authorized an additional five-year share repurchase program of up to $1.0 billion of our common stock.
We temporarily suspended our share repurchase programs in April 2020 in response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We resumed share repurchases in March 2021 and expect to invest at least $200 million throughout fiscal 2021. Any future share repurchase programs are subject to the authorization by our Board of Directors and will be dependent upon future earnings, cash flows, financial requirements and other factors.
Dividends
During the fiscal years ended January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020, we paid $107.4 million and $98.3 million, respectively, of dividends to our stockholders. On March 5, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a 16% increase in our quarterly cash dividend compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020. The dividend of $0.3625 per share of common stock and Class B common stock is payable on March 26, 2021 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on March 19, 2021.
The declaration of future dividends and the establishment of the per share amount, record dates and payment dates for any such future dividends are subject to authorization by our Board of Directors and are dependent upon multiple factors, including future earnings, cash flows, financial requirements and other considerations.
Cash Flows
Changes in cash and cash equivalents are as follows (in millions):
Operating Activities
Cash flows provided by operating activities increased $1.1 billion in fiscal 2020 compared fiscal 2019 due primarily to changes in inventory levels and accounts payable, which increased operating cash flows by $731.4 million. These changes reflect a 20.7% inventory increase in fiscal 2019 due to our strategic inventory investments in key growth categories, which included footwear, apparel, baseball and golf, followed by an 11.3% inventory decrease in fiscal 2020, reflecting precautionary reductions in inventory receipts in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, supply chain constraints and a 9.5% sales increase in fiscal 2020. The remaining year-over-year increase in operating cash flows was primarily due to the increase in net income, qualified payroll tax payments as permitted by the CARES Act and deferrals of rent in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We anticipate that future operating cash flows will include comparably higher cash payments for inventory and accounts payable, and rent payments in fiscal 2021.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $224.2 million for fiscal 2020, an increase of $94.9 million compared to fiscal 2019. The prior year included proceeds of $40.4 million from the sale of two technology subsidiaries and $45.0 million from our sale of a corporate aircraft.
Financing Activities
Financing activities have historically consisted of capital return initiatives, including share repurchases and cash dividend payments, cash flows generated from stock option exercises and cash activity associated with our Credit Facility. Changes in financing cash flows between periods included net proceeds from the issuance of our Convertible Senior Notes, a reduction in share repurchases due to our temporary suspension of that program in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and lower net Credit Facility borrowings in the current period resulting from the increase in our operating cash flows year-to-date.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
We are party to contractual obligations that involve commitments to make payments to third parties in the ordinary course of business. The following table provides summary information concerning our future contractual obligations as of January 30, 2021 (in millions):
(a)Represents semi-annual interest payments on the outstanding principal balance of our Convertible Senior Notes.
(b)Amounts do not include approximately $67.3 million of minimum future payments for leases which have not yet commenced.
(c)Our primary purchase obligations are for marketing commitments, including naming rights, licenses for trademarks, minimum requirements with our third-party eCommerce fulfillment provider, and technology-related and other ordinary course commitments. In the ordinary course of business, we enter into many contractual commitments, including purchase orders and commitments for products or services, but generally, such commitments represent annual or cancellable commitments. The amount of purchase obligations shown is based on multi-year non-cancellable contracts outstanding at the end of fiscal 2020.
(d)Excludes $2.4 million of tax contingencies, including interest and penalties, because we are not able to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement. See Part IV. Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules, Note 12-Income Taxes for additional information.
The Note references above are to the Notes within Part IV. Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Our off-balance sheet arrangements are primarily for purchase obligations for marketing commitments, including naming rights, licenses for trademarks, minimum requirements with our third-party eCommerce fulfillment provider and technology-related and other ordinary course commitments. We have excluded these items from the Consolidated Balance Sheets in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. We do not believe that any of these arrangements have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or resources.
At January 30, 2021, we have other commercial commitments totaling $16.1 million in the form of standby letters of credit that are currently off-balance sheet. If triggered, we would fund these letters of credit with operating cash flows generated in the normal course of business.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are described in Part IV. Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules, Note 1-Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies. Critical accounting policies are those that we believe are both 1) most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and 2) require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of such policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions.
We consider the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
Inventory Valuation
We value inventory using the lower of weighted average cost and net realizable value, which is generally based on the selling price expectations of the merchandise. We regularly review inventories to determine if the carrying value of the inventory exceeds net realizable value and, when determined necessary, record a reserve to reduce the carrying value to net realizable value. Changes in customer merchandise preference, current and anticipated demand, consumer spending, weather patterns, economic conditions, business trends or merchandising strategies could cause our inventory to be exposed to obsolescence or slow-moving merchandise.
Shrink expense is accrued as a percentage of merchandise sales based on historical shrink trends. We perform physical inventories at our stores and distribution centers throughout the year. The shrink reserve represents the cumulative loss estimate for each of our locations since the last physical inventory date through the reporting date. Estimates by location and in the aggregate are impacted by internal and external factors and may vary significantly from actual results.
Business Development Allowances
Business development allowances include allowances, rebates and cooperative advertising funds received from vendors. These funds are determined for each fiscal year and the majority are based on various quantitative contract terms. Amounts we expect to receive from vendors for the purchase of merchandise inventories (“vendor allowances”) are recognized as a reduction of cost of goods sold as the merchandise is sold. Amounts that represent a reimbursement of costs incurred, such as advertising, (“cooperative advertising”) are recorded as a reduction to the related expense in the period that the expense is incurred. We record estimates of earned allowances based on the latest projected purchase volumes and advertising forecasts.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill, indefinite-lived and other finite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment on an annual basis, or whenever circumstances indicate that a decline in value may have occurred. Our evaluation for impairment requires accounting judgments and financial estimates in determining the fair value of the reporting unit or asset. If these judgments or estimates change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges for these assets.
Our goodwill impairment test compares the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. We determine the fair value of our reporting units using a combination of an income approach and a market approach. Estimates may differ from actual results due to, among other things, economic conditions, changes to our business models, or changes in operating performance. Significant differences between these estimates and actual results could result in future impairment charges and could materially affect our future financial results. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that reporting unit, goodwill is not impaired. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, an impairment charge is recorded to reduce the carrying value of the reporting unit to its fair value. As of January 30, 2021, we had no reporting units at risk of impairment.
Similar to our test for impairment of goodwill, the impairment test for indefinite-lived intangible assets involves comparing their estimated fair values to their carrying values. We estimate the fair value of indefinite-lived intangible assets, which are comprised almost entirely of trademarks and trade names, based on an income approach using the relief-from-royalty method, which assumes that, in lieu of ownership, a third-party would be willing to pay a royalty in order to derive a benefit from these types of assets. This approach is dependent on a number of factors, including estimates of future sales projections and growth, royalty rates in the category of intellectual property, discount rates and other variables. If actual results are not consistent with our estimates and assumptions used in estimating fair value, we may be exposed to material losses. We recognize an impairment charge when the estimated fair value of the intangible asset is less than its carrying value. During fiscal 2019, we recorded a non-cash pre-tax impairment charge of $28.3 million related to a trademark used in our hunt business. We recorded no such impairments in fiscal 2020.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review long-lived assets whenever events and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable based on estimated undiscounted future cash flows. Assets are reviewed at the lowest level for which independent cash flows can be identified, which is typically the store level. We use an income approach to determine the fair value of individual store locations, which requires discounting projected future cash flows over each store’s remaining lease term. When determining the stream of projected future cash flows associated with an individual store location, we make assumptions about key store variables that incorporate local market conditions, including sales growth rates, gross margin and controllable expenses, such as store payroll. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying amount of the store location is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value.
Self-Insurance
We are self-insured for certain losses related to health, workers' compensation and general liability insurance, although we maintain stop-loss coverage with third-party insurers to limit our liability exposure. Liabilities associated with these losses are estimated in part by considering historical claim experience, industry factors, severity factors and other actuarial assumptions.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with fair value recognition provisions. We use the Black-Scholes pricing model to estimate fair value of our stock options, which requires the input of multiple assumptions, such as the length of time employees will retain their vested stock options before exercising them (“expected term”), the volatility of our common stock price over the expected term and the expected dividend yield. In addition, we estimate the number of awards that will ultimately not complete their vesting requirements (“forfeitures”) and recognize expense for those stock awards expected to vest. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the estimate of fair value of stock-based compensation and consequently, the related amount recognized on the Consolidated Statements of Income.