Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Financial measures included herein have been presented on a generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") basis and, in certain limited instances, we have presented our financial results on a GAAP and non-GAAP (“adjusted”) basis, which is further described and reconciled in the sections entitled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Business Outlook
Our fourth quarter and full year results for fiscal 2021 outpaced our expectations. We believe this shows the strength of our unique business model to service diversified sales channels and demonstrated the successful streamlining of our organization. We delivered record full year results, with a 7.5% operating margin on $437 million in net sales, resulting in $2.86 earnings per diluted share.
In our Activewear business, the streamlining of our organization has allowed us to remain nimble as we fluidly adapt to the needs of our diversified customer base. Our executive leadership, planning, sales force and customer service teams are all aligned to service the distinctive Delta Direct, Retail Direct and Global Brands sales channels, which is a win-win for Delta Apparel and our customers. Customers seeking our portfolio of Delta, Delta Platinum, Soffe, and sourced-branded products can purchase them directly from our Delta Direct business, formerly referred to as Delta Catalog. Delta Direct services key channels, such as the screen print, promotional, and eRetailer channels as well as the retail licensing channel, whose customers sell through to many mid-tier and mass market retailers. In our Global Brands & Retail Direct business, we are a supply chain partner to global brands, from product development of custom garments to shipment of their branded products, with the majority of products being sold with value-added services. We also serve retailers by providing our portfolio of Delta, Delta Platinum, and Soffe products directly to their retail stores and through their ecommerce channels. In fiscal 2021 we achieved record sales of $127 million in our Global Brands & Retail Direct business.
On-shore and near-shore strategies have become an integral component of brands’ and retailers’ sourcing plans driven by many factors, including changes in trade policies, speed to market, social, environmental and sustainability efforts, inflationary pressures and supply chain disruptions. We have seen an increased desire from existing and new customers who want to use Delta Activewear as their supply chain partner. Our western hemisphere manufacturing platform, with its broad product capabilities, coupled with our unparalleled service levels, provides customers the diversification and confidence they desire within their supply chain. This past year has been a challenging manufacturing environment with limited availability of raw materials. Our teams have tackled these industry challenges proactively and despite the headwinds, have successfully grown our manufacturing output to record levels. The higher production in the first half of fiscal 2022 should allow us to be in a stronger inventory position to service the spring 2022 business. We also expect to bring further capacity on line in the second half of fiscal 2022, providing additional flexibility of product capabilities for our customers.
DTG2Go, our digital print business, remains committed to serving retailers, intellectual property holders, and brands with on-demand products, and remains focused on achieving the highest quality and service in the business. DTG2Go made significant investments this year on research and development to achieve a “digital-first” model utilizing the full decoration platform of digital, hybrid and screen print, making digital indistinguishable from traditional products. We believe the unlocking of this market channel to digital print will result in significant growth opportunities for DTG2Go in fiscal 2022 and beyond. We continue to see customers realizing the benefits of our integrated model with Activewear, and in fiscal 2021 Delta blanks were used for over 51% of the garments digitally printed. This is up significantly from the 32% utilization in fiscal year 2020. This trend is promising as it creates a more efficient operation, reduces garment cost for our customers, and lowers working capital needs in the business.
Within our Salt Life Group, we have divested the Coast brand and ceased operations of the two Coast retail stores in the 2021 fiscal fourth quarter as the leases expired. The brand has been purchased by a regional retailer who is excited to be offering the brand in their stores. During the year we also completed a license agreement for the Salt Life beer. This puts Salt Life Lager in the hands of beer professionals, and we are already receiving royalty payments on the revenue they have generated. These actions will allow our Salt Life team to focus on the many initiatives which should continue to drive growth for the brand.
Our Salt Life lifestyle brand awareness and consumer engagement is at an all-time high. Salt Life has the strongest order bookings in its history for spring 2022 and summer 2022. While Salt Life has always been known for its cotton graphic tees, Salt Life’s performance wear and ladies’ categories are gaining great momentum with consumers. During fiscal 2021, Salt Life reached a milestone with 32% of its sales direct to consumers. Of this, over $10 million was from consumers visiting our thirteen branded retail doors, with sales for those stores open a year ago growing 19% during the fourth quarter. We plan to open seven new stores in fiscal 2022 across Florida, South Carolina, Alabama and Texas, with continuing plans to open six to eight new Salt Life stores annually for the next several years.
We believe the opportunities Delta Apparel, Inc. has to grow its top line and further expand profitability are the most robust we have seen in our history. We remain optimistic about the broad-based growth opportunities and are poised for further manufacturing expansion to support the demand we anticipate in fiscal 2022 and beyond. Overall, we expect top-line growth and operating profit expansion in fiscal 2022, resulting in all-time record revenue and earnings per share in fiscal 2022.
Results of Operations
Net sales for 2021 were $436.8 million, up 14.6% from $381.0 million in the prior year. Our growth was broad-based reaching all time record sales in our Global Brands & Retail Direct sales channel in our Delta Group Segment and in our branded retail stores in our Salt Life segment. Net sales in 2020 were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which halted retail in the U.S. beginning in mid-March through the first half of the June quarter, and disrupted our non-U.S. manufacturing operations for most of the June quarter in 2020. Our direct-to-consumer and business-to-business ecommerce and branded retail sales represented a larger portion of consolidated revenue in the current year, constituting 10.4% of total net sales for 2021 compared to 9.9% of net sales in the prior year.
Delta Group segment net sales increased 13% to $387.0 million in 2021 compared to prior year net sales of $343.9 million. While the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted sales performance in the prior year, fiscal year 2021 was a record year for our Global Brands & Retail Direct business reaching $127 million in sales, as brands and retailers used Delta Activewear as their supply chain partner.
Salt Life Group segment net sales were $49.7 million in 2021, a 34% increase from $37.1 million in the prior year. Wholesale sales grew 30% in fiscal 2021 and our branded retail stores accelerated throughout the year reaching $10 million in sales for the year. In the prior year, this segment was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic with the temporary closure of retail, including our Salt Life branded retail stores, in the prior year June quarter.
Overall gross profit increased 49% to $101.8 million from $68.4 million in the prior period. Gross margins improved 540 basis points to 23.3% of sales from prior year margin of 17.9% of sales. Adjusting for the $14.7 million impact of COVID-19 related expenses in 2020, gross margins would have been 21.8%. The improvement over prior year is attributable to favorable product mix and process improvements within the Delta Group segment’s integrated vertical manufacturing platform.
Delta Group segment gross margins improved 500 basis points to 20.2% compared to 15.2% in the prior year. The prior year was unfavorably impacted by $14.7 million of COVID-19 related expenses. Adjusting for these discrete impacts, gross margins would have been 19.4% in 2020.
Salt Life Group segment gross margins were 47.9% compared to 43.6% in 2020, a 430 basis point improvement. Margins were favorably impacted by a stronger mix of direct-to-consumer sales and favorable mix of higher profitability products.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses in 2021 were $70.7 million, or 16.2% of sales, compared to $68.4 million, or 17.9% of sales, in 2020. Adjusting for $2.4 million of COVID-19 related expenses, adjusted SG&A for 2020 was $66.0 million, or 17.3% of sales. Expenses increased in 2021 due to increased labor costs and higher variable selling costs as well as incentive-based compensation, but expenses were lower as a percentage of sales due to leveraging fixed costs against higher sales volume.
Other income of $1.6 million in 2021 included $0.5 million of profits related to our Honduran equity method investment as well as $2.4 million income from the net reduction in contingent consideration liabilities, partially offset by $1.3 million of expenses related to the impact of the two hurricanes that disrupted our Honduran manufacturing facilities in the December quarter. In 2020, we recognized $8.1 million in expenses caused from the COVID-19 pandemic related to incremental costs to right size production to new forecasted demand and increased inventory reserves related to the heightened risks in the market as the U.S. continued its recovery. In addition, in 2020 we recognized income from our Honduran equity method investment as well as $0.2 million in income from net reductions in contingent consideration liabilities.
Operating profit for 2021 was $32.8 million, an all time record operating profit for the Company. This compares to an operating loss of $7.1 million in the prior year. Operating income, adjusted for discrete items, was $18.1 million in fiscal year 2020.
Delta Group segment operating income for 2021 was $40.0 million, or 10.3% of sales, compared to $6.6 million, or 1.9% of sales, in 2020. Adjusting for the $23.7 million in COVID-related expenses in the prior year, operating income would have been $30.3 million, or 8.8% of sales. The improvement in operating income is attributable to increased sales volumes and gross margin expansion. Operating income also improved due to strategic cost reductions associated with integration efficiencies between the Soffe and Activewear businesses.
Salt Life Group segment operating income was $5.8 million for 2021 compared to prior year operating income of $0.5 million. Adjusting for the $0.8 million in COVID-related expenses in the prior year, operating income would have been $1.3 million, or 3.4% of net sales. Operating income improved due to higher sales volume coupled with favorable product mix.
Interest expense for 2021 was $6.8 million compared to $7.0 million in 2020. The decrease is primarily due to lower average debt levels.
Our 2021 effective income tax rate is 21.9% compared to 23.6% in the prior year. See Note 9-Income Taxes for more information.
Net income attributable to shareholders in 2021 was $20.3 million, or $2.86 per diluted share. The prior year net loss was $10.6 million, or a loss of $1.53 per diluted share, and adjusted net income in 2020 was $8.6 million, or $1.22 income per diluted share.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We provide all information required in accordance with GAAP, but we believe that evaluating our ongoing operating results may be difficult if limited to reviewing only GAAP financial measures. In an effort to provide investors with additional information regarding the Company's results, we also provide non-GAAP information that management believes is useful to investors. We discuss gross margin, SG&A expenses, operating income, net income and earnings per diluted share as performance measures because management uses these measures in evaluating the Company's underlying performance on a consistent basis across periods. We also believe these measures are frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of the Company's ongoing performance. These non-GAAP measures have limitations as analytical tools, and securities analysts, investors and other interested parties should not consider any of these non-GAAP measures in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of the Company's results as reported under GAAP. These non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. The tables below reconcile operating income, net income and earnings per diluted share to adjusted operating income, adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per diluted share (in thousands except per share data):
(1) Our 2020 results included approximately $25.2 million of pre-tax expenses associated with the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and primarily related to the curtailment of manufacturing operations ($11.9 million), incremental costs to right size production to new forecasted demand ($2.6 million), increased accounts receivable and inventory reserves related to the heightened risks in the market as the U.S. continues its recovery ($6.6 million), and other expenses ($4.1 million). These costs are included within net sales ($0.5 million), cost of goods sold ($14.2 million), SG&A expenses ($2.4 million), and other loss (income), net ($8.1 million).
(2) Totals may not add due to rounding.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Cash Flows
Cash provided by operating activities in 2021 was $25.5 million compared to $31.8 million for 2020. The lower operating cash flows in 2021 primarily relate to an increase in inventory levels to support demand from customers.
Investing Cash Flows
Cash used in investing activities in 2021 and 2020 was $13.1 million and $12.1 million, respectively. Capital expenditures during 2021 and 2020 were $15.8 and $13.6 million, respectively. Capital expenditures in both periods primarily related to investments in our distribution expansion, digital print equipment, information technology, and retail stores. There were $12.3 million in expenditures financed under capital lease arrangements and $2.9 million in unpaid expenditures as of September 2021.
We expect to spend approximately $20 million in capital expenditures in 2022, primarily on our manufacturing expansion, digital print equipment, information technology, and direct-to-consumer investments, including seven new Salt Life retail store openings.
Financing Activities
Cash used by financing activities was $19.5 million in 2021 compared $3.9 million in 2020. In 2021, we lowered the outstanding on our U.S credit facility and made the required payments on our capital lease financing, while in 2020 we utilized the cash proceeds from our U.S. credit facility to pay the required payments on our capital financing and to fund our operating activities and certain capital investments. In 2021, we paid $2.1 million in contingent consideration related to the DTG2Go acquisition compared to $2.5 million paid in the prior year. We did not purchase any shares of our common stock during 2021 compared to $2.0 million in repurchases in the prior year.
Future Liquidity and Capital Resources
See Note 8 - Long-Term Debt to the Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of our various financing arrangements, including the terms of our revolving U.S. credit facility.
Our credit facility, as amended on August 28, 2020, as well as cash flows from operations, are intended to fund our day-to-day working capital needs, along with capital lease financing arrangements, to fund our planned capital expenditures. However, any material deterioration in our results of operations, may result in the loss of our ability to borrow under our U.S. revolving credit facility and to issue letters of credit to suppliers, or may cause the borrowing availability under that facility to be insufficient for our needs. Availability under our credit facility is primarily a function of the levels of our accounts receivable and inventory. A significant deterioration in our accounts receivable or inventory levels could restrict our ability to borrow additional funds or service our indebtedness.
Our credit facility includes a financial covenant that if the availability under our credit facility falls below the amounts specified in our credit agreement, our Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (“FCCR”) (as defined in our credit agreement) for the preceding 12-month period must not be less than 1.1 to 1.0. Our availability at September 2021, was above the minimum thresholds specified in our credit agreement, and we were above the 1.1 to 1.0 FCCR for the preceding 12-month period. A significant deterioration in our business could cause our availability to fall below minimum thresholds, thereby requiring us to maintain the minimum FCCR specified in our credit agreement, which we may not be able to maintain.
Derivative Instruments
From time to time, we may purchase cotton option contracts to economically hedge the risk related to market fluctuations in the cost of cotton used in our operations. We do not receive hedge accounting treatment for these derivatives. As such, the realized gains and losses associated with them were recorded within cost of goods sold on the Consolidated Statement of Operations. There were no material option agreements that were outstanding at September 2021.
From time to time, we may use interest rate swaps or other instruments to manage our interest rate exposure and reduce the impact of future interest rate changes. These financial instruments are not used for trading or speculative purposes. We have designated our interest rate swap contracts as cash flow hedges of our future interest payments. As a result, the gains and losses on the swap contracts are reported as a component of other comprehensive income and are reclassified into interest expense as the related interest payments are made. As of September 2021, all of other comprehensive income was attributable to shareholders; none related to the non-controlling interest. The changes in fair value of the interest rate swap agreements resulted in other comprehensive gain, net of taxes, of $0.5 million for the year ended September 2021, and other comprehensive loss, net of taxes, of $0.4 million for the year ended September 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of September 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that were material to our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows as defined by Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC other than letters of credit, and purchase obligations. We have disclosed letters of credit and purchase obligations in Note 15-Commitments and Contingencies.
Dividends and Purchases of our Own Shares
Pursuant to the terms of our credit facility, we are allowed to make cash dividends and stock repurchases if (i) as of the date of the payment or repurchase and after giving effect to the payment or repurchase, we have availability on that date of not less than 15% of the lesser of the borrowing base or the commitment, and average availability for the 30-day period immediately preceding that date of not less than 15% of the lesser of the borrowing base or the commitment; and (ii) the aggregate amount of dividends and stock repurchases after May 10, 2016, does not exceed $10 million plus 50% of our cumulative net income (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) from the first day of the third quarter of 2016 to the date of determination. At September 2021, and September 2020, there was $19.0 million and $8.8 million, respectively, of retained earnings free of restrictions to make cash dividends or stock repurchases.
Our Board of Directors did not declare, nor were any dividends paid, during 2021 and 2020. Any future cash dividend payments will depend upon our earnings, financial condition, capital requirements, compliance with loan covenants and other relevant factors.
As of September 2021, our Board of Directors had authorized management to use up to $60.0 million to repurchase stock in open market transactions under our Stock Repurchase Program. There were no repurchases of our common stock in 2021. During 2020, we purchased 99,971 shares of our common stock for a total cost of $2.0 million. As of September 2021, we had purchased 3,598,933 shares of common stock for an aggregate of $52.5 million since the inception of the Stock Repurchase Program. All purchases were made at the discretion of management and pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of SEC Rule 10b-18. As of September 2021, $7.5 million remained authorized by our Board of Directors for future purchases under our Stock Repurchase Program, which does not have an expiration date.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which were prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have no reason to believe that our past estimates have not been appropriate. Our most critical accounting estimates, discussed below, pertain to revenue recognition, accounts receivable and related reserves, inventories and related reserves, the carrying value of goodwill, and the accounting for income taxes.
Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements includes a summary of the significant accounting policies or methods used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when performance obligations under the terms of the contracts are satisfied. Our performance obligations primarily consist of delivering products to our customers. Control is transferred upon providing the products to customers in our retail stores, upon shipment of our products to the consumers from our ecommerce sites, and upon shipment from our distribution centers to our customers in our wholesale operations. Once control is transferred to the customer, we have completed our performance obligation.
In certain areas of our wholesale business, we offer discounts and allowances to support our customers. Some of these arrangements are written agreements, while others may be implied by customary practices in the industry. Wholesale sales are recorded net of discounts, allowances, and operational chargebacks. As certain allowances and other deductions are not finalized until the end of a season, program or other event which may not have occurred, we estimate such discounts, allowances, and returns that we expect to provide.
We record reductions to revenue for estimated customer returns, allowances, markdowns and discounts. We estimate these reductions based on historical rates of customer returns and allowances as well as the specific identification of outstanding returns, markdowns and allowances that have not yet been received by us. The actual amount of customer returns and allowances, which is inherently uncertain, may differ from our estimates. If we determine that actual or expected returns or allowances are significantly higher or lower than the reserves we established, we would record a reduction or increase, as appropriate, to net sales in the period in which we make such a determination. Reserves for returns, allowances, markdowns and discounts are included within accrued expenses as refund liabilities, and the value of inventory associated with reserves for sales returns are included within prepaid expenses and other current assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of September 2021, and September 2020, there was $1.0 million and $1.3 million, respectively, in refund liabilities for customer returns, allowances, markdowns and discounts included within accrued expenses.
Accounts Receivable and Related Reserves
Accounts receivable consists primarily of receivables from our customers arising from the sale of our products, and we generally do not require collateral from our customers. We actively monitor our exposure to credit risk through the use of credit approvals and credit limits. Accounts receivable is presented net of reserves for doubtful accounts.
We estimate the net collectability of our accounts receivable and establish an allowance for doubtful accounts based upon this assessment. In situations where we are aware of a specific customer’s inability to meet its financial obligation, such as in the case of a bankruptcy filing, we assess the need for a specific reserve for bad debts. Reserves are determined through analysis of the aging of accounts receivable balances, historical bad debts, customer concentrations, customer credit-worthiness, current economic trends and changes in customer payment terms. Although our historical allowances have been materially accurate, if market conditions change, additional reserves may be required. Bad debt expense was less than 1% of net sales in each of 2021 and 2020.
Inventories and Related Reserves
We state inventories at the lower of cost and net realizable value using the first-in, first-out method. Inventory cost includes materials, labor and manufacturing overhead on manufactured inventory and all direct and associated costs, including inbound freight, to acquire sourced products. We regularly review inventory quantities on hand and record reserves for obsolescence, excess quantities, irregulars and slow-moving inventory based on historical selling prices, current market conditions, and forecasted product demand to reduce inventory to its net realizable value. During fiscal year 2020, we estimated and recorded additional reserves of approximately $5.5 million based on heightened risks in the market as the U.S. and our customers continue their recovery from the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although our historical reserves have been materially accurate, if actual selling prices are less favorable than those projected or if sell-through of the inventory is more difficult than anticipated, additional inventory reserves may be required.
Goodwill
Goodwill and definite-lived intangibles were recorded in conjunction with our acquisitions of Salt Life, DTG2Go, and SSI. We did not record any separately identifiable indefinite-lived intangibles associated with any of these acquisitions. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price and related costs over the value assigned to net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill must be tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired, and goodwill is required to be written down when impaired. As of April 4, 2021, we performed our annual goodwill impairment evaluation and concluded that the goodwill for the Salt Life and DTG2Go reporting units were not impaired. The goodwill impairment testing process involved the use of significant assumptions, estimates and judgments with respect to a variety of factors, including projected sales, gross margins, selling, general and administrative expenses, capital expenditures and cash flows and the selection of an appropriate discount rate, all of which are subject to inherent uncertainties and subjectivity. Our assumptions were based on annual business plans and other forecasted results as well as the selection of a discount rate, all of which we believe represent those of a market participant. We also believe these assumptions are reflective of the current macro-economic environment, including the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe that the most significant elements of uncertainty are the intensity and duration of the impact on retailers as well as the ability of our customers, supply chain, and distribution to operate with minimal disruption, all of which could negatively impact the reporting units' financial position, results of operations, cash flows, and outlook. Given the current macro-economic environment and the uncertainties regarding its potential impact on our business, there can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions used in our impairment tests will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. If our assumptions regarding fair value are not achieved, it is possible that an impairment review may be triggered and goodwill or other intangible assets may be impaired in a future period.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, as well as operating loss, interest deductions, and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. A valuation allowance is required to reduce the carrying value of deferred tax assets to the amount that is more-likely-than-not to be realized. In making this final determination, we follow the Accounting Standards Codification 740, Income Taxes ("ASC 740"), and look to taxable income in prior carryback years, reversals of existing temporary book/tax differences, tax planning strategies and future taxable income exclusive of reversals of existing temporary differences. By its very nature, future taxable income requires estimates and judgments about future events that may be predictable, but are far less certain than past events that can be objectively measured.
We established a valuation allowance related to certain of our state operating loss carryforward amounts in accordance with the provisions of ASC 740. We continually review the adequacy of the valuation allowance and recognize the benefits of deferred tax assets if reassessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized based on earnings forecasts in the respective state tax jurisdictions. As of September 2021, we had state NOLs of approximately $46.3 million, with deferred tax assets of $2.2 million related to these state NOLs, and related valuation allowances against them of approximately $0.6 million. These state net loss carryforwards expire at various intervals from 2026 through 2040.
Recent Accounting Standards
For information regarding recently issued accounting standards, refer to Note 2(ad) and Note 2(ae) to our Consolidated Financial Statements.