ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OR FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this filing. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report.
Cautionary Statements
This Form 10-K contains financial projections and other “forward-looking statements,” as that term is used in federal securities laws, about our financial condition, results of operations, and business. These statements include, among others:
·
statements concerning the potential for benefits that we may experience from our business activities and certain transactions we contemplate or have completed; and
·
statements of our expectations, future plans and strategies, anticipated developments, and other matters that are not historical facts. These statements may be made expressly in this Form 10-K.You can find many of these statements by looking for words such as “believes,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “estimates,” or similar expressions used in this Form 10-K.These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous assumptions, risks, and uncertainties that may cause the Company’s actual results to be materially different from any future results expressed or implied by the Company in those statements. The most important facts that could prevent the Company from achieving its stated goals include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a)
volatility or decline of the Company’s stock price;
(b)
potential fluctuation in quarterly results;
(c)
failure of the Company to earn revenues or profits;
(d)
inadequate capital to continue or expand its business, and inability to raise additional capital or financing to implement its business plans;
(e)
failure to develop or acquire a sufficient number of cell towers;
(f)
rapid and significant changes in markets;
(g)
litigation with or legal claims and allegations by outside parties;
(h)
insufficient revenues to cover operating costs;
(i)
aspects of the Company’s business are not proprietary and in general the Company is subject to inherent competition;
(j)
further dilution of existing shareholders’ ownership in the Company;
(k)
uncollectible accounts and the need to incur expenses to collect amounts owed to the Company;
(l)
inability to make business and asset acquisitions in the industries we seek due to a lack of capital or financing, purchase prices that are too high, terms that are too onerous, a lack of attractive candidates for acquisition, and strong competition for business and asset acquisitions from bigger, better capitalized competitors; and
(m)
failure of newly acquired business or assets to operate profitability or perform as expected.
There is no assurance that the Company will be profitable. The Company may not be able to successfully develop, manage, or market its products and services. The Company may not be able to attract or retain qualified executives and technology personnel. The Company may not be able to obtain customers for its products or services. The Company’s products and services may become obsolete. Government regulation may hinder the Company’s business. Additional dilution in outstanding stock ownership may be incurred due to the issuance of more shares, warrants, and stock options, the exercise of outstanding warrants and stock options, or the issuance and conversion of convertible debt.
Because the statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. The Company cautions you not to place undue reliance on the statements, which speak only as of the date of this Form 10-K. The cautionary statements contained or referred to in this section should be considered in connection with any subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements that the Company or persons acting on its behalf may issue. The Company does not undertake any obligation to review or confirm analysts’ expectations or estimates or to release publicly any revisions to any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this Form 10-K or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes to those statements. In addition to historical information, the following discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties.
Current Overview
On January 7, 2021, the Company, SmallCellSite.com LLC, a Virginia limited liability company (“SCS”), and SmallCellSite, Inc., a newly formed Nevada corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Subsidiary”) entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (“APA”) to acquire substantially all of the assets of SCS’s wireless communications marketing and database services business in consideration for a total purchase price of $10,000 in cash and a five-year convertible promissory note in the amount of $1,000,000 made in favor of SCS or its assignees (the “Note”). Pursuant to the APA, SCS instructed the Company to assign $500,000 principal amount of the Note to each of SCS’s two members. SCS is a source of more than 80,000 cell sites offered by property owners for use by wireless network operators.
The purchase of the operating assets of SCS will be accounted for as a purchase and, effective January 7, 2021, the accounts of SmallCellSite, Inc. will be consolidated with those of the Company.
Subsequent to the acquisition of SCS’s assets, we intend to aggressively market and add more potential wireless sites to our database through non-exclusive marketing agreements with property owners. Management believes that the addition of more sites in the database will give our customers more options to select sites that meet their internal criteria. Once sites are selected and activated, additional revenue per site will be recognized by the Company.
Prior Business
On November 30, 2018, the Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with the EllisLab, Inc., Rick Ellis (“Ellis”), and EllisLab Corp., a newly formed Nevada corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, pursuant to which EllisLab, Inc. merged with and into EllisLab Corp. (the “Merger”). Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, Ellis received 36,000 shares of the Company’s newly designated Series C Convertible Preferred Stock, with a stated value of $100 per share, in exchange for the cancellation of all common shares of EllisLab, Inc. owned by Ellis, which shares represented 100% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of EllisLab, Inc.The separate legal existence of EllisLab, Inc. ceased, and EllisLab Corp. became the surviving company. The acquisition of EllisLab, Inc. in the Merger has been accounted for as a purchase, and the accounts of EllisLab Corp. were consolidated with those of the Company as of December 1, 2018.
On September 30, 2019, the Company, entered into an Agreement for the Purchase and Sale of Capital Stock of EllisLab Corp. (the “EllisLab Corp. Sale Agreement”) with Ellis to sell to Ellis all of the issued and outstanding shares of EllisLab Corp. for $10,000 and the 36,000 shares of the Company’s Series C Convertible Preferred Stock owned by him, which represents all of the issued and outstanding shares of the Series C Convertible Preferred Stock. Pursuant to the Ellis Lab Corp. Sale Agreement, the Company effectively divested itself of the Ellis Lab business and discontinued it. Consequently, the revenues and expenses for EllisLab Corp. are reported as “Loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes” in our statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
We reported no revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. As discussed above, revenues and expenses of EllisLab Corp. are combined and presented as loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes in our condensed statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.On September 30, 2019, we sold EllisLab Corp. and no other sources of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased to $460,826 in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $397,949 in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses in the current year is due primarily to increased consulting and professional fees related to the APA with SCS, dated January 7, 2021.In addition, we reported compensation expense of $108,514 from the issuance of non-qualified stock options in 2020, with no such compensation expense in 2019.
Depreciation Expense
Our investment in property and equipment currently is not material to our operations and our property and equipment was fully depreciated as of December 31, 2020. Depreciation expense was $595 and $522 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Bad Debt Expense
From December 1, 2018 through September 30, 2019, we provided operating advances to EllisLab Corp. totaling $356,851. Pursuant to the sale of EllisLab Corp. on September 30, 2019, we agreed to forgive these operating advances and $356,851 was recorded as a bad debt expense in our statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.We had no bad debt expense in the current year.
Other Income (Expense)
Total other expense was $2,285,774 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and total other income was $3,966,440 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in total other income (expense) resulting primarily from the change in gain (loss) on derivative liabilities.
Our interest expense decreased to $626,685 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $974,713 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense in the current fiscal year resulted primarily from lower amortization of debt discount as we had multiple convertible notes payable fully converted to common stock during the current fiscal year. The increase or decrease in our interest expense result primarily from the timing of amortization of debt discount recorded on our convertible promissory notes.
We reported a loss on change in derivative liabilities of $1,659,089 in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a gain on change in derivative liabilities of $4,624,168 in the year ended December 31, 2019. We estimate the fair value of the derivatives associated with our convertible notes, certain stock options and warrants, and our Series B Preferred Stock using a multinomial lattice model based on projections of various potential future outcomes. These estimates are based on multiple inputs, including the market price of our stock, interest rates, our stock price volatility, variable conversion prices based on market prices as defined in the respective agreements, and probabilities of certain outcomes based on management projections. These inputs are subject to significant changes from period to period and to management’s judgment; therefore, the estimated fair value of the derivative liabilities will fluctuate from period to period, and the fluctuation may be material.
As more fully discussed above and in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company divested itself of the EllisLab business and discontinued it during the year ended December 31, 2019. We recorded a gain on disposition of subsidiary of $316,985 in that fiscal year.
Loss from Discontinued Operations, net of Income Taxes
As discussed above, the revenues and expenses for EllisLab Corp. are combined and reported as “loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes” in our 2019 consolidated statement of operations. That loss was $269,693 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Income (Loss)
As a result of the activity discussed above, we reported a net loss of $2,747,195 in the year ended December 31, 2020 and net income of $2,941,425 in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of changes in our derivative liabilities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had total current and total assets of $18,605, comprised of cash, and total current liabilities and total liabilities of $14,955,096, resulting in a working capital deficit and total stockholders’ deficit of $14,936,491. Included in our current liabilities at December 31, 2020 are derivative liabilities totaling $11,282,091, which we do not anticipate will require cash payments to settle.
We have funded our operations primarily from the proceeds of convertible notes payable. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received proceeds of $216,500 compared to proceeds of $617,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019.We believe the world-wide Coved 19 pandemic and its negative impact on capital markets reduced our ability to raise funding from this source in 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used net cash of $215,671 in operating activities as a result of our net loss of $2,747,195 partially offset by total non-cash expenses of $2,128,063, decrease in prepaid expenses of $2,808 and increases in accounts payable of $122,468, accrued expenses and other current assets of $11,365, and accrued interest - notes payable of $266,820.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we used net cash of $627,957 in operating activities as a result of our net income of $2,941,425, non-cash expenses totaling $1,097,061, and increases in accounts payable of $13,042, accrued expenses and other current assets of $1,141, accrued interest - notes payable of $250,492 and change in net assets of discontinued operations of $10,843, offset by non-cash gains totaling $4,941,153, and increase in prepaid expenses of $808.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we had no cash provided by or used in investing activities.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $226,001 comprised of proceeds from convertible notes payable of $216,500 and proceeds from a Paycheck Protection Program loan of $9,501. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $617, comprised of proceeds from convertible notes payable.
Historically, proceeds received from the issuance of debt have been sufficient to fund our current operating expenses. We estimate that we will need to raise substantial capital or financing over the next twelve months in order to explore business expansion opportunities and provide the necessary capital to meet our other general and administrative expenses. We anticipate that we will incur operating losses in the next twelve months. Our revenue is not expected to exceed our investment and operating costs in the next twelve months. Therefore, our future operations are dependent on our ability to secure additional financing. Our funding opportunities in 2020 were limited due to downturns in U.S. equity and debt markets resulting from the world-wide Coved 19 pandemic. Future financing transactions, if available, may include the issuance of equity or debt securities, obtaining credit facilities, or other financing mechanisms. However, the trading price of our common stock and continued downturn in the U.S. equity and debt markets could make it more difficult to obtain financing through the issuance of equity or debt securities.
Even if we are able to raise the funds required, it is possible that we could incur unexpected costs and expenses or experience unexpected cash requirements that would force us to seek alternative financing. Furthermore, if we issue additional equity or debt securities, stockholders may experience additional dilution or the new equity securities may have rights, preferences, or privileges senior to those of existing holders of our common stock. The inability to obtain additional capital may restrict our ability to grow and may reduce our ability to continue to conduct business operations. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we may have to curtail our marketing and development plans and possibly cease our operations.
Our prospects must be considered in light of the risks, expenses, and difficulties frequently encountered by companies in their early stage of operations. To address these risks, we must, among other things, seek growth opportunities through investment and acquisitions, implement and successfully execute our business strategy, respond to competitive developments, and attract, retain and motivate qualified personnel. We cannot assure that we will be successful in addressing such risks, and the failure to do so could have a material adverse effect on our business prospects, financial condition and results of operations.
Future Impact of Covid-19
The negative impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on companies continues and we are currently unable to assess with certainty the broad effects of Covid-19 on our future business. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no material assets that would be subject to impairment or change in valuation due to Covid-19.However as of December 31, 2019, the reported values of the Company’s material convertible debt and derivative liabilities are based on multiple factors, including the market price of our stock, interest rates, our stock price volatility, variable conversion prices based on market prices as defined in the respective agreements and probabilities of certain outcomes based on management projections. We believe these inputs will be subject to even more significant changes due to the impact on capital markets of Covid-19, and the future estimated fair value of these liabilities may fluctuate materially from period to period.
Without a current source of revenue, we are currently dependent on debt or equity financing to fund our operations and execute our business plan. We believe that the impact on capital markets of Covid-19 may make it more costly and more difficult for us to access these sources of funding.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements. The following is a summary of those accounting policies that involve significant estimates and judgment of management.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the accompanying financial statements. Significant estimates made in preparing these financial statements include the estimate of useful lives of property and equipment and intangible assets, operating lease obligations, impairment of assets, the deferred tax valuation allowance, the fair value of stock options and derivative liabilities. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Derivative Liabilities
We have identified the conversion features of our convertible notes payable and Series B preferred stock and certain stock options as derivatives. Where the number of common shares to be issued under these agreements is indeterminate, the Company has concluded that the equity environment is tainted, and all additional options, warrants and convertible debt and equity are included in the value of the derivatives. We estimate the fair value of the derivatives using the Black-Scholes pricing model and a multinomial lattice model based on projections of various potential future outcomes. We estimate the fair value of the derivative liabilities at the inception of the financial instruments, at the date of conversions to equity and at each reporting date, recording a derivative liability, debt discount, additional paid-in capital and a gain or loss on change in derivative liabilities as applicable. These estimates are based on multiple inputs, including the market price of our stock, interest rates, our stock price volatility, variable conversion prices based on market prices as defined in the respective agreements and probabilities of certain outcomes based on management projections. These inputs are subject to significant changes from period to period and to management's judgment; therefore, the estimated fair value of the derivative liabilities will fluctuate from period to period, and the fluctuation may be material.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Disclosures about fair value of financial instruments require disclosure of the fair value information, whether or not recognized in the balance sheet, where it is practicable to estimate that value. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we believe the amounts reported for cash, prepaid expenses, accounts payable, accounts payable - related party, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, accrued interest, notes payable and convertible note payable approximate fair value because of their short maturities.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. ASC Topic 820 established a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (level 1measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (level 3 measurements).These tiers include:
·
Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets;
·
Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and
·
Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
We measure certain financial instruments at fair value on a recurring basis. Liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis are as follows at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenues in accordance with Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (Topic 606). EllisLab Corp. operating revenues included in loss from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 were derived primarily from the sale of monthly and annual tech support subscriptions and partnership fees, and from software applications that customers purchase via EllisLab Corp.’s online store. Sales were processed using a real-time payment processing company. Revenue from product sales was recorded net of processing costs. Amounts collected from customers for support subscriptions and partnership fees with a contract life of one month or greater were recorded as deferred revenue and recognized over the life of the contract.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had no operating revenues.
Under Topic 606, revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
·
identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
·
identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
·
determination of the transaction price;
·
allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
·
recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under the asset and liability method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the value of the award granted using either the Black-Scholes option pricing model or a multinomial lattice model based on projections of various potential future outcomes and recognized over the period in which the award vests. For stock awards no longer expected to vest, any previously recognized stock compensation expense is reversed in the period of termination.The stock-based compensation expense is included in general and administrative expenses.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Although there are several new accounting pronouncements issued or proposed by the FASB, which the Company has adopted or will adopt, as applicable, the Company does not believe any of these accounting pronouncements has had or will have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.