ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) includes the following sections:
•Executive Overview that discusses what we do, our operating results at a high level and our financial outlook for the upcoming year;
•Consolidated Results of Operations; Restructuring, Integration and Other Costs; CEO Transition Costs and Segment Results that includes a more detailed discussion of our revenue and expenses;
•Cash Flows and Liquidity, Capital Resources and Other Financial Position Information that discusses key aspects of our cash flows, capital structure and financial position;
•Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, Guarantees and Contractual Obligations that discusses our financial commitments; and
•Critical Accounting Policies that discusses the policies we believe are most important to understanding the assumptions and judgments underlying our financial statements.
Please note that this MD&A discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Part I, Item 1A of this report outlines known material risks and important information to consider when evaluating our forward-looking statements. The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the "Reform Act") provides a “safe harbor” for forward-looking statements to encourage companies to provide prospective information. When we use the words or phrases “should result,” “believe,” “intend,” “plan,” “are expected to,” “targeted,” “will continue,” “will approximate,” “is anticipated,” “estimate,” “project,” “outlook,” "forecast" or similar expressions in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, in future filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, in our press releases, investor presentations and in oral statements made by our representatives, they indicate forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Reform Act.
This MD&A includes financial information prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. ("GAAP"). In addition, we discuss free cash flow, net debt, liquidity, adjusted diluted earnings per share (EPS) and consolidated adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA), all of which are non-GAAP financial measures. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures, when reviewed in conjunction with GAAP financial measures, can provide useful information to assist investors in analyzing our current period operating performance and in assessing our future period operating performance. For this reason, our internal management reporting also includes these financial measures, which should be considered in addition to, and not as superior to or as a substitute for, GAAP financial measures. We strongly encourage investors and shareholders to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure. Our non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies and therefore, may not result in useful comparisons. The reconciliation of our non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures can be found in Consolidated Results of Operations.
Realignment - Effective January 1, 2020, we reorganized our reportable business segments to align with structural and management reporting changes in support of our growth strategy. We now operate 4 reportable segments: Payments, Cloud Solutions, Promotional Solutions and Checks. These segments are generally organized by product type and reflect the way we currently manage the company. Further information regarding our segments and our product and service offerings can be found under the caption "Note 19: Business Segment Information" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
COVID-19 impact on 2020 results - The COVID-19 pandemic began to impact our operations late in the first quarter of 2020. While we believe revenue in 2020 benefited from sales-driven growth, it was not sufficient to overcome the impact of the pandemic. Within Promotional Solutions, many of our business customers were significantly impacted by their customers' and governmental responses to the pandemic. Demand for promotional products declined, as our customers reduced or stopped their promotional activities when they were forced to close, and many of their operations are still limited. The decline in travel and event cancellations also reduced promotional spending. In our Checks segment, the volume of both business and personal checks declined as a result of the slowdown in the economy, while the impact in Cloud Solutions was primarily driven by a decline in data-driven marketing solutions, as clients suspended their marketing campaigns during this period of uncertainty. Within our Payments segment, the impact of the pandemic resulted in some reduction in payroll services revenue, as well as delays in new customer implementations. Partially offsetting these impacts was new revenue of $31.0 million during 2020 from sales of personal protective equipment (PPE) in our Promotional Solutions segment.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our revenue was most severe in April and began to improve throughout the remainder of the second quarter. The impact in the third and fourth quarters of the year remained relatively stable, with the fourth
quarter benefiting from new business and some seasonality in Promotional Solutions. Despite the challenges of the pandemic, adjusted EBITDA margin was 20.4% for 2020, in line with our annual expectations prior to the pandemic. To bolster our liquidity at the beginning of the pandemic, we drew an additional $238.0 million on our $1.15 billion revolving credit facility in March 2020 and we suspended share repurchases for the remainder of 2020. We also took steps to reduce discretionary spending and other expenditures in line with the revenue decline. These steps included temporary salary reductions for all salaried employees, including our leadership team and board of directors, project delays, furloughs and other actions. We also delayed U.S. federal payroll tax payments under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act. As a result of these actions and our stronger than expected performance, free cash flow for 2020 was $154.9 million and net debt as of December 31, 2020 was the lowest since June 30, 2018. As a result of our strong cash flow, we were able to end the temporary salary reductions, effective July 1, 2020. Also, during the second half of 2020, we repaid $300.0 million of the amount drawn on our revolving credit facility, reducing our outstanding debt by $43.5 million from December 31, 2019. Our priority is to maintain our financial strength, while simultaneously continuing our business transformation. While we reduced some expenditures during the first half of 2020, we subsequently decided to resume certain capital projects and to continue important systems implementation work, including our enterprise resource planning and sales technology implementations. In addition, we paid our regular quarterly dividend of $0.30 per share during each quarter of 2020.
We continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business, including our operations, suppliers, customers, industry and workforce. We are keeping 2 primary goals in mind: (1) protecting our employees and customers and (2) continuing to serve the customers who rely on us. The situation surrounding COVID-19 remains fluid, and the potential for additional negative impacts on our results of operations, financial condition and/or liquidity increases the longer the virus impacts activity levels in the U.S. and the other countries in which we operate. During the first quarter of 2020, we successfully activated our business continuity plan to ensure uninterrupted operations and services. We have not experienced any significant interruptions in our supply chain to-date, and we currently do not expect significant future interruptions. Many of our facilities remain open, employees who have the ability to work from home continue to do so, and the success of our work-from-home model allowed us to accelerate certain site closures.
2020 results vs. 2019 - Numerous factors drove the increase in net income for 2020, as compared to 2019. The primary factor was a decrease in asset impairment charges of $293.0 million, as compared to 2019. Other factors that increased net income included:
•actions taken to reduce costs in line with reduced revenue and the continuing evaluation of our cost structure, including savings of approximately $33.0 million from the temporary salary reductions, suspension of the 401(k) plan employer matching contribution, discretionary spending reductions and furloughs;
•revenue growth in certain of our business lines, including increased treasury management revenue, increases in certain data-driven marketing campaigns in the first quarter of 2020 prior to the commencement of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and new revenue from sales of PPE in 2020;
•a decrease in acquisition amortization of $14.9 million, driven in part by previous asset impairment charges;
•a decrease in interest expense of $11.5 million, driven by our lower weighted-average interest rate;
•a decrease in certain legal-related expenses of $8.6 million; and
•the absence of non-recurring CEO transition costs in 2020, as compared to $9.4 million in 2019.
Partially offsetting these increases in net income were the following factors:
•the loss of revenue resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•various investments of approximately $50.0 million, in the aggregate, to advance our One Deluxe strategy, including costs related to treasury management deals signed in the fourth quarter of 2019 and various information technology, sales, finance and human capital investments;
•the continuing secular decline in checks and business forms, the loss of web hosting revenue in the third quarter of 2019 and the decision to exit certain product lines within Cloud Solutions;
•incremental costs of approximately $8.0 million resulting from our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including a Hero Pay premium provided to employees working on-site during the second quarter of 2020, costs related to enabling employees to work from home and additional facility cleaning costs; and
•a $5.4 million increase in bad debt expense in 2020 related to notes receivable from our Promotional Solutions distributors.
Diluted EPS of $0.19 for 2020, as compared to diluted loss per share of $4.65 for 2019, reflects the increase in net income described in the preceding paragraphs, as well as lower average shares outstanding in 2020. Adjusted diluted EPS for 2020 was $5.08, compared to $6.82 for 2019, and excludes the impact of non-cash items or items that we believe are not indicative of ongoing operations. The decrease in adjusted EPS for 2020, as compared to 2019, was driven, in large part, by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as investments in our One Deluxe strategy and the continuing secular decline in checks and business forms. These decreases were partially offset by various cost savings initiatives and growth in treasury management revenue. A reconciliation of diluted earnings (loss) per share to adjusted diluted EPS can be found in Consolidated Results of Operations.
Asset impairment charges - Net income for 2020 included asset impairment charges of $98.0 million, or $1.45 per share. The impairment charges related primarily to the goodwill of our Promotional Solutions and Cloud Solutions Web Hosting reporting units, as well as certain intangibles in our Cloud Solutions Web Hosting reporting unit. Net loss for 2019 included asset impairment charges of $391.0 million, or $7.94 per share. These impairment charges related to the goodwill of our former Small Business Services Web Services and Financial Services Data-Driven Marketing reporting units, as well as certain intangibles, primarily in our former Small Business Services Web Services reporting unit. Further information regarding these impairment charges can be found under the caption "Note 8: Fair Value Measurements" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report and in Critical Accounting Policies.
"One Deluxe" Strategy
A detailed discussion of our strategy can be found in Part I, Item 1 of this report. We are encouraged by the success to-date of our One Deluxe strategy. We believe revenue in 2020 benefited from sales-driven growth, although this growth was not large enough to overcome the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We signed new customers and expanded many of our relationships. We retained our strong client base and we signed numerous deals during 2020. New initiatives in our tele-sales centers led to increased cross-sell opportunities that improved average order value. During 2020, we upgraded our talent pool throughout product and business development and innovation, as we seek to drive differentiation in the market across all of our businesses. We also added new services such as Medical Payment Exchange (MPX) and Deluxe Payment Exchange, along with improved customer experiences. We took advantage of the new reality of working remotely in 2020 to accelerate our efforts to reduce our real estate footprint, closing 24 additional sites in 2020. We also expect to achieve future operating savings and significant capital avoidance by relocating both our Minnesota headquarters and our Atlanta technology facilities to more efficient spaces. Despite the pressures of the pandemic, we continued to execute on our technology infrastructure upgrades and renewals with a focus on optimization, gaining efficiencies and building scale for future growth. We remain optimistic about our transformation initiatives as we move into 2021.
Outlook for 2021
During 2021, we plan continued focus on growth in Payments and Cloud Solutions, specifically scaling and leveraging distribution and optimizing product offerings and solutions to drive new recurring revenue streams. In Promotional Solutions, we will remain focused on improving profitability and driving recurring revenue streams. Within Checks, we plan to continue managing profitability, while continuing to increase market share. We may also consider potential acquisitions within the payments and data spaces, focused on driving scale and/or adding technology that would provide additional value-added services to our customers.
While the overall economic recovery in 2021 remains uncertain, we believe that, by building on our 2020 actions, we will generate sales-driven revenue growth during 2021 in the range of 0% to 2%, primarily due to the combination of our sales performance and expected steady macroeconomic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect that our first quarter financial performance will be similar to fourth quarter 2020 results, as we begin to lap the onset of the pandemic in March 2020. We are positioned for recovery to begin in the second quarter, enabling us to exit the year with revenue growth in the mid-single digits, and we expect that adjusted EBITDA margin for the full year will be between 20% and 21%, at the lower end of our long-term target range. We anticipate that our annual effective income tax rate for 2021 will be approximately 25%.
As of December 31, 2020, we held cash and cash equivalents of $123.1 million and $302.3 million was available for borrowing under our revolving credit facility. Our credit facility includes an accordion feature allowing us, subject to lender consent, to expand the facility from $1.150 billion to $1.425 billion. We anticipate that capital expenditures will be approximately $90.0 million in 2021, as we continue with important transformation work, innovation investments and building future scale across our product categories. We also expect that we will continue to pay our regular quarterly dividend. However, dividends are approved by our board of directors each quarter and thus, are subject to change. We anticipate that net cash generated by operations, along with cash and cash equivalents on hand and availability under our credit facility, will be sufficient to support our operations for the next 12 months. We were in compliance with our debt covenants as of December 31, 2020, and we anticipate that we will remain in compliance with our debt covenants throughout the next 12 months.
Consolidated Revenue
The decrease in total revenue for 2020, as compared to 2019, was driven primarily by volume declines resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily in our Promotional Solutions, Checks and Cloud Solutions segments, as discussed in Executive Overview. In addition, revenue continued to be impacted by the secular decline in order volume for checks and business forms. Cloud Solutions web and hosted solutions revenue also declined, due to our decision in the third quarter of 2019 to exit certain customer contracts, the loss of certain large customers in the third quarter of 2019 as they elected to in-source some of the services we provide, and more recent decisions to exit certain product lines. These decreases in revenue were partially offset by growth of 16.8% in treasury management revenue within our Payments segment, driven primarily by lockbox processing outsourcing deals signed in the fourth quarter of 2019 and new client wins. We also generated new revenue of $31.0 million from sales of PPE in our Promotional Solutions segment in 2020. In addition, revenue benefited from new data-driven marketing campaigns and growth in pay-for-performance marketing campaigns in our Cloud Solutions segment prior to the commencement of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The increase in total revenue for 2019, as compared to 2018, was driven primarily by incremental revenue of approximately $65.1 million from businesses acquired, price increases in certain of our Checks sales channels and an increase in Cloud Solutions data-driven marketing volume. Information regarding our acquisitions can be found under the caption "Note 6: Acquisitions" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report. These increases in revenue were partially offset by the continuing decline in order volume for both personal and business checks, as well as business forms and accessories sold by our Promotional Solutions segment. In addition, web and hosted solutions and marketing and promotional solutions volume, excluding incremental revenue from businesses acquired, declined approximately $14.7 million and $10.0 million, respectively. Revenue was also negatively impacted during 2019 by continued check pricing pressure within our financial institution sales channel.
Service revenue represented 31.3% of total revenue in 2020, 29.8% in 2019 and 27.3% in 2018. We do not manage our business based on product versus service revenue. Instead, we analyze our revenue based on the product and service offerings shown under the caption "Note 19: Business Segment Information" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report. Our revenue mix by business segment was follows:
Consolidated Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of raw materials used to manufacture our products, shipping and handling costs, third-party costs for outsourced products and services, payroll and related expenses, information technology costs, depreciation and amortization of assets used in the production process and in support of digital service offerings, and related overhead.
The decrease in total cost of revenue for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily attributable to the decrease in revenue volume resulting from the COVID-19 impact. In addition, cost of revenue decreased as a result of the continued secular decline in checks and business forms, as well as the decline in web and hosted solutions revenue driven by the events of the third quarter of 2019 outlined in our discussion of consolidated revenue. Benefits from cost reductions and efficiencies in our
fulfillment area, unrelated to our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, reduced cost of revenue approximately $7.5 million in 2020, while actions taken to reduce costs in response to COVID-19 reduced cost of revenue approximately $6.0 million in 2020. Partially offsetting these decreases in cost of revenue were costs related to the new revenue from PPE sales in 2020, costs related to treasury management deals signed in the fourth quarter of 2019, incremental costs driven by our response to the COVID-19 pandemic of approximately $6.0 million, and a $4.9 million increase in obsolete inventory expense in 2020, primarily in Promotional Solutions. Total cost of revenue as a percentage of total revenue increased slightly, as compared to 2019, as costs related to the new treasury management clients were partially offset by the loss of lower margin revenue driven by the impacts of COVID-19, as well as the benefits of our cost reduction initiatives.
The increase in total cost of revenue for 2019, as compared to 2018, was primarily attributable to incremental costs of businesses acquired of approximately $32.9 million, as well as increased shipping and material rates and an increase in medical costs of approximately $5.0 million in 2019. Partially offsetting these increases in total cost of revenue was the impact of the lower order volume for both personal and business checks, as well as business forms and some accessories. In addition, manufacturing efficiencies and other benefits resulting from our continued cost reduction initiatives resulted in a reduction in total cost of revenue of approximately $10.0 million in 2019. Total cost of revenue as a percentage of total revenue increased as compared to 2018, due in large part to the increase in service revenue, including the impact of acquisitions, as well as the increase in shipping, materials and medical costs, partially offset by price increases in certain of our Checks sales channels.
Consolidated Selling, General & Administrative (SG&A) Expense
The decrease in SG&A expense for 2020, as compared to 2019, was driven by lower commissions on the lower order volume resulting from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the benefit of organizational actions taken in response to COVID-19, including the temporary salary reductions and the suspension of the 401(k) plan employer matching contribution. These actions lowered SG&A expense approximately $27.0 million in 2020. Also lowering SG&A expense were various cost reduction actions that were unrelated to our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including advertising expense reductions and other efficiencies in sales, marketing and our corporate support functions. These decreases in SG&A expense were partially offset by investments of approximately $50.0 million in 2020 in support of our One Deluxe strategy. These costs related to treasury management outsourcing deals signed in the fourth quarter of 2019 and various other expenses related to initiatives such as transforming our brand and our website and expanding our sales capabilities, as well as ongoing new costs related to software-as-a-service solutions we are employing throughout the company. In addition, we incurred commission expense related to new revenue from the sales of PPE during 2020. We also recorded bad debt expense of $5.4 million in our Promotional Solutions segment related to notes receivable from our distributors, primarily one distributor that was underperforming prior to the commencement of the COVID-19 pandemic. Total SG&A expense as a percentage of revenue increased for 2020, as compared to 2019, as revenue declines and investments in our transformation more than offset the benefit of cost reductions.
The increase in SG&A expense for 2019, as compared to 2018, was driven by incremental costs of approximately $20.2 million from businesses acquired, excluding acquisition amortization, as well as investments in our One Deluxe transformation, increased commission rates on customer referrals, an increase of $7.0 million in share-based compensation expense, driven by an increase in the level of equity awards in 2019, a $6.5 million increase in medical costs and increased sales incentives in our data-driven marketing business. These increases in SG&A expense were partially offset by various expense reduction initiatives of approximately $40.0 million. Total SG&A expense as a percentage of revenue increased for 2019, as compared to 2018, as the investments in our transformation more than offset the impact of cost reductions.
In addition to the above factors, SG&A expense was also impacted by changes in the following items:
(1) Further information regarding the 2018 asset sales can be found under the caption "Note 3: Supplemental Balance Sheet and Cash Flow Information" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Restructuring and Integration Expense
We are currently pursuing several initiatives designed to focus our business behind our growth strategy and to increase our efficiency. Further information can be found under Restructuring, Integration and Other Costs.
Asset Impairment Charges
Further information regarding our asset impairment charges can be found under the caption "Note 8: Fair Value Measurements" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report and in Critical Accounting Policies.
During 2020, we recorded asset impairment charges of $98.0 million, related primarily to the goodwill of our Promotional Solutions and Cloud Solutions Web Hosting reporting units and amortizable intangibles of our Cloud Solutions Web Hosting reporting unit.
During 2019, we recorded asset impairment charges of $391.0 million related primarily to the goodwill of our former Financial Services Data-Driven Marketing and Small Business Services Web Hosting reporting units, as well as certain amortizable intangible assets of the Small Business Services Web Hosting reporting unit.
During 2018, we recorded asset impairment charges of $101.3 million related primarily to the goodwill and indefinite-lived trade name of our former Small Business Services Indirect reporting unit.
Interest Expense
(1) Amounts for 2018 include our obligations under finance leases, which were reported as debt in our consolidated balance sheets prior to the adoption of Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-02, Leasing, and related amendments on January 1, 2019.
The decrease in interest expense for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily driven by our lower weighted-average interest rate in 2020, partially offset by our higher weighted-average debt level in 2020, as we borrowed additional funds for a period of time at the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic to ensure liquidity. Those funds were subsequently repaid and our total debt outstanding was $840.0 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $883.5 million as of December 31, 2019.
The increase in interest expense for 2019, as compared to 2018, was driven primarily by our higher weighted-average debt level that funded share repurchases throughout 2019 and 2018 and acquisitions throughout 2018, as well as our higher weighted-average interest rate during 2019.
Income Tax Provision
Our effective income tax rates in 2020 and 2019 were significantly impacted by the asset impairment charges in both periods, coupled with their impact on the amount of pretax income (loss) and the nondeductible portion of the impairment charges. The non-deductible portion of goodwill impairment charges drove a 68.5 point increase in our tax rate in 2020 and the tax impact of share-based compensation resulted in an 8.5 point increase, as compared to 2019. In addition, during the third quarter of 2019, we placed a full valuation allowance of $8.4 million on the intangible-related deferred tax asset generated by the impairment of intangible assets located in Australia, resulting in a 4.5 point increase in our tax rate in 2020, as compared to 2019. Partially offsetting these increases in our effective tax rate was a 3.2 decrease in our state income tax rate. Further information regarding our effective tax rates for 2020 and 2019 can be found under the caption "Note 11: Income Tax Provision" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report. We anticipate that our annual effective income tax rate for 2021 will be approximately 25%.
The decrease in our effective income tax rate for 2019, as compared to 2018, was driven primarily by the nondeductible portion of the goodwill impairment charges in each period, combined with the impact of the asset impairment charges on pretax (loss) income in each period. The larger non-deductible goodwill impairment charge in 2019 resulted in a decrease in our effective tax rate of 36.4 points, as compared to 2018. In addition, during the third quarter of 2019, we placed a full valuation allowance of $8.4 million on the intangible-related deferred tax asset generated by the impairment of intangible assets located in Australia, decreasing our tax rate 4.5 points. Partially offsetting these decreases in our effective income tax rate was an increase in our state income tax rate of 1.9 points, as compared to 2018. Further information regarding our effective tax rates for 2019 and 2018 can be found under the caption "Note 11: Income Tax Provision" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Net Income (Loss) / Diluted Earnings (Loss) per Share
(1) Information regarding the calculation of adjusted diluted EPS can be found in the following section, Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures.
The change in net income and diluted EPS for 2020, as compared to 2019, was driven by the factors outlined in Executive Overview - 2020 results vs. 2019. The decrease in adjusted diluted EPS for 2020, as compared to 2019, was driven, in large part, by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as investments in our One Deluxe strategy and the continuing secular decline in checks and business forms. These decreases were partially offset by various cost savings initiatives and growth in treasury management revenue.
We reported a net loss and diluted loss per share for 2019, compared to net income and diluted EPS for 2018. The primary factor contributing to the net loss in 2019 was a $289.7 million increase in asset impairment charges. Other factors that contributed to the net loss in 2019 included:
•an increase in restructuring, integration and other costs of $58.3 million in support of our growth strategies and to increase our efficiency;
•the continuing secular decline in check and forms usage;
•investments in our One Deluxe transformation;
•increased shipping and material rates, medical costs and interest expense;
•organic declines in web and hosted solutions and marketing and promotional solutions revenue;
•gains from sales of businesses and customer lists of $15.6 million in 2018;
•increased share-based compensation expense, driven by an increase in the level of equity awards in 2019; and
•an unfavorable effective income tax rate.
Partially offsetting these increases in net loss and diluted loss per share were:
•a benefit in 2019 of approximately $50.0 million from continuing initiatives to reduce our cost structure;
•lower shares outstanding in 2019;
•the benefit of price increases in certain of our Checks sales channels;
•a $7.9 million decrease in acquisition amortization expense; and
•incremental earnings from businesses acquired.
The decrease in adjusted diluted EPS for 2019, as compared to 2018, was driven primarily by the continuing decline in checks, business forms and some accessories, investments in our One Deluxe transformation, increased shipping and material rates, increased medical costs and interest expense, lower organic web and hosted solutions and marketing and promotional solutions revenue, increased referral costs and continued check pricing pressure within our financial institution sales channel. These decreases in adjusted diluted EPS were partially offset by benefits from our cost reduction initiatives, lower shares outstanding in 2019, the benefit of price increases in certain of our Checks sales channels and incremental earnings from businesses acquired.
Adjusted EBITDA
The decrease in adjusted EBITDA for 2020, as compared to 2019, was driven primarily by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, adjusted EBITDA was negatively impacted by mix changes resulting from the contraction of legacy products and services, primarily checks and business forms, and the loss of web and hosted solutions revenue driven by the events of the third quarter of 2019 outlined in our discussion of consolidated revenue. We also continued to advance our transformation in line with our One Deluxe strategy by investing in various activities such as transforming our brand and our website and expanding our sales capabilities, as well as incurring ongoing new costs related to software-as-a-service solutions we are employing throughout the company. We also incurred expenses related to treasury management deals signed in the fourth quarter of 2019, as well as investments in our client operations area that included human capital investments and other costs related to on-boarding new clients. Additionally, during 2020, we incurred incremental costs resulting from our response to the COVID-19 pandemic of approximately $8.0 million, and we recorded bad debt expense of $5.4 million related to notes receivable from our distributors. These decreases in adjusted EBITDA were partially offset by actions taken to reduce costs in line with the reduced revenue, including savings of approximately $33.0 million from the temporary salary reductions, suspension of the 401(k) plan employer matching contribution, furloughs and other actions. In addition, we realized the benefit of various cost reductions unrelated to our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily in our sales, marketing and fulfillment organizations, as we continued to develop our post-COVID-19 operating model.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased for 2019, as compared to 2018, driven primarily by the continuing decline in checks, business forms and some accessories, investments in our One Deluxe transformation, increased shipping and material rates, increased medical costs and lower organic web and hosted solutions and marketing and promotional solutions revenue. In addition, referral costs increased and check pricing pressure within our financial institution sales channel continued. These decreases in adjusted EBITDA were partially offset by benefits from our cost reduction initiatives, price increases in certain of our Checks sales channels and incremental earnings from businesses acquired.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We have not reconciled adjusted EBITDA outlook guidance for 2021 to the directly comparable GAAP financial measure because we do not provide outlook guidance for net income or the reconciling items between net income and adjusted EBITDA. Because of the substantial uncertainty and variability surrounding certain of these forward-looking reconciling items, including asset impairment charges, restructuring, integration and other costs, and certain legal-related expenses, a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure outlook guidance to the corresponding GAAP measure is not available without unreasonable effort. The probable significance of certain of these reconciling items is high and, based on historical experience, could be material.
Free cash flow - We believe that free cash flow is an important indicator of cash available for debt service and for shareholders, after making capital investments to maintain or expand our asset base. Free cash flow is limited and not all of our free cash flow is available for discretionary spending, as we may have mandatory debt payments and other cash requirements
that must be deducted from our cash available for future use. We believe that the measure of free cash flow provides an additional metric to compare cash generated by operations on a consistent basis and to provide insight into the cash flow available to fund items such as share repurchases, dividends, mandatory and discretionary debt reduction and acquisitions or other strategic investments.
Net cash provided by operating activities reconciles to free cash flow as follows:
Net debt - Management believes that net debt is an important measure to monitor leverage and to evaluate the balance sheet. In calculating net debt, cash and cash equivalents are subtracted from total debt because they could be used to reduce our debt obligations. A limitation associated with using net debt is that it subtracts cash and cash equivalents, and therefore, may imply that management intends to use cash and cash equivalents to reduce outstanding debt and that there is less debt than the most comparable GAAP measure indicates.
Total debt reconciles to net debt as follows:
Liquidity - We consider liquidity to be an important metric for demonstrating the amount of cash that is available or that could be readily available on short notice. This financial measure is not a substitute for GAAP liquidity measures. Instead, we believe that this measurement enhances investors’ understanding of the funds that are currently available.
Adjusted diluted EPS - By excluding the impact of non-cash items or items that we believe are not indicative of current period operating performance, we believe that adjusted diluted EPS provides useful comparable information to assist in analyzing our current period operating performance and in assessing our future operating performance. As such, adjusted diluted EPS is one of the key financial performance metrics we use to assess the operating results and performance of the business and to identify strategies to improve performance. It is reasonable to expect that one or more of the excluded items will occur in future periods, but the amounts recognized may vary significantly.
Diluted earnings (loss) per share reconciles to adjusted diluted EPS as follows:
(1) In 2019 and 2018, includes share-based compensation expense related to the modification of certain awards in conjunction with our CEO transition.
(2) The tax effect of the pretax adjustments considers the tax treatment and related tax rate(s) that apply to each adjustment in the applicable tax jurisdiction(s). Generally, this results in a tax impact that approximates the U.S. effective tax rate for each adjustment. However, the tax impact of certain adjustments, such as asset impairment charges, share-based compensation expense and CEO transition costs, depends on whether the amounts are deductible in the respective tax jurisdictions and the applicable effective tax rate(s) in those jurisdictions.
(3) The total of weighted-average shares and potential common shares outstanding used in the calculation of adjusted diluted EPS differs from that used in the GAAP diluted EPS calculations because of the impact on the GAAP calculations of the net losses in certain of the periods in each year.
Adjusted EBITDA - We believe that adjusted EBITDA is useful in evaluating our operating performance, as the calculation eliminates the effect of interest expense, income taxes, the accounting effects of capital investments (i.e., depreciation and amortization) and certain items, as presented below, that may vary for companies for reasons unrelated to current period operating performance. In addition, management utilizes adjusted EBITDA to assess the operating results and performance of the business, to perform analytical comparisons and to identify strategies to improve performance. We also believe that an increasing adjusted EBITDA depicts an increase in the value of the company. We do not consider adjusted EBITDA to be a measure of cash flow, as it does not consider certain cash requirements such as interest, income taxes, debt service payments or capital investments.
Net income (loss) reconciles to adjusted EBITDA as follows:
(1) In 2019 and 2018, includes share-based compensation expense related to the modification of certain awards in conjunction with our CEO transition.
Restructuring and integration expense consists of costs related to the consolidation and migration of certain applications and processes, including our financial, sales and human resources management systems. It also includes costs related to the integration of acquired businesses into our systems and processes. These costs primarily consist of information technology consulting, project management services and internal labor, as well as other costs associated with our initiatives, such as training, travel and relocation and costs associated with facility closures. In addition, we recorded employee severance costs related to these initiatives, as well as our ongoing cost reduction initiatives across functional areas. Our restructuring and integration activities began to increase during the second half of 2019, as we began pursuing several initiatives designed to focus our business behind our growth strategy and to increase our efficiency. Further information regarding restructuring and integration expense can be found under the caption "Note 9: Restructuring and Integration Expense" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report. In addition to restructuring and integration expense, we also recognized certain business transformation costs related to optimizing our business processes in line with our growth strategies. While we reduced certain expenditures during the first half of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we subsequently decided to resume certain capital projects and to continue important system implementation work.
The majority of the employee reductions included in our restructuring and integration accruals as of December 31, 2020 are expected to be completed in the first quarter of 2021, and we expect most of the related severance payments to be paid in the first half of 2021. As a result of our employee reductions, we realized cost savings of approximately $25.0 million in SG&A expense and $5.0 million in total cost of revenue in 2020, in comparison to our 2019 results of operations, which represents a portion of the total net cost reductions we realized in 2020. For those employee reductions included in our restructuring and integration accruals through December 31, 2020, we expect to realize cost savings of approximately $35.0 million in SG&A expense and $1.0 million in total cost of revenue in 2021, in comparison to our 2020 results of operations, which represents a portion of the total net cost reductions we expect to realize in 2021. In addition, we closed 24 facilities during 2020 and we expect to close additional facilities during 2021. These facilities primarily contain sales and administrative functions, and most of the impacted employees have converted to a work-from-home model. We anticipate annual savings of more than $10.0 million from these facility closures, once they are complete.
In April 2018, we announced the retirement of Lee Schram, our former CEO. Mr. Schram remained employed under the terms of a transition agreement through March 1, 2019. Under the terms of this agreement, we provided certain benefits to Mr. Schram, including a transition bonus in the amount of $2.0 million that was paid in March 2019. In addition, modifications were made to certain of his share-based payment awards. In conjunction with the CEO transition, we offered retention agreements to
certain members of our management team under which each employee was entitled to receive a cash bonus equal to his or her annual base salary or up to 1.5 times his or her annual base salary if he or she remained employed during the retention period, generally from July 1, 2018 to December 31, 2019, and complied with certain covenants. In addition to these expenses, we incurred certain other costs related to the CEO transition process, including executive search, legal, travel and board of directors fees in 2018. During 2019, we incurred consulting fees related to the evaluation of our strategic plan and we expensed the majority of the current CEO's signing bonus. CEO transition costs are included in SG&A expense on the consolidated statements of income (loss) and were $9.4 million in 2019 and $7.2 million in 2018. Accruals for CEO transition costs were $4.4 million as of December 31, 2019 and were included in accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. All of these amounts were paid during 2020.
Effective January 1, 2020, we reorganized our reportable business segments to align with structural and management reporting changes in support of our growth strategy. We currently operate 4 reportable segments: Payments, Cloud Solutions, Promotional Solutions and Checks. These segments are generally organized by product type and reflect the way we currently manage the company. The financial information presented below for our reportable business segments is consistent with that presented under the caption “Note 19: Business Segment Information” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report, where information regarding our product and service offerings can also be found.
Payments
Results for our Payments segment were as follows:
The increase in total revenue for 2020, as compared to 2019, was driven by an increase in treasury management revenue of 16.8%, related primarily to lockbox processing outsourcing deals signed in the fourth quarter of 2019 and other client wins. Partially offsetting this increase in revenue was a decline in payroll services revenue, primarily driven by the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our small business customers. Revenue for the fourth quarter of 2020 was impacted by customer implementation delays attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The decrease in adjusted EBITDA for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily driven by increased costs in support of our One Deluxe strategy, including costs related to the lockbox processing outsourcing deals signed in the fourth quarter of 2019, as well as investments in our client operations area that included human capital investments and other costs related to on-boarding new clients. In addition, adjusted EBITDA was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, as payroll revenue declined and we incurred incremental costs, including the Hero Pay premium we paid to employees working on-site during the second quarter of 2020. These impacts were partially offset by revenue from the lockbox processing outsourcing deals and actions taken to reduce costs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Adjusted EBITDA margin decreased for 2020, as compared to 2019, as a result of the investments we made in this business and expected COVID-19-related delays in new customer implementations. Throughout 2020, we expanded the number of financial institution partners that utilize our full suite of capabilities, and during 2021, we will continue to work with these partners to on-board these services and to expand the number of full-service clients.
The increase in total revenue for 2019, as compared to 2018, was driven by incremental treasury management revenue of approximately $49.1 million from businesses acquired. Information regarding our acquisitions can be found under the caption "Note 6: Acquisitions" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report. Partially offsetting this increase in revenue was a decrease in treasury management volume of $3.6 million due to a customer electing to bring its services in-house, as well as a reduction in software maintenance revenue.
The increases in adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin for 2019, as compared to 2018, were primarily driven by incremental earnings of the acquired businesses, as well as continuing cost reduction initiatives across functional areas. Partially offsetting these increases were investments in our One Deluxe strategy and increased medical costs in 2019.
Cloud Solutions
Results for our Cloud Solutions segment were as follows:
The decrease in total revenue for 2020, as compared to 2019, was driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily in data-driven marketing solutions as clients suspended their marketing campaigns, with some impact on web and hosted solutions as well. Data-driven marketing revenue for the fourth quarter of 2020 remained stable, as compared to the third quarter of 2020, as financial institutions slowly reactivated data-driven marketing analytics and campaigns in the second half of the year. Web and hosted solutions revenue declined, as compared to 2019, due to our decision in the third quarter of 2019 to exit certain customer contracts, the loss of certain large customers in the third quarter of 2019 as they elected to in-source some of the services we provide, and more recent decisions to exit certain product lines. Partially offsetting these decreases was a $7.0 million increase in data-driven marketing revenue in the first quarter of 2020, prior to the commencement of the COVID-19 pandemic, driven by new campaigns and growth in pay-for-performance marketing campaigns.
The decrease in adjusted EBITDA for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and increased information technology costs in support of our One Deluxe strategy, as well as the loss of web hosting revenue related to the events that occurred in the third quarter of 2019. Partially offsetting these declines in adjusted EBITDA were various cost reductions unrelated to our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily sales and marketing costs, and the benefit of actions taken in response to the pandemic. Adjusted EBITDA also benefited from the increase in data-driven marketing revenue in the first quarter of 2020, prior to the commencement of the COVID-19 pandemic. Adjusted EBITDA margin increased slightly for 2020, as compared to 2019, as cost reductions outpaced the revenue decline and revenue mix was favorable in 2020. We expect that the loss of revenue associated with certain product exits in the fourth quarter of 2020 will continue to impact revenue in 2021, but we anticipate adjusted EBITDA margins to remain in the low-to-mid 20% range.
The increase in total revenue for 2019, as compared to 2018, was driven by incremental revenue from businesses acquired of approximately $14.6 million. Information regarding our acquisitions can be found under the caption "Note 6: Acquisitions" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report. In addition, data-driven marketing revenue increased $10.9 million, as compared to 2018, driven by new campaigns and growth in existing client spend. Partially offsetting these revenue increases was softness in web and hosted solutions driven primarily by the events that occurred in the third quarter of 2019.
The increase in adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin for 2019, as compared to 2018, was driven by growth in data-driven marketing revenue and the contribution of the acquired businesses, as well as cost saving initiatives designed to bring our cost structure in line with the level of web and hosted solutions revenue. In addition, adjusted EBITDA margin benefited from a more favorable product mix.
Promotional Solutions
Results for our Promotional Solutions segment were as follows:
The decrease in total revenue for 2020, as compared to 2019, was driven primarily by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as our small business and enterprise customers reacted to the current economic environment and demand for marketing and promotional products declined sharply, as our customers stopped virtually all promotional activities in response to the pandemic. The continuing secular decline in business forms and some accessories also negatively impacted revenue. Partially offsetting these volume declines was new revenue of $31.0 million from sales of PPE during 2020. Revenue for the fourth quarter of 2020 increased 15.3% over the third quarter of 2020, primarily in marketing and promotional solutions, partially due to seasonality in certain of our products. We believe revenue will continue to improve in 2021, but we are not expecting a rapid recovery in this segment until COVID-19 impacts abate.
The decrease in adjusted EBITDA for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily driven by the loss of revenue resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, investments in support of our One Deluxe strategy, primarily information technology and sales force expenses, and the continuing secular decline in business forms and some accessories. In addition, we recorded bad debt expense of $5.4 million during 2020, related to notes receivable from our distributors, primarily one that was underperforming prior to the commencement of the COVID-19 pandemic, and expense for obsolete inventory was higher in 2020. These decreases in adjusted EBITDA were partially offset by the benefit of actions taken in response to COVID-19, various cost reductions unrelated to our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily sales, marketing and fulfillment costs, and the sales of PPE in 2020. Adjusted EBITDA margin for 2020 decreased, as compared to 2019, as the revenue decline, investments in our transformation, and bad debt and obsolete inventory expense more than offset the benefit of actions taken in response to COVID-19 and the other cost savings realized. We are anticipating improved adjusted EBITDA margins in 2021, as a result of cost reduction actions taken in 2020, including changes in key distribution relationships that will continue in 2021.
The decrease in total revenue for 2019, as compared to 2018, was driven primarily by the continued secular decline in business forms and some accessories, the loss of a large customer and a decline in promotional products volume.
The decreases in adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin for 2019, as compared to 2018, were driven by the lower order volume, investments in our One Deluxe strategy, increased medical costs and higher materials and shipping rates. These decreases were partially offset by the benefits of our cost reductions initiatives, including efficiency initiatives and spending reductions.
Checks
Results for our Checks segment were as follows:
The decrease in total revenue for 2020, as compared to 2019, was driven primarily by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in a decline in business and personal check usage stemming from the slowdown in the economy. The continuing secular decline in checks also contributed to the revenue decline, partially offset by nominal price increases. Based on our client retention rate and new business that we won during 2020, we anticipate revenue declines in 2021 to return to mid-single digits.
The decrease in adjusted EBITDA for 2020, as compared to 2019, was driven by the loss of revenue resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and the secular decline in checks, as well as referral costs and investments in support of our One Deluxe strategy, primarily information technology expenses. Partially offsetting these decreases in adjusted EBITDA were various cost reductions unrelated to our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily sales, marketing and fulfillment costs, and the benefit of actions taken in response to COVID-19. We continue to focus on scaling our operating expenses to match anticipated check volumes, while we make strategic investments in this business.
The decrease in total revenue for 2019, as compared to 2018, was primarily due to the reduction in orders stemming from the continuing secular decline in check usage. This decrease in revenue was partially offset by the benefit of price increases in certain sales channels.
The decrease in adjusted EBITDA for 2019, as compared to 2018, was due primarily to the revenue decline, increased material and shipping rates, as well as increased referral and medical costs. These decreases were partially offset by benefits from our cost reduction initiatives, including lower advertising expense driven by advertising print reduction initiatives, efficiency initiatives and spending reductions. These cost reductions drove the increase in adjusted EBITDA margin for 2019, as compared to 2018.
As of December 31, 2020, we held cash and cash equivalents of $123.1 million and cash and cash equivalents included in funds held for customers of $106.3 million. The following table shows our cash flow activity for the past 3 years, and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated statements of cash flows appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
(1) See the Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures within the Consolidated Results of Operations section, which illustrates how we calculate free cash flow.
To maintain liquidity at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we took steps to reduce discretionary spending and other expenditures in line with revenue declines. These steps included temporary salary reductions for all salaried employees, including our leadership team and board of directors, project delays, furloughs and other actions. We also delayed U.S. federal payroll tax payments as permitted by the CARES Act. As a result of these actions and our stronger than expected performance, we generated operating cash flow of $217.6 million and free cash flow of $154.9 million in 2020. This allowed us to end the temporary salary reductions, effective July 1, 2020. In addition, during the second half of 2020, we repaid $300.0 million of the amount drawn on our revolving credit facility, and we ended 2020 with liquidity of $425.5 million, comprised of cash on hand and availability on our credit facility.
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $69.1 million for 2020, as compared to 2019, driven primarily by the loss of revenue resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, increased investments in support of our One Deluxe strategy, the continuing secular decline in checks and business forms, and changes in the timing of certain working capital items, such as inventory purchases and payments on accounts payable. These decreases in operating cash flow were partially offset by a $36.1 million reduction in income tax payments resulting from lower taxable income, actions taken in response to COVID-19, such as the temporary salary reductions and other actions, delays in U.S. federal payroll tax payments of $14.3 million allowed under the CARES Act, and a legal-related settlement of $12.5 million in 2019 that was accrued in the previous year.
The $52.7 million decrease in net cash provided by operating activities for 2019, as compared to 2018, was due primarily to increased restructuring and integration activities in support of our growth strategy and to increase efficiency, the continuing secular decline in check and forms usage, the payment of certain legal-related expenses, including $12.5 million accrued in the prior year and paid in the first quarter of 2019, an increase of $10.1 million in medical benefit payments and a $7.3 million increase in interest payments. These decreases in operating cash flow were partially offset by benefits of our cost reduction initiatives, a $27.5 million reduction in income tax payments in 2019, the timing of accounts receivable collections and annual billings in certain of our businesses, and Checks price increases in certain sales channels.
Included in net cash provided by operating activities were the following operating cash outflows:
(1) Amounts reflect compensation based on total company performance.
Net cash used by investing activities for 2020 was $16.3 million lower than 2019, driven primarily by proceeds from the sale of facilities of $9.7 million in 2020, an $8.3 million reduction in payments for acquisitions and a reduction in capital purchases of $4.0 million, partially offset by purchases of customer lists of $11.1 million in 2020.
Net cash used by investing activities for 2019 was $180.7 million lower than in 2018, driven primarily by a decrease of $183.7 million in payments for acquisitions. Our One Deluxe growth strategy focuses on profitable organic growth, supplemented by acquisitions, rather than being dependent on acquisitions for growth. As such, the amount paid for acquisitions in 2019 decreased significantly from 2018. Information about our acquisitions can be found under the caption “Note 6: Acquisitions” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Net cash used by financing activities for 2020 was $79.6 million lower than 2019, due primarily to a decrease in common share repurchases of $104.5 million. To maintain liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic, we did not repurchase any of our common shares during the last 3 quarters of the year. Partially offsetting this decrease in cash used by financing activities was a net increase in payments on long-term debt of $17.0 million and the net change in customer funds obligations in each period.
Net cash used by financing activities for 2019 was $128.0 million higher than in 2018, driven primarily by a net decrease in borrowings on long-term debt of $227.6 million, as our borrowings were higher in 2018 to fund acquisitions and share repurchases. This increase in cash used by financing activities was partially offset by a decrease in share repurchases of $81.5 million.
Significant cash transactions, excluding those related to operating activities, for each period were as follows:
As of December 31, 2020, our foreign subsidiaries held cash and cash equivalents of $98.7 million. Deferred income taxes have not been recognized on unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, as these amounts are intended to be reinvested indefinitely in the operations of those subsidiaries. If we were to repatriate all of our foreign cash and cash equivalents into the U.S. at one time, we estimate we would incur a foreign withholding tax liability of approximately $5.0 million.
As of December 31, 2020, $302.3 million was available for borrowing under our $1.15 billion revolving credit facility. Our credit facility includes an accordion feature allowing us, subject to lender consent, to expand the facility to $1.425 billion. We anticipate that net cash generated by operating activities, along with cash and cash equivalents on hand and availability under our revolving credit facility, will be sufficient to support our operations for the next 12 months. We anticipate that we will continue to pay our regular quarterly dividend. However, dividends are approved by our board of directors each quarter and thus, are subject to change.
Our total debt was $840.0 million as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of $43.5 million from December 31, 2019. Further information concerning our outstanding debt can be found under the caption "Note 15: Debt” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report. Information regarding our debt service obligations can be found under Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, Guarantees and Contractual Obligations.
Our capital structure for each period was as follows:
(1) The fixed interest rate amount represents the amount drawn under our revolving credit facility that is subject to an interest rate swap agreement. The related interest rate includes the fixed rate under the swap of 1.798% plus the credit facility spread due on all amounts outstanding under the credit facility agreement.
In October 2018, our board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to $500.0 million of our common stock. This authorization has no expiration date. To maintain liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic, we did not repurchase any of our common shares during the last 3 quarters of 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, we repurchased 0.5 million shares for $14.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, $287.5 million remained available for repurchase under the authorization. Information regarding changes in shareholders' equity can be found in the consolidated statements of shareholders' equity appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
As of December 31, 2020, the total availability under our revolving credit facility was $1.15 billion. The facility includes an accordion feature allowing us, subject to lender consent, to increase the credit commitment to an aggregate amount not exceeding $1.425 billion. The credit facility matures in March 2023. Our quarterly commitment fee ranges from 0.175% to 0.35%, based on our leverage ratio.
Borrowings under the credit facility agreement are collateralized by substantially all of our personal and intangible property. The credit agreement governing the credit facility contains customary covenants regarding limits on levels of subsidiary indebtedness and capital expenditures, liens, investments, acquisitions, certain mergers, certain asset sales outside the ordinary course of business and change in control as defined in the agreement. The agreement also requires us to maintain certain financial ratios, including a maximum leverage ratio of 3.5 and a minimum ratio of consolidated earnings before interest and taxes to consolidated interest expense, as defined in the credit agreement, of 3.0. Additionally, the agreement contains customary representations and warranties including, as a condition to borrowing, that all such representations and warranties are true and correct in all material respects on the date of the borrowing, including representations as to no material adverse change in our business, assets, operations or financial condition. We were in compliance with all debt covenants as of December 31, 2020, and we anticipate that we will remain in compliance with our debt covenants throughout 2021.
As of December 31, 2020, amounts were available for borrowing under our revolving credit facility as follows:
(1) We use standby letters of credit primarily to collateralize certain obligations related to our self-insured workers' compensation claims, as well as claims for environmental matters, as required by certain states. These letters of credit reduce the amount available for borrowing under our revolving credit facility.
Information concerning items comprising selected captions on our consolidated balance sheets can be found under the caption "Note 3: Supplemental Balance Sheet and Cash Flow Information" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Prepaid product discounts - Other non-current assets include prepaid product discounts that are recorded upon contract execution and are generally amortized on the straight-line basis as reductions of revenue over the related contract term. Changes in prepaid product discounts during the past 3 years can be found under the caption "Note 3: Supplemental Balance Sheet and Cash Flow Information" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report. Cash payments made for prepaid product discounts were $33.6 million for 2020, $25.6 million for 2019 and $23.8 million for 2018.
The number of checks being written has been declining, which has contributed to increased competitive pressure when attempting to retain or acquire clients. Both the number of financial institution clients requesting prepaid product discount payments and the amount of the payments has fluctuated from year to year. Although we anticipate that we will selectively continue to make these payments, we cannot quantify future amounts with certainty. The amount paid depends on numerous factors, such as the number and timing of contract executions and renewals, competitors’ actions, overall product discount levels and the structure of up-front product discount payments versus providing higher discount levels throughout the term of the contract.
Liabilities for prepaid product discounts are recorded upon contract execution. These obligations are monitored for each contract and are adjusted as payments are made. Prepaid product discounts due within the next year are included in accrued liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. These accruals were $14.4 million as of December 31, 2020 and $14.7 million as of December 31, 2019. Accruals for prepaid product discounts included in other non-current liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets were $3.7 million as of December 31, 2019.
It is not our general business practice to enter into off-balance sheet arrangements or to guarantee the performance of third parties. In the normal course of business we periodically enter into agreements that incorporate general indemnification language. These indemnification provisions generally encompass third-party claims arising from our products and services, including, without limitation, service failures, breach of security, intellectual property rights, governmental regulations and/or employment-related matters. Performance under these indemnities would generally be triggered by our breach of the terms of the contract. In disposing of assets or businesses, we often provide representations, warranties and/or indemnities to cover various risks, including, for example, unknown damage to the assets, environmental risks involved in the sale of real estate, liability to investigate and remediate environmental contamination at waste disposal sites and manufacturing facilities, and unidentified tax liabilities and legal matters related to periods prior to disposition. We do not have the ability to estimate the potential liability from such indemnities because they relate to unknown conditions. However, we do not believe that any liability under these indemnities would have a material adverse effect on our financial position, annual results of operations or annual cash flows. We have recorded liabilities for known indemnifications related to environmental matters. These liabilities were not significant as of December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019. Further information regarding our liabilities related to self-insurance and litigation can be found under the caption “Note 17: Other Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
We are not engaged in any transactions, arrangements or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other third parties that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our liquidity or on our access to, or requirements for, capital resources. We have not established any special purpose entities other than our agreement to form MedPay Exchange LLC (MPX), doing business as Medical Payment Exchange, which delivers payments to healthcare providers from insurance companies and other payers. This entity is a variable interest entity (VIE), as defined in Accounting Standards Codification Topic 810, Consolidation. Further information regarding our accounting for this entity can be found under the caption "Note 1: Significant Accounting Policies" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report. We have not entered into any material related party transactions during the past 3 years.
As of December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations were as follows:
Purchase obligations include amounts due under executed contracts with third-party service providers. These contracts are primarily for information technology services, including cloud computing and professional services contracts related to the
build-out of the technology platforms discussed in Executive Overview. Purchase obligations also include direct mail advertising agreements and data agreements. We routinely issue purchase orders to numerous vendors for the purchase of inventory and other supplies. These purchase orders are not included in the purchase obligations presented here, as our business partners typically allow us to cancel these purchase orders as necessary to accommodate business needs. Of the purchase obligations included in the table above, $36.1 million allow for early termination upon the payment of early termination fees. If we were to terminate these agreements, we would have incurred early termination fees of $3.6 million as of December 31, 2020. Of the operating lease obligations included in the table above, $42.7 million allow for early termination upon the payment of early termination fees. If we were to terminate these agreements, we would have incurred early termination fees of approximately $4.4 million as of December 31, 2020.
Other non-current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of amounts due under our deferred compensation and postretirement pension plans, the fair value of our interest rate swap agreement, the liability for federal payroll tax payments that we deferred under the CARES Act, and income tax liabilities related to uncertain tax positions and prior year tax returns. Of the $43.2 million reported as other non-current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020, $20.3 million is excluded from the obligations shown in the table above. The excluded amounts, including the current portion of each liability, are comprised primarily of the following:
•Fair value of interest rate swap agreement - We have no plans, at this time, to terminate the interest rate swap agreement.
•Income tax liabilities - Due to the nature of the underlying liabilities and the extended time frame often needed to resolve income tax uncertainties, we cannot make reliable estimates of the amount or timing of cash payments that may be required to settle these liabilities.
•A portion of the amount due under our deferred compensation plan - Under this plan, some employees may begin receiving payments upon the termination of employment or disability, and we cannot predict when these events will occur. As such, $3.1 million of our deferred compensation liability as of December 31, 2020 is excluded from the obligations shown in the table above.
•Other non-current liabilities that are not settled in cash, such as incentive compensation that will be settled by issuing shares of our common stock and deferred revenue.
The table of contractual obligations does not include the following:
•Benefit payments under our postretirement medical benefit plan - We have the option of paying benefits from the accumulated assets of the plan or from the general funds of the company. Additionally, we expect the plan assets to earn income over time. As such, we cannot predict when or if payments from our general funds will be required. We anticipate that we will utilize plan assets to pay a majority of the benefits due during 2021. Our postretirement benefit plan was overfunded by $71.2 million as of December 31, 2020.
•Income tax payments, which are dependent upon our taxable income.
Our critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations, or which place the most significant demands on management's judgment about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain, and the impact of different estimates or assumptions could be material to our financial condition or results of operations.
Our MD&A discussion is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our accounting policies are discussed under the caption “Note 1: Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report. We review the accounting policies used in reporting our financial results on a regular basis. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors and assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the result of which forms the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. In some instances, we reasonably could have used different accounting estimates and, in other instances, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results may differ from our estimates. Significant estimates and judgments utilized are reviewed by management on an ongoing basis and by the audit committee of our board of directors at the end of each quarter prior to the public release of our financial results.
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. As such, we are uncertain of the full impact the pandemic will have on our financial condition, liquidity and/or results of operations. This uncertainty affected several of the assumptions made and estimates used in the preparation of our 2020 consolidated financial statements. Further information can be found under the caption “Note 20: Risks and Uncertainties” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report, as well as in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
Goodwill Impairment
As of December 31, 2020, goodwill totaled $736.8 million, which represented 39.3% of our total assets. Goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis as of July 31, or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would indicate a possible impairment. To analyze goodwill for impairment, we must assign our goodwill to individual reporting units. Identification of reporting units includes an analysis of the components that comprise each of our operating segments, which considers, among other things, the manner in which we operate our business and the availability of discrete financial information. Components of an operating segment are aggregated to form a reporting unit if the components have similar economic characteristics. We periodically review our reporting units to ensure that they continue to reflect the manner in which we operate our business.
When performing a quantitative analysis of goodwill, we first compare the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill, to its estimated fair value. Carrying value is based on the assets and liabilities associated with the operations of the reporting unit, which often requires the allocation of shared and corporate items among reporting units. We utilize a discounted cash flow model to calculate the estimated fair value of a reporting unit. This approach is a valuation technique under which we estimate future cash flows using the reporting unit's financial forecast from the perspective of an unrelated market participant. Using historical trending and internal forecasting techniques, we project revenue and apply our fixed and variable cost experience rates to the projected revenue to arrive at the future cash flows. A terminal value is then applied to the projected cash flow stream. Future estimated cash flows are discounted to their present value to calculate the estimated fair value. The discount rate used is the market-value-weighted average of our estimated cost of capital derived using both known and estimated customary market metrics. In determining the estimated fair values of our reporting units, we are required to estimate a number of factors, including revenue growth rates, terminal growth rates, direct costs, the discount rate and the allocation of shared and corporate items. When completing a quantitative analysis for all of our reporting units, the summation of our reporting units' fair values is compared to our consolidated fair value, as indicated by our market capitalization, to evaluate the reasonableness of our calculations.
Evaluations of asset impairment require us to make assumptions about future events, market conditions and financial performance over the life of the asset being evaluated. These assumptions require significant judgment and actual results may vary from our assumptions. For example, if our stock price were to further decline over a sustained period, if a further downturn in economic conditions were to negatively affect our actual and forecasted operating results, if we were to change our business strategies and/or the allocation of resources, if we were to lose significant customers, if competition were to materially increase, or if order volume declines for checks and business forms were to materially accelerate, these situations could indicate a decline in the fair value of one or more of our reporting units. This may require us to record additional impairment charges for a portion of goodwill or other assets.
First quarter 2020 goodwill impairment analyses - Effective January 1, 2020, we reorganized our reportable business segments to align with structural and management reporting changes in support of our growth strategy. As a result, we reassessed our previously determined reporting units and concluded that a realignment of our reporting units was required. We analyzed goodwill for impairment immediately prior to this realignment by performing a qualitative analysis for the reporting units that changed, with the exception of our Direct-to-Consumer reporting unit, which is part of our new Checks reportable business segment. The qualitative analyses evaluated factors including, but not limited to, economic, market and industry conditions, cost factors and the overall financial performance of the reporting units. We also considered the last quantitative analyses we completed. In completing these assessments, we noted no changes in events or circumstances that indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair value of any reporting unit was less than its carrying amount. The quantitative analysis of our Direct-to-Consumer reporting unit indicated that its fair value exceeded its carrying value by approximately $35.0 million, or 26%.
In completing the realignment of our reporting units, we reallocated the carrying value of goodwill to our new reporting units based on their relative fair values. Immediately subsequent to the realignment, we completed a quantitative analysis for the reporting units that changed as a result of the realignment. This quantitative analysis, as of January 1, 2020, indicated that the estimated fair values of our reporting units exceeded their carrying values by approximate amounts between $37.0 million and $954.0 million, or by amounts between 121% and 189% above the carrying values of their net assets.
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) announced a global health emergency due to an outbreak of COVID-19 originating in Wuhan, China and the risks to the international community as the virus spread globally beyond its point of origin. In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. Following the pandemic designation, we observed a decline in the market valuation of our common shares and we determined that the global response to the pandemic negatively impacted our estimates of expected future cash flows. After our consideration of economic, market and industry conditions, cost factors, the overall financial performance of our reporting units and the last quantitative analyses we completed, we concluded that a triggering event had occurred for 2 of our reporting units.
As such, we completed quantitative goodwill impairment analyses for our Promotional Solutions and Cloud Solutions Web Hosting reporting units as of March 31, 2020. Our analyses indicated that the goodwill of our Promotional Solutions reporting unit was partially impaired and the goodwill of our Cloud Solutions Web Hosting reporting unit was fully impaired. As such, we recorded goodwill impairment charges of $63.4 million and $4.3 million, respectively. The impairment charges were measured as the amount by which the reporting units' carrying values exceeded their estimated fair values, limited to the carrying amount of goodwill. After the impairment charges, $62.8 million of goodwill remained in the Promotional Solutions reporting unit as of the measurement date.
Our impairment analyses were based on assumptions made using the best information available at the time, including the performance of our reporting units subsequent to the WHO declaration of a pandemic and available economic forecasts. These assumptions anticipated a sharp decline in gross domestic product and a material decline in the number of small businesses. We may have not yet experienced the full impact of the pandemic or its resulting impact on our small business customers and thus, actual events may differ from our assumptions. The sweeping nature of the pandemic makes it extremely difficult to predict how our business and operations will be affected in the longer term. To the extent our assumptions differ from actual events, we may be required to record additional asset impairment charges.
Our impairment assessments are sensitive to changes in forecasted revenues and expenses, as well as our selected discount rate. For the March 31, 2020 assessment of our Promotional Solutions reporting unit, holding all other assumptions constant, if we assumed revenue in each year was 10% higher than we estimated, our goodwill impairment charge would have been approximately $18.0 million less, and if we assumed revenue in each year was 10% lower than we estimated, our goodwill impairment charge would have been approximately $18.0 million more. If we assumed our expenses, as a percentage of revenue, were 100 basis points lower in each year, our goodwill impairment charge would have been approximately $39.0 million less, and if we assumed our expenses, as a percentage of revenue, were 100 basis points higher in each year, our goodwill impairment charge would have been approximately $39.0 million more. If we assumed our selected discount rate of 12% was 100 basis points lower, our goodwill impairment charge would have been approximately $21.0 million less, and if we assumed the discount rate was 100 basis points higher, our goodwill impairment charge would have been approximately $17.0 million more.
2020 annual impairment analysis - In completing the 2020 annual impairment analysis of goodwill, we elected to perform qualitative analyses for 2 of our reporting units: Payments and Checks. These qualitative analyses evaluated factors, including, but not limited to, economic, market and industry conditions, cost factors and the overall financial performance of the reporting units. We also considered the most recent quantitative analyses we completed, which indicated that the estimated fair values of these reporting units exceeded their carrying values by approximately $490.0 million and $954.0 million, or by 189% and 180% above the carrying values of their net assets. In completing these assessments, we noted no changes in events or circumstances that indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair value of either reporting unit was less than its carrying amount.
We elected to perform quantitative analyses for our other 2 reporting units: Cloud Data Analytics and Promotional Solutions. These quantitative analyses indicated that the estimated fair values of these reporting units exceeded their carrying values by approximately $100.0 million and $210.0 million, or by 63% and 132% above the carrying values of their net assets. As such, no goodwill impairment charges were recorded as a result of our annual impairment analysis. This impairment assessment is sensitive to changes in forecasted cash flows, as well as our selected discount rate of 11%. Changes in the reporting units' forecast assumptions and estimates could materially affect the estimation of the fair value of these reporting units.
Information regarding our 2019 and 2018 impairment analyses can be found under the caption "Note 8: Fair Value Measurements" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Business Combinations
We allocate the purchase price of acquired businesses to the estimated fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the date of the acquisition. The calculations used to determine the fair value of the long-lived assets acquired, primarily intangible assets, can be complex and require significant judgment. We weigh many factors when completing these estimates, including, but not limited to, the nature of the acquired company’s business; its competitive position, strengths, and challenges; its historical financial position and performance; estimated customer retention rates; discount rates; and future plans for the combined entity. We may also engage independent valuation specialists, when necessary, to assist in the fair value calculations for significant acquired long-lived assets.
We generally estimate the fair value of acquired customer lists using the multi-period excess earnings method. This valuation model estimates revenues and cash flows derived from the asset and then deducts portions of the cash flow that can be attributed to supporting assets, such as a trade name or fixed assets, that contributed to the generation of the cash flows. The resulting cash flow, which is attributable solely to the customer list asset, is then discounted at a rate of return commensurate with the risk of the asset to calculate a present value. The fair value of acquired customer lists may also be estimated by discounting the estimated cash flows expected to be generated by the assets. Key assumptions used in these calculations include same-customer revenue growth rates, estimated earnings, estimated customer retention rates based on the acquirees' historical information and the discount rate.
The fair value of acquired trade names and technology is estimated, at times, using the relief from royalty method, which calculates the cost savings associated with owning rather than licensing the assets. Assumed royalty rates are applied to projected revenue for the estimated remaining useful lives of the assets to estimate the royalty savings. Royalty rates are selected based on the attributes of the asset, including its recognition and reputation in the industry, and in the case of trade names, with consideration of the specific profitability of the products sold under a trade name and supporting assets. The fair value of acquired technology may also be estimated using the cost of reproduction method under which the primary components of the technology are identified and the estimated cost to reproduce the technology is calculated based on historical data provided by the acquiree.
The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized, but is subject to impairment testing on at least an annual basis.
We are also required to estimate the useful lives of the acquired intangible assets, which determines the amount of acquisition-related amortization expense we will record in future periods. Each reporting period, we evaluate the remaining useful lives of our amortizable intangibles to determine whether events or circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining period of amortization.
While we use our best estimates and assumptions, our fair value estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to 1 year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Any adjustments required after the measurement period are recorded in the consolidated statements of income (loss).
The judgments required in determining the estimated fair values and expected useful lives assigned to each class of assets and liabilities acquired can significantly affect net income. For example, different classes of assets will have different useful lives. Consequently, to the extent a longer-lived asset is ascribed greater value than a shorter-lived asset, net income in a given period may be higher. Additionally, assigning a lower value to amortizable intangibles would result in a higher amount assigned to goodwill. As goodwill is not amortized, this would benefit net income in a given period, although goodwill is subject to annual impairment analysis.
Income Taxes
When preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves estimating our actual current tax expense based on expected taxable income, statutory tax rates, tax credits allowed in the various jurisdictions in which we operate, and risks associated with uncertain tax positions, together with assessing temporary and permanent differences resulting from the differing treatment of certain items between income tax return and financial reporting requirements. In interim reporting periods, we use an estimate of our annual effective tax rate based on the facts available at the time. Changes in the jurisdictional mix or the estimated amount of annual pretax income could impact our estimated effective tax rate for interim periods. The actual effective income tax rate is calculated at the end of the year.
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for temporary differences between the financial reporting basis of assets and liabilities and their respective tax reporting bases, using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when we expect the temporary differences to reverse. We must assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be realized through future taxable income, and to the extent we believe that realization is not likely, we must establish a valuation allowance against those deferred tax assets. Judgment is required in evaluating our tax positions, and in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. As of December 31, 2020, we had net deferred tax liabilities of $5.2 million, including valuation allowances of $11.5 million.
We are subject to tax audits in numerous domestic and foreign tax jurisdictions. Tax audits are often complex and can require several years to complete. In the normal course of business, we are subject to challenges from the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities regarding the amount of taxes due. These challenges may alter the timing or amount of taxable income or deductions, or the allocation of income among tax jurisdictions. We recognize the benefits of tax return positions in the financial statements when they are more likely than not to be sustained by the taxing authorities based solely on the technical merits of the position. If the recognition threshold is met, the tax benefit is measured and recognized as the largest amount of tax benefit that, in our judgment, is greater than 50% likely to be realized. As of December 31, 2020, our liability for uncertain tax positions, including accrued interest and penalties, was $3.9 million, excluding tax benefits of deductible interest and the federal benefit of deductible state income tax. Further information regarding our unrecognized tax benefits can be found under the caption “Note 11: Income Tax Provision” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report. The ultimate outcome of tax matters may differ from our estimates and assumptions. Unfavorable settlement of a particular issue would require the use of cash and could result in increased income tax expense. Favorable resolution would result in reduced income tax expense.
A one-percentage-point change in our effective income tax rate would have resulted in a $0.3 million change in income tax expense for 2020. The determination of our provision for income taxes, deferred income taxes and unrecognized tax
positions requires judgment, the use of estimates, and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws. As such, the amounts reflected in our consolidated financial statements may require adjustment in the future as additional facts become known or circumstances change. If actual results differ from estimated amounts, our effective income tax rate and related tax balances would be affected.
Revenue Recognition
Product revenue is recognized when control of the goods is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods. In most cases, control is transferred when products are shipped. We recognize the vast majority of our service revenue as the services are provided. The majority of our contracts are for the shipment of tangible products or the delivery of services that have a single performance obligation or include multiple performance obligations where control is transferred at the same time. Many of our financial institution contracts require prepaid product discounts in the form of cash payments we make to our financial institution clients. These prepaid product discounts are included in other non-current assets on our consolidated balance sheets and are generally amortized as reductions of revenue on the straight-line basis over the contract term. Sales tax collected concurrent with revenue-producing activities is excluded from revenue. Amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling are included in revenue, while the related costs incurred for shipping and handling are reflected in cost of products and are accrued when the related revenue is recognized.
When another party is involved in providing goods or services to a customer, we must determine whether our obligation is to provide the specified good or service itself (i.e., we are the principal in the transaction) or to arrange for that good or service to be provided by the other party (i.e., we are an agent in the transaction). When we are responsible for satisfying a performance obligation, based on our ability to control the product or service provided, we are considered the principal and revenue is recognized for the gross amount of consideration. When the other party is primarily responsible for satisfying a performance obligation, we are considered the agent and revenue is recognized in the amount of any fee or commission to which we are entitled. We sell certain products and services through a network of distributors. We have determined that we are the principal in these transactions, and revenue is recorded for the gross amount of consideration.
Certain costs incurred to obtain customer contracts are required to be recognized as assets and amortized consistent with the transfer of goods or services to the customer. As such, we defer sales commissions related to obtaining check supply and treasury management solution contracts. These amounts, which totaled $9.2 million as of December 31, 2020, are included in other non-current assets and are amortized on the straight-line basis as SG&A expense. Amortization of these amounts on the straight-line basis approximates the timing of the transfer of goods or services to the customer. Generally, these amounts are being amortized over periods of 3 to 5 years. We expense sales commissions as incurred when the amortization period would have been 1 year or less.
Accounting for customer contracts can be complex and may involve the use of various techniques to estimate total contract revenue. Estimates related to variable consideration are based on various assumptions to project the outcome of future events. We review and update our contract-related estimates regularly, and we do not anticipate that revisions to our estimates would have a material effect on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding the accounting pronouncements adopted during 2020 and those not yet adopted can be found under the caption “Note 2: New Accounting Pronouncements” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this report.