ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contain forward looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. The actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those which are not within our control.
OVERVIEW
We have developed and patented a nanostructured polymer technology, which is being commercialized in products based on the functionality of these materials. We believe the applications of our technology have promise in several diverse market segments and products. We will expand our push to sell ConsERV product largely in North America with Aqualyte nanomaterial sales with OEMs in international markets.
Growing emphasis is being actively placed on the Aqualyte OEM material sales in addition to ConsERV system sales to generate another revenue stream in targeted non-ConsERV applications. We believe the targeted Aqualyte OEM applications created when using features and properties of the Aqualyte nanomaterial provide the OEM evolutionary or new products. Products which the Company believes offer greater functionality, and differentiation in growing worldwide water market.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2020 as compared with December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain data derived from our Statements of Operations:
Revenue
We generate our revenues primarily from the sale of our ConsERV cores and systems, and our Aqualyte membrane. Product sales were $952,845 and $830,625 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $122,220 or 15%. We had no change in ConsERV sales, a drop of 100% in NanoClear sales, and a 58% increase in Aqualyte Only OEM membrane sales. This decrease in NanoClear sales reflects the Company’s decision to focus on acquiring the long-term operational data it believes is needed to rapidly grow its chosen markets. This period will end no later than 1Q 2022 and to date the results of this third-party testing are ‘above average’. Company thinking shows the possession of long-term test data eases the ability to market the NanoClear application. The increase in Aqualyte OEM sales was due to the expansion of the significant concentrations of sales belonging to two customers in 2019 and 2020. Other than Aqualyte sales, we are focusing on creating sustainable revenues with the expectation that this will allow for continued growth in 2021.
Revenues from royalty and license fees were $50,000 and $75,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively a decrease of $25,000 or 33% due to the royalty due per the license agreement with Menred in 2019.
Cost of Sales
Our cost of sales consists primarily of materials (including freight), direct labor, and outsourced manufacturing expenses incurred to produce our ConsERV cores and systems, NanoClear evaporators and Aqualyte membrane. Cost of goods sold were $545,068 and $600,213 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $55,145 or 9% resulting from focused efforts to reduce our costs by working with our current suppliers on better pricing and finding alternative suppliers and materials.
Research and Development
Expenditures for research, development and engineering of products are expensed as incurred. We incurred research and development costs of $221,700 and $293,751 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $72,051 or 25%. We account for proceeds received from government funding for research as a reduction in research and development costs. We recorded proceeds against research and development expenses on the Statements of Operations of $123,055 and $89,994 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $33,061 or 37%. The fluctuation in expenses and reimbursements are due to the timing of the grant activities.
Selling, General and Administrative
Our selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll and related benefits, share-based compensation, professional fees, marketing and channel support costs, and other infrastructure costs such as insurance, information technology and occupancy expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $1,079,594 and $1,369,037 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $289,443 or 21%.
Our selling, general and administrative expenses may fluctuate due to a variety of factors, including, but not limited to:
•
Additional expenses because of being an SEC reporting company including, but not limited to, director and officer insurance, director fees, SEC compliance expenses, transfer agent fees, additional staffing, professional fees, and similar expenses;
•
Additional infrastructure needed to support the expanded commercialization of our ConsERV and NanoClear products and/or new product applications of our polymer technology for, among other things, administrative personnel, physical space, marketing and channel support and information technology; and
•
The issuance and recognition of expense related to fair value of new share-based awards, which is based on various assumptions including, among other things, the volatility of our stock price.
The 21% decrease in selling general and administrative expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 resulted primarily from the decrease in legal and consulting fees.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,127,807 compared to an expense of $2,126,590 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Loss on change in fair value of derivative increased to $939,464 from $712,952 from 2019 to 2020 and there was a decrease in gain on extinguishing debt from $57,784 in 2019 to $0 in 2020. The gain on extinguishing debt in 2019 was due to conversion of principal and interest of a portion of our notes payable in to shares of common stock. There were no conversions of our notes payable in 2020.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2,787,733 compared to a net loss of $4,049,140 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net loss in 2020 was primarily due to the decrease in interest expense and our selling, general, and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming we will continue as a going concern. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated a net loss of $2,787,733 and have incurred significant losses since inception. As of December 31, 2020, we have an accumulated deficit of $56,974,063, total stockholders’ deficit of $12,456,727, negative working capital of $12,324,850 and cash and cash equivalents of $36,516. We used $556,423 and $718,090 of cash from operations during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which was funded primarily through proceeds from loans from related parties and other equity financings. There is no assurance that such financing will be available in the future.
The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is directly linked to our ability to obtain additional sources of cash flow sufficient to fund our working capital requirements. However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in our efforts to secure such additional sources of product revenue or capital. Any failure by us to timely procure additional financing or investment adequate to fund our ongoing operations, including planned or currently underway product development initiatives and commercialization efforts, may have material adverse consequences on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Any future financing may result in substantial dilution to existing shareholders, and future debt financing, if available, may include restrictive covenants or may require us to grant a lender a security interest in any of our assets not already subject to an existing security interest. If we secure debt financing in the future, we may not be able to repay all or any of such debt when due without severely impacting our ability to continue operations and we may not be able to secure additional financing to repay such financing on acceptable terms, if at all. Should we be unable to repay or renegotiate any such financing, as an alternative, management could attempt to renegotiate the repayment terms and seek extension of the maturity dates. There is no guarantee that, if we should need to renegotiate any such future debt, any negotiated terms we may be able to secure would be favorable to us. To the extent that we attempt to raise additional funds through third party collaborations and/or licensing arrangements, we may be required to relinquish some rights to our technologies or products currently in various stages of development or grant licenses or other rights on terms that are not favorable to us. Any failure by us to timely procure additional financing or investment adequate to fund our ongoing operations, including planned product development initiatives and commercialization efforts, will have material adverse consequences on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows as could any unfavorable terms.
We face risks related to Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) which could significantly disrupt our research and development, operations, sales, and financial results. Although the magnitude of the impact of the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak on our business and operations remains uncertain, the continued spread of the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) or the occurrence of other epidemics and the imposition of related public health measures and travel and business restrictions will adversely impact our business, financial condition, operating results and cash flows. In addition to global macroeconomic effects, the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak and any other related adverse public health developments will cause disruption to our operations and sales activities. Our third-party manufacturers, third-party distributors, and our customers have been and will be disrupted by worker absenteeism, quarantines and restrictions on employees’ ability to work, office and factory closures, disruptions to ports and other shipping infrastructure, border closures, or other travel or health-related restrictions. Depending on the magnitude of such effects on our activities or the operations of our third-party manufacturers and third-party distributors, the supply of our products will be delayed, which could adversely affect our business, operations, and customer relationships. In addition, the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) or other disease outbreak will in the short-run and may over the longer term adversely affect the economies and financial markets of many countries, resulting in an economic downturn that will affect demand for our products and services and impact our operating results. There can be no assurance that any decrease in sales resulting from the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) will be offset by increased sales in subsequent periods. In addition, we have experienced and will experience disruptions to our business operations resulting from quarantines, self-isolations, or other movement and restrictions on the ability of our employees to perform their jobs that may impact our ability to develop and design our products and services in a timely manner or meet required milestones or customer commitments.
Statements of Cash Flows
Cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 were $36,516 compared to $4,083 as of December 31, 2019. Cash is primarily used to fund our working capital requirements.
Net cash used by operating activities was $556,423 and $718,090 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The decrease in cash used in operations of $161,667 results primarily from a decrease in loss of $301,989 (after adjusting for noncash items), partially offset by a decrease in cash of $140,322 resulting from the net change in operating assets and liabilities
Net cash used by investing activities was $25,094 and $11,547 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, driven primarily by increases in patent spending in 2020.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $613,950 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $704,420 for the same period in 2019. The difference is a decrease in proceeds from note payables to related parties and an increase in repayment of notes in 2020.
Material Financing Transactions
In the period from June 2017 through the end of December 2019, the Company entered eight Convertible Note Holder agreements with eight Note Holders totaling with all fees, interest, and principal $2,008,812as of December 31, 2020. The notes were not considered to be in default and were being renegotiated at December 31, 2020. Subsequently, as of May 31, 2021, each Convertible Noteholder received their fees, interest, and principal totaling $2,111,334 in shares of Common stock of the Company (at $0.30 per share) with 50% warrant coverage (1 year cash warrant with a strike price of $0.30). All documents were executed by June 30, 2021 with all equity/warrants issued by July 31, The Company issued 7,036,667 Common shares, and 3,576,733 Warrant shares in this transaction.
No new Convertible Note Transactions were entered into during 2020.
COVID-19 Disclosure
The Company’s operations have been and continue to be affected by the ongoing outbreak of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) which was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020. The ultimate disruption and impact on the Company which may be caused by the outbreak is uncertain. In 2020 we believe the company suffered materially adverse impacts caused by (1.) the late filing of required SEC mandated reports which resulted from professionals and company employees being ill, dislocated from jobs, taking abnormally longer times to necessary filing information due to lack of access to computer from remote locations or limited/no access to needed 3rd party professionals, etc. Further the pandemic has resulted in a material adverse impact on the Company’s operations, and cash flows as marketing plans for new product introduction were delayed.
Future possible impacts may include, but are not limited to, disruption to the Company’s customers and revenue, absenteeism in the Company’s labor workforce, unavailability of products and supplies used in operations, and a decline in value of assets held by the Company, including inventories, property and equipment, marketable securities, and potential loss of key team members.
Economy and Inflation
Except as disclosed herein, we have not experienced any significant cancellation of orders due to the downturn in the economy. Our management believes that inflation has not had a material effect on our results of operations.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any liabilities related to long-term contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues, and results of operations, liquidity, or capital expenditures.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of the accompanying financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the accompanying financial statements and the accompanying notes. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. When making these estimates and assumptions, we consider our historical experience, our knowledge of economic and market factors and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from these estimates. Management has discussed the selection of critical accounting policies and estimates with our Board of Directors, and the Board of Directors has reviewed our disclosure relating to critical accounting policies and estimates in this annual report on Form 10-K. The following critical accounting policies are significantly affected by judgments, assumptions and estimates used in the preparation of the financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
Generally, we recognize revenue for products upon shipment to customers, provided no significant obligations remain and collection is probable.
In certain instances, our ConsERV system product may carry a limited warranty of up to two years for all parts contained therein except for the energy recovery ventilator core produced and sold by us. The distributor of the ConsERV system may carry a limited warranty of up to ten years. The limited warranty includes replacement of defective parts for the ConsERV system and includes workmanship and material failure for the ConsERV core. We have recorded an accrual of $91,531 for future warranty expenses on December 31, 2020, which is included in accrued expenses, other.
Revenue derived from the sale of licenses is deferred and recognized as license fee revenue on a straight-line basis over the life of the license, or until the license arrangement is terminated. We recognized license fee revenue of $50,000 and $50,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Royalties are recognized as earned. We recognized royalty revenue of $0 and $25,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company has adopted the new revenue recognition guidelines in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606), commencing from the period under this report. The Company analyzes its contracts to assess that they are within the scope and in accordance with ASC 606. In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as the Company fulfills its obligations under each of its agreements, whether for goods and services or licensing, the Company performs the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation. The Company acts as a principal in its revenue transactions as the Company is the primary obligor in the transactions. Generally, the Company recognizes revenue for its products upon shipment to customers, provided no significant obligations remain and collection is probable.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable consist primarily of receivables from the sale of our ERV products and Aqualyte membrane. We regularly review accounts receivables for any bad debts based on an analysis of our collection experience, customer credit worthiness and current economic trends. After all attempts to collect a receivable have failed, the receivable is written off against the allowance. Based on management’s review of accounts receivable, an allowance for doubtful accounts of $0 and $0 has been recorded on December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Impairment of Long-Lived and Intangible Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the book value of the asset may not be recoverable. We periodically evaluate whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate possible impairment. When impairment indicators exist, we use market quotes, if available or an estimate of the future undiscounted net cash flows of the related asset or asset group over the remaining life in measuring whether the asset values are recoverable. We did not recognize impairment on its long-lived assets during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Identified intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Our existing intangible assets consist solely of patents. Patents are amortized over their estimated useful or economic lives of 17 years. Patent amortization expense was $17,638 and $16,255 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Based on current capitalized costs, total patent amortization expense is estimated to be approximately $18,500 per year for the next five years and thereafter.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, as compensation expense in the financial statements based on their fair values. That expense will be recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period) or immediately if the share-based payments vest immediately.
There were no stock options issued during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposure to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risk. Terms of convertible promissory note instruments are reviewed to determine whether they contain embedded derivative instruments that are required under ASC 815 “ Derivative and Hedging” (ASC 815) to be accounted for separately from the host contract and recorded on the balance sheet at fair value. The fair value of derivative liabilities, if any, is required to be revalued at each reporting date, with corresponding changes in fair value recorded in current period operating results.
Freestanding warrants issued by us in connection with the issuance or sale of debt and equity instruments are considered to be derivative instruments and are evaluated and accounted for in accordance with the provisions of ASC 815. Pursuant to ASC 815, an evaluation of specifically identified conditions is made to determine whether fair value of warrants issued is required to be classified as equity or as a derivative liability.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are provided for the tax effects of transactions reported in the financial statements and consist of taxes currently due plus deferred taxes resulting from temporary differences. Such temporary differences result from differences in the carrying value of assets and liabilities for tax and financial reporting purposes. The deferred tax assets and liabilities represent the future tax consequences of those differences, which will either be taxable or deductible when the assets and liabilities are recovered or settled. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
We identify and evaluate uncertain tax positions, if any, and recognize the impact of uncertain tax positions for which there is a less than more-likely-than-not probability of the position being upheld when reviewed by the relevant taxing authority. Such positions are deemed to be unrecognized tax benefits and a corresponding liability is established on the balance sheet. We have not recognized a liability for uncertain tax positions. If there were an unrecognized tax benefit, we would recognize interest accrued related to unrecognized tax benefits in interest expense and penalties in operating expenses. The Company’s 2017-2020 tax years remain open and subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For a description of recent accounting standards, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our financial statements, see Part II, Item 8 Note 3 Significant Accounting Policies: Recent Accounting Pronouncements.