Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and discusses the financial condition and results of operations for DiaMedica Therapeutics Inc. and subsidiaries for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve numerous risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the forward-looking statements as a result of these risks and uncertainties. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for additional cautionary information.
Business Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company developing novel treatments for neurological and kidney diseases. Our goal is to use our patented and in-licensed technologies to establish our Company as a leader in the development and commercialization of therapeutic treatments from novel recombinant proteins. Our current focus is on the treatment of AIS and CKD. We plan to advance DM199, our lead drug candidate, through required clinical trials to create shareholder value by establishing its clinical and commercial potential as a therapy for AIS and CKD.
DM199 is a recombinant form of human tissue kallikrein-1 (KLK1). KLK1 is a serine protease (protein) produced primarily in the kidneys, pancreas and salivary glands, which plays a critical role in the regulation of local blood flow and vasodilation (the widening of blood vessels which decreases vascular resistance) in the body, as well as an important role in inflammation and oxidative stress (an imbalance between potentially damaging reactive oxygen species, or free radicals, and antioxidants in your body). We believe DM199 has the potential to treat a variety of diseases where healthy functioning requires sufficient activity of KLK1 and its system, the kallikrein-kinin system (KKS).
Our DM199 product candidate is in clinical development as follows:
Neurological Diseases
AIS Phase 2/3 ReMEDy 2 Study
In December 2020, we received written responses from the FDA following a Type B Pre-IND meeting request that we submitted in October 2020 regarding our development plan for DM199 in the treatment of AIS. In the FDA’s written responses to the questions we provided, the FDA agreed with our proposals regarding key elements of a Phase 2/3 trial for DM199 in patients with AIS, including plans for an adaptive trial design with a primary endpoint based upon the modified Rankin Scale at day 90 and acknowledged that, provided the study results qualify, a single trial may support a Biologics License Application submission. Additionally, based upon the clinical and preclinical testing performed to date and currently in process, the FDA did not recommend any additional studies in preparation for an IND submission and initiation of our planned Phase 2/3 trial. We intend to file an IND for this study by the end of the first quarter of 2021.
AIS Phase 2 ReMEDy Clinical Trial
Enrollment in the ReMEDy study began in February 2018 and concluded in October 2019. We enrolled 92 participants to assess DM199 in the treatment of participants who experienced an AIS. The study drug (DM199 or placebo) was administered as an intravenous infusion within 24 hours of stroke symptom onset, followed by subcutaneous injections later that day and once every 3 days for 21 days. The study was designed to measure safety and tolerability along with multiple tests designed to investigate DM199’s therapeutic potential including standard functional stroke measures and stroke recurrence assessed at 90 days post-stroke and certain plasma-based biomarkers. Standard functional stroke measurements include the Modified Rankin Scale, National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale, the Barthel Index and C-reactive protein, a measure of inflammation. Positive top-line results, including the achievement of primary safety and tolerability endpoints and no DM199-related serious adverse events, were announced in May 2020. In addition to meeting its primary safety and tolerability endpoints, a statistically significant 86% (P=0.028) relative reduction in the number of participants with severe recurrent strokes was observed in the active treatment group (N=1, 2.2%) compared to placebo (N=7, 15.6%), a potentially transformative outcome given that approximately 25% of the 795,000 strokes occurring each year in the United States are recurrent strokes.
Kidney Diseases
CKD Phase 2 REDUX Clinical Trial
In October 2019, the FDA accepted our Phase 2 clinical trial protocol for the treatment of CKD caused by rare or significant unmet diseases. The trial named REDUX, Latin for restore, is a multi-center, open-label investigation targeting enrollment of approximately 90 participants with mild or moderate CKD (Stage II or III) and albuminuria, who are being enrolled in three equal cohorts. The study is being conducted in the United States at 13 sites and is focused on participants with CKD: Cohort I is focused on non-diabetic, hypertensive African Americans with Stage II or III CKD. African Americans are at greater risk for CKD than Caucasians, and those African Americans who have the APOL1 gene mutation are at an even higher risk. The study is designed to capture the APOL1 gene mutation as an exploratory biomarker in this cohort. Cohort II is focused on participants with IgA Nephropathy. Cohort III, which was added after the completion of our August 2020 public offering, is focused on participants with Type 2 diabetes mellitus with CKD, hypertension and albuminuria. The study will evaluate two dose levels of DM199 within each cohort. Study participants receive DM199 by subcutaneous injection twice weekly for 95 days. The primary study endpoints include safety, tolerability, blood pressure, albuminuria and kidney function, which will be evaluated by changes from baseline in estimated glomerular filtration rate and albuminuria, as measured by the urinary albumin to creatinine ratio. Participant enrollment and dosing for this study commenced in December 2019.
As of March 1, 2021, we had enrolled 68 subjects, including 15 African American subjects into Cohort I, 21 subjects with IgAN into Cohort II and 32 subjects with Type 2 diabetes, hypertension and albuminuria into Cohort III of the REDUX study. Due to actions implemented at our clinical study sites to combat the COVID-19 pandemic, we have continued to experience slower than expected enrollment in the first two cohorts of the REDUX trial. We believe this is due to the reduction or suspension of activities at our clinical study sites as they address staff and patient safety concerns and patient concerns related to visiting clinical study sites in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, with the significant declines in new COVID-19 cases and the anticipated availability and effectiveness of vaccines, we currently anticipate completion of Cohort I and Cohort II in the second half of 2021. The enrollment of Cohort III was much more rapid completing in December 2020, which is likely due to the large population of potential subjects. We currently expect topline results from Cohort III to be available in the second quarter of 2021.
CKD Phase 1b Clinical Trial
During 2019, we initiated and completed a Phase 1b clinical trial of DM199 in 32 subjects with moderate or severe CKD caused by Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes mellitus. The study was performed at 3 sites in the U.S. and was designed to assess the pharmacokinetics of three dose levels of DM199 (3, 5 and 8 µg/kg), administered in a single subcutaneous dose, as well as the evaluation of safety, tolerability and secondary pharmacodynamic endpoints. Results from the study were also used to guide the design of Phase 2 CKD studies.
We continue to believe that strategic alternatives with respect to our DM199 product candidate, including licenses and business collaborations, with other regional and global pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies can be important in advancing the clinical development of DM199. Therefore, as a matter of course and from time to time, we engage in discussions with third parties regarding these matters.
Financial Overview
We have not generated any revenues from product sales. Since our inception, we have financed our operations from public and private sales of equity, the exercise of warrants and stock options, interest income on funds available for investment and government grants and tax credits. We have incurred losses in each year since our inception. Our net losses were $12.3 million and $10.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $68.9 million. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our product candidate development programs, our primary R&D activities, and general and administrative (G&A) support costs associated with our operations.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increased operating losses for at least the next several years. In the near term, we anticipate that our expenses will increase as we:
●
complete our ongoing Phase 2 study of DM199 for CKD;
●
initiate and complete our pending Phase 2/3 study of DM199 for AIS;
●
complete manufacturing process development to support applications for commercial approval of DM199;
●
provide G&A support for our operations; and
●
maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio.
While we expect our rate of future negative cash flow per month will vary due to the timing of expenses incurred, we expect our current cash resources will be sufficient to allow us to complete all three cohorts in our REDUX Phase 2 study in patients with CKD, initiate our pending Phase 2/3 study in patients with AIS and to otherwise fund our planned operations for at least the next twelve months from the date of issuance of the financial statements included in this report. However, the amount and timing of future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the timing and results of our ongoing development efforts, including enrollment in our clinical trials, the potential expansion of our current development programs, potential new development programs, related G&A support and the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. We may require significant additional funds earlier than we currently expect and there is no assurance that we will not need or seek additional funding prior to such time. We may elect to raise additional funds even before we need them if market conditions for raising additional capital are favorable.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses consist primarily of fees paid to external service providers such as contract research organizations; contractual obligations for clinical development including clinical site costs, outside nursing services, laboratory testing, preclinical trials; development of manufacturing processes; costs for production runs of DM199; salaries, benefits and share-based compensation and other personnel costs. We incurred $8.3 million and $7.9 million in R&D expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Over the past approximately nine years, our R&D efforts have been primarily focused on developing DM199.
At this time, due to the risks inherent in the clinical development process and the clinical stage of our product development programs, we are unable to estimate with any certainty the costs we will incur in the continued development of DM199 or any of our preclinical development programs. We have experienced a delay and expect to continue to expect a delay in the timing of costs incurred in the REDUX trial as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We do not, however, expect to experience a significant overall increase in costs. We intend to continue to assess the effect of the pandemic on our REDUX trial by monitoring the spread of the COVID-19 virus and the actions implemented to combat the virus. We expect that our R&D expenses will increase in the future if we are successful in advancing DM199, or any of our preclinical programs, into advanced stages of clinical development. The process of conducting clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval and manufacturing scale-up to support expanded development and potential future commercialization is costly and time consuming. Any failure by us or delay in completing clinical trials, manufacturing scale-up or in obtaining regulatory approvals could lead to increased R&D expenses and, in turn, have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
General and Administrative Expenses
G&A expenses consist of salaries and related benefits, including share-based compensation related to our executive, finance, business development and support functions. Other G&A expenses include professional fees for auditing, tax and legal services, insurance, rent, utilities and travel expenses. We expect our G&A expenses will increase in the future as we expand our development and operating activities.
We have instituted a number of procedural changes related to protecting the health and safety of our employees in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. During the last three quarters of 2020 our office remained closed and our employees worked remotely. In addition, all non-essential travel was on hold. We have encouraged our employees to interact with each other and vendors through audio and video conferencing. We did not incur significant additional expenses during 2020 related to these changes, nor do we expect to incur significant additional expenses going forward. We expect to continue to work remotely and restrict non-essential travel for the foreseeable future.
In 2020, our G&A expenses increased due to increased costs associated with non-cash share-based compensation costs, outside professional services and directors and officers liability insurance. The increase in 2020 was partially offset by reduced travel and meeting costs primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists primarily of governmental assistance comprised of R&D incentives earned by our Australian subsidiary DiaMedica Australia Pty Ltd., foreign currency exchange gains and losses and interest income.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Research and Development Costs
R&D costs include expenses incurred in the conduct of human clinical trials, for third-party service providers performing various treatment, testing and data accumulation and analysis related to these clinical studies; non-clinical research studies; developing the manufacturing process necessary to produce sufficient amounts of the DM199 compound for use in our clinical studies; consulting resources with specialized expertise related to execution of our development plan for our DM199 product candidate; and personnel costs, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation.
We charge R&D costs, including clinical trial costs, to expense when incurred. Our human clinical trials are performed at clinical trial sites and are generally administered jointly by us with assistance from contract research organizations, and include outside service providers such as outside nursing services, testing laboratories and data coordination and collection. Costs of setting up clinical trial sites are accrued upon execution of the study agreement. Expenses related to the performance of clinical trials are accrued based on contracted amounts and the achievement of agreed upon milestones, such as patient enrollment, patient follow-up, etc. We monitor levels of performance under each significant contract, including the extent of patient enrollment and other activities through communications with the clinical trial sites, CROs and supporting vendors and adjust the estimates, if required, on a quarterly basis so that clinical expenses reflect the actual work performed at each clinical trial site and by each CRO or supporting vendor.
Clinical Trial Costs
Our clinical trials are performed at clinical trial sites and are administered by us with assistance from CROs or outside contractors as necessary. Clinical trial costs are accrued based on estimates of work completed to date by CROs, outside contractors and clinical trial sites that manage and perform the trials. We obtain initial estimates of total costs based on the trial protocol, actual enrollment of subjects, trial duration, project management costs, manufacturing costs, patient treatment costs and other activities as required by the trial protocol. Additional, non-patient related costs may be charged to us and are recognized as the tasks are completed by the clinical trial site. Accrued clinical trial costs may be subject to revisions as clinical trials progress and any revisions are recorded in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revisions become known.
Share-based Compensation
We account for all share-based compensation awards using a fair value method. The cost of employee and non-employee services received in exchange for awards of equity instruments is measured and recognized based on the estimated grant date fair value of those awards. Compensation cost is recognized ratably using the straight-line attribution method over the vesting period, which is considered to be the requisite service period. We record forfeitures in the periods in which they occur.
The fair value of share-based awards is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The determination of the fair value of share-based awards is affected by our common share price, as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. Risk-free interest rates are based upon United States Government bond rates appropriate for the expected term of each award. Expected volatility rates are based on the historical volatility equal to the expected life of the option. The assumed dividend yield is zero, as we do not expect to declare any dividends in the foreseeable future. The expected term of options is estimated considering the vesting period at the grant date, the life of the option and the average length of time similar grants have remained outstanding in the past.
The assumptions used in calculating the fair value under the Black-Scholes option valuation model are set forth in the following table for options issued by us for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses were $8.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $0.4 million. The increase was primarily due to a combination of costs incurred for our REDUX Phase 2 CKD study initiated late in 2019, driven in particular by the addition of the third cohort targeting participants with DKD, which fully enrolled during the fourth quarter of 2020, and increased non-cash share-based compensation costs. These increases were partially offset by decreases in clinical study costs incurred for the ReMEDy stroke study, which wound down in the first half of 2020, and non-recurring costs of the Phase 1b CKD study which was started and completed in the prior year period. Additionally, there was a year over year net decrease in drug manufacturing and development costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
G&A expenses were $4.4 million and $3.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This $0.7 million increase was primarily due to increased non-cash share-based compensation costs, outside professional services and directors and officers liability insurance. The increase in 2020 was partially offset by reduced travel and meeting costs primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.0 million for 2019. This decrease was driven primarily by reduced R&D incentives receivable from the Australian Government, paid for qualifying research work performed by DiaMedica Australia Pty Ltd. during 2020, related to the decreased ReMEDy stroke study costs. This decrease was partially offset by increased foreign currency transaction gains recognized during 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following tables summarize our liquidity and capital resources as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and cash flows for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and are intended to supplement the more detailed discussion that follows (in thousands):
Working Capital
We had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $27.5 million, current liabilities of $2.0 million and working capital of $25.9 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $7.9 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, $1.3 million in current liabilities and $7.5 million in working capital as of December 31, 2019. The increases in our combined cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and in our working capital were due primarily to our February 2020 and August 2020 public offerings.
On August 10, 2020, we issued and sold an aggregate of 4,600,000 common shares in a public underwritten offering at a public offering price of $5.00 per share, receiving gross proceeds of $23.0 million and net proceeds of approximately $21.1 million, after deducting the underwriting discount and offering expenses.
On February 13, 2020, we issued and sold an aggregate of 2,125,000 common shares in a public underwritten offering at a public offering price of $4.00 per share, receiving gross proceeds of $8.5 million and net proceeds of approximately $7.7 million, after deducting the underwriting discount and offering expenses.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9.2 million compared to $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This slight increase relates primarily to the combination of the increase in the net loss and partially offset by an increase in non-cash share-based compensation.
Investing Activities
Investing activities consist primarily of purchases of marketable securities and property and equipment. Net cash used in investing activities was $16.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was due to the investment of a portion of the net proceeds received in the February 2020 and August 2020 public offerings in short-term marketable securities, partially offset by an increase in the maturities of marketable securities during 2020.
Financing Activities
Financing activities consist primarily of net proceeds from the sale of common shares. Net cash provided by financing activities was $28.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $70,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was due to our February 2020 and August 2020 public offerings compared to no offerings in 2019.
Capital Requirements
Since our inception, we have incurred losses while advancing the R&D of our DM199 product candidate. We have not generated any revenues from product sales and do not expect to do so for at least three to five years. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenues from product sales of our DM199 product candidate or any future product candidate. We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval. We expect to continue to incur substantial operating losses until such time as any future product sales, royalty payments, licensing fees and/or milestone payments are sufficient to generate revenues to fund our continuing operations. We expect our operating losses to increase in the near term as we continue the research, development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our DM199 product candidate. In the long-term, subject to obtaining regulatory approval of our DM199 product candidate or any future product candidate and in the absence of the assistance of a strategic partner, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses for product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution.
Accordingly, we expect we will need substantial additional capital to further our R&D activities, planned clinical trials, regulatory activities and otherwise develop our product candidate, DM199, or any future product candidates, to a point where they may be commercially sold. Although we are striving to achieve these plans, there is no assurance these and other strategies will be achieved or that additional funding will be obtained on favorable terms or at all. While our rate of future negative cash flow per month will vary due to the timing of expenses incurred, we expect our current cash resources will be sufficient to allow us to complete all three cohorts in our REDUX Phase 2 study in patients with CKD, initiate our pending Phase 2/3 study in patients with AIS and to otherwise fund our planned operations for at least the next 12 months from the date of issuance of the financial statements included in this report. However, the amount and timing of future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the timing and results of our ongoing development efforts, the potential expansion of our current development programs, potential new development programs and related G&A support. We may require significant additional funds earlier than we currently expect and there is no assurance that we will not need or seek additional funding prior to such time, especially if market conditions for raising additional capital are favorable.
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily from public and private sales of equity, the exercise of warrants and stock options, interest income on funds available for investment and government grants and tax incentives. We expect to continue this practice for the foreseeable future. We do not have any existing credit facilities under which we could borrow funds. We may seek to raise additional funds through various sources, such as equity and debt financings, or through strategic collaborations and license agreements. We can give no assurances that we will be able to secure additional sources of funds to support our operations, or if such funds are available to us, that such additional financing will be sufficient to meet our needs or on terms acceptable to us. This is particularly true if our clinical data is not positive or economic and market conditions deteriorate.
To the extent we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our shareholders will be diluted. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include conversion discounts or covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through government or other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, or strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. The availability of financing will be affected by our clinical data and other results of scientific and clinical research; the ability to attain regulatory approvals; market acceptance of our product candidates; the state of the capital markets generally with particular reference to pharmaceutical, biotechnology and medical companies; the status of strategic alliance agreements; and other relevant commercial considerations. If adequate funding is not available, we may be required to implement cost reduction strategies; delay, reduce, or eliminate one or more of our product development programs; relinquish significant rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us; and/or divest assets or cease operations through a merger, sale, or liquidation of our company.
Commitments and Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we incur obligations to make future payments as we execute our business plan. As of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding commitments, including R&D contracts and other commitments, that are known and committed of approximately $2.2 million over the next 12 months and $0 in the following 12 months. These contracts relate to clinical, and development activities, including the clinical study sites and related professional service providers conducting or supporting the conduct of the REDUX study and the clinical research organization conducting the Phase 2 clinical trial for DM199 related to AIS. These commitments are subject to significant change and the ultimate amounts due may be materially different as these obligations are affected by, among other factors, the number and pace of patients enrolled, the number of clinical study sites, the amount of time to complete study enrollments and the time required to finalize the analysis and reporting of study results. These commitments are generally cancelable upon 30 days’ notice, with our obligation then limited to costs incurred up to that date. As of December 31, 2020, we had future operating lease commitments totaling approximately $105,000 over the remainder of the lease, of which $61,000 is due over the next 12 months.
We have entered into a license agreement with Catalent Pharma Solutions, LLC whereby we have licensed certain gene expression technology and we contract with Catalent for the manufacture of DM199. Under the terms of this license, certain milestone and royalty payments may become due under this agreement and are dependent upon, among other factors, clinical trials, regulatory approvals and ultimately the successful development of a new drug, the outcome and timing of which is uncertain. As of December 31, 2020, two milestones remain which include $185,000 due upon the initiation of dosing in our first Phase 3 trial and $185,000 upon our first regulatory approval for commercial sale. Following the launch of our first product, we will also incur a royalty of less than 1% on net sales. The royalty term is indefinite but the license agreement may be canceled by us on 90 days’ prior written notice. The license may not be terminated by Catalent unless we fail to make required milestone and royalty payments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined by applicable SEC regulations) that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.