Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This MD&A should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto contained in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report, as well as Item 1. Business of this Annual Report, for an overview of our operations and business environment.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table presents our consolidated results of operations as a percentage of net revenue:
The following table presents the consolidated results of operations and the change from the prior period (in thousands):
Net revenue. Our business generates revenue primarily through the delivery of a variety of performance-based marketing services, including customer acquisition, managed services and software services.
The following table presents revenue by type for each segment and the change from the prior period:
Customer Acquisition Revenue. Customer Acquisition contracts deliver potential consumers or leads (i.e. number of clicks, emails, calls and applications) to the customer in real-time based on predefined qualifying characteristics specified by our customer. Customer Acquisition revenue for Marketplace increased by $82.6 million, or 113%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to our successful penetration into the insurance vertical as a result of the acquisition of UE.
Brand Direct. The Brand Direct segment experienced an increase in Customer acquisition revenue of $17.0 million, or 10%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. This change was primarily due to growth in our affiliate and performance businesses due to further penetration of existing customers and expansion in the markets, offset by a decrease in sales from our messaging services due to a strategic shift caused by industry disruptions.
Managed Services Revenue. Managed Services contracts provide continuous service of managing the customer’s media spend for the purpose of generating leads through a third-party supplier of leads, as requested by our customer.
Managed Services revenue experienced an increase of $9.4 million, or 64%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to the acquisition of SmarterChaos in the third quarter of 2020.
Software Services Revenue. Software Services contracts provide the customer with continuous, daily access to the Company’s proprietary software. Software Services revenue is considered insignificant to our total Net revenue as a whole.
Cost of revenue and gross profit. Cost of revenue primarily includes media and other related costs, such as the cost to acquire user traffic through the purchase of impressions, clicks or actions from publishers or third-party intermediaries, including advertising exchanges, and technology costs that enable media acquisition. These media costs are used primarily to drive user traffic to the Company’s and our customers’ media properties. Cost of revenue also includes indirect costs such as data verification, hosting and fulfillment costs.
The following table presents the gross profit percentage (gross profit as a percentage of total revenue) by segment and the change from prior period:
Gross profit for Brand Direct decreased to 23.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 25.0% in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the reduction in messaging services, which had overall higher margins, and the expansion in the performance ad network at compressed margins.
Gross profit for Marketplace decreased to 30.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 36.0% in 2019, primarily due to the expansion in the insurance business at compressed margins.
Gross profit for Other decreased to 64.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 98.0% in 2019, primarily due to the new revenue mix, which has compressed lower profit margins.
Total gross profit decreased to 29.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 32.2% in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the expansion of the performance ad network for our affiliate and insurance business, both at compressed margins.
Salaries and related costs. Total compensation includes salaries, commissions, bonuses, payroll taxes and retirement benefits.
Salaries and related costs increased by $5.4 million, or 19%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily driven by the increase in headcount as a result of an expansion of our workforce in the insurance business, as well as an increase in stock-based compensation and commissions due to the increase in revenue. This increase was partially offset by earnout compensation related to a previous acquisition during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Salaries as a percentage of net revenue were 10.0% and 11.7% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist of expenses incurred in our normal course of business relating to office supplies, computer and technology, rent and utilities, insurance, legal and professional fees, state and local taxes and licenses, penalties and settlements and bad debt expense, as well as sales and marketing expenses relating to advertising and promotion. We also include other expenses such as investment banking expenses, fundraising costs and costs related to the advancement of our corporate social responsibility program.
General and administrative increased $9.7 million, or 49%, from $19.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $29.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by approximately $1.0 million of lease and other expenses related to certain office closures as well as an overall increase in insurance, audit and other compliance costs related to our new public company status, an increase in legal and professional fees due to compliance related legal activity, and an increase in our bank service charges due to increased merchant activity. These increases were partially offset by a decline in travel and office expenses due to COVID-19 restrictions.
Acquisition costs. Acquisition related costs are not considered part of the consideration for acquisitions and are expensed as incurred. This includes accretion of contingent consideration, acquisition incentive compensation and other transaction related costs.
Acquisition costs decreased by $14.4 million, or 75%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the acceleration of the earnout of a previous acquisition during the year ended December 31, 2019, partially offset by acquisition costs incurred during year ended December 31, 2020 related to SmarterChaos as well as the Business Combination with Leo and other acquisition activity.
Depreciation and amortization. Property, plant and equipment consists of computers and office equipment, furniture and fixtures, leasehold improvements and internally developed software costs. Intangible assets subject to amortization include technology, customer relationships, brand, and non-competition agreements.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $8.2 million, or 84%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily driven by the intangible assets acquired with UE with twelve-months comparable amounts during the 2020 period versus two-months in 2019 as well as continued investments in internally developed software, which were placed in service.
Interest expense. Interest expense is related primarily to our debt, which carries a variable interest rate based on the three-month LIBOR, or an alternate base rate, plus an agreed upon margin with the Company’s financial institution.
Interest expense was $13.7 million and $10.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase was primarily due to the increase in our outstanding debt balance, partially offset by the decrease in the interest rate during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income tax expense. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company’s effective income tax rate was (222.15)% and (1.24)% (no income tax expense or benefit in 2019 period), versus the current transition of period, respectively. The blended effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was (222.15)%. The Company’s income tax expense is attributable to the allocable share of earnings from DMSH, a portion of activities of DMSH that are subject to Canadian income tax, and the activities of UE, a wholly-owned U.S. corporate subsidiary of DMSH, which is subject to U.S. federal and state and local income taxes. The income tax burden on the earnings allocated to the non-controlling interests is not reported by the Company in its consolidated financial statements under GAAP. As a result of the foregoing reasons, the Company’s effective tax rate differs materially from the statutory rate.
Non-controlling interest. As a result of the Business Combination, SmarterChaos acquisition and additional shares issued post Business Combination, our non-controlling interest owns approximately 44.8% of the ownership interest of DMSH and we allocate the respective portion of net income or loss to the DMSH Units held by the non-controlling interest. Refer to Note 10. Equity in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report, for a more detailed discussion on the non-controlling interest and the Business Combination.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
In addition to providing financial measurements based on accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), this Annual Report includes additional financial measures that are not prepared in accordance with GAAP (“non-GAAP”), including Adjusted Revenue, Adjusted EBITDA, Combined Adjusted EBITDA, Unlevered Free Cash Flow, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS. A reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures can be found below. As explained further below, we use these financial measures internally to review the performance of our business units without regard to certain accounting treatments and non-recurring items. We believe that presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information to investors regarding our results of operations. Because of these limitations, management relies primarily on its GAAP results and uses non-GAAP measures only as a supplement.
Adjusted Revenue
Adjusted Revenue is a non-GAAP financial measure presented as an alternative method for assessing the Company’s operating results in a manner that is focused on the performance of our underlying operations. Management believes this measure provides useful information because, while the majority of our business is comprised of lead generation contracts which are accounted for on a gross basis, a portion of our agency managed services contracts are accounted for on a net basis. In light of these considerations, management believes that Adjusted Revenue provides useful information regarding operating performance across our business, without regard to the accounting treatment of individual contracts, and allows management to build forecasts on a consistent basis across the business. Management further uses Adjusted Revenue to compare the performance of divisions within the Company against each other and to isolate our core operating performance. Moreover, management expects that over time we will transition all of our services to a principal relationship and as our contracts are either amended or new agreements are executed, this measure will help provide a basis for comparison of our business operations between different periods over time as we transition these services and related accounting for these contracts.
Adjusted Revenue is defined as revenue as reported under GAAP, without regard to netting of costs applicable to revenues earned under contracts that are deemed to be entered into on an agency basis.
The following table provides a reconciliation of Adjusted Revenue to revenue, the most directly comparable GAAP measure (in thousands):
(1) Includes the gross up for certain Managed services contracts that are presented net of costs under GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA, Unlevered Free Cash Flow and Unlevered Free Cash Flow Conversion
We use the non-GAAP measures of Adjusted EBITDA and Unlevered Free Cash Flow to assess operating performance. Management believes that these measures provide useful information to investors regarding DMS’s operating performance and its capacity to incur and service debt and fund capital expenditures. DMS believes that these measures are used by many investors, analysts and rating agencies as a measure of performance. By reporting these measures, DMS provides a basis for comparison of our business operations between current, past and future periods by excluding items that DMS does not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. Financial measures that are non-GAAP should not be considered as alternatives to operating income, cash flows from operating activities or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP as measures of operating performance, or cash flows as measures of liquidity. These measures have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, DMS relies primarily on its GAAP results and uses Adjusted EBITDA and Unlevered Free Cash Flow only as a supplement.
Adjusted EBITDA, is defined as net income (loss), excluding (1) interest expense, (2) income tax expense, (3) depreciation and amortization, (4) acquisition costs, (5) other expenses, (6) other non-recurring, infrequent or unusual costs (An item is considered to be non-recurring, infrequent or unusual if it is unlikely that it will recur in the next two years or if a similar charge or gain has not occurred in the preceding two years, in accordance with SEC rules.); (7)) [future estimated cost savings resulting primarily from the reorganization of the W4 Performance Ad Network (“PAN”) within our Brand-Direct segment, including adjustments to headcount during the year ended December 31, 2019, as well as other operational synergies, (8) future estimated UE and SmarterChaos technology synergies and cost savings due to the use of an alternative vendor, (9) future estimated costs savings resulting primarily from reorganization of UE such as staff adjustments, use of lower cost distribution vendors, amongst others, (10 UE EBITDA from January 1, 2019 through October 31, 2019, the date of the acquisition, and (11) uncollectible receivables outside of normal operations.
Unlevered Free Cash Flow is defined as Adjusted EBITDA, less capital expenditures, and Unlevered Free Cash Flow Conversion is defined as Unlevered Free Cash Flow divided by Adjusted EBITDA.
A reconciliation between Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS to Net Income and Earnings Per Share, the most directly comparable GAAP measures, are presented below (In thousands, except per share data):
(1)Balance includes business combination transaction fees and related payments on Company’s EIP, acquisition incentive payments, contingent consideration accretion, earnout payments and pre-acquisition expenses.
(2)Balance includes legal fees associated with acquisitions, stock-based compensation, investor management fees and costs related to philanthropic initiatives.
(3)Other non-recurring expenses include, restructuring costs and lease termination costs due to office closures, severance payments due to company reorganization.
(4)These are estimated cost savings primarily from reorganization of the company.
(5)These are annualized estimated UE Authority, Co. (“UE”) technology synergies related to uniform infrastructure platform.
(6)These are annualized estimated cost savings resulting primarily from reorganization of UE and SmarterChaos.com and related entities (“SmarterChaos”).
(7)Includes UE EBITDA from January 1, 2019 to October 31,2019 (UE acquisition date), and SmarterChaos EBITDA from January 1, 2019 to July 16, 2020 (SmarterChaos acquisition date).
(8)This represents certain unusual bad debt expenses related to potentially uncollectible receivables that resulted from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and an unexpected business interruption. Management has determined that these items are not indicative of normal operations.
A reconciliation of Unlevered Free Cash Flow to net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is presented below (in thousands):
______________
(1)This represents certain unusual bad debt expenses related to potentially uncollectible receivables that resulted from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and an unexpected business interruption. Management has determined that these items are not indicative of normal operations.
(2)Includes UE EBITDA from January 1, 2019 to October 31,2019 (UE acquisition date), and SmarterChaos EBITDA from January 1, 2019 to July 16, 2020 (SmarterChaos acquisition date).
(3)These are annualized estimated cost savings resulting primarily from reorganization of UE and SmarterChaos.com and related entities (“SmarterChaos”).
(4)These are annualized estimated UE Authority, Co. (“UE”) technology synergies related to uniform infrastructure platform.
(5)These are estimated cost savings primarily from reorganization of the company.
(6)Other non-recurring expenses include, restructuring costs and lease termination costs due to office closures, severance payments due to company reorganization.
(7)Balance includes legal fees associated with acquisitions, stock-based compensation, investor management fees and costs related to philanthropic initiatives.
(8)Balance includes business combination transaction fees and related payments on Company’s EIP, acquisition incentive payments, contingent consideration accretion, earnout payments and pre-acquisition expenses.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS:
We use the non-GAAP measures Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS to assess operating performance. Management believes that these measures provide investors with useful information on period-to-period performance as evaluated by management and comparison with our past financial and operating performance. Management also believes these non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance compared to that of other companies in our industry, as this metric generally eliminates the effects of certain items that may vary from company to company for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance. We define Adjusted Net Income (Loss) as net loss attributable to Digital Media Solutions, Inc. adjusted for (x) costs associated with the Business Combination, acquisition-related costs, equity based compensation and lease restructuring charges and (y) the reallocation of net income (loss) attributable to non-controlling interests from the assumed acquisition by Digital Media Solutions, Inc. of all units of Digital Media Solutions Holdings, LLC ("DMSH LLC") (other than units held by subsidiaries of Digital Media Solutions, Inc.) for newly-issued shares of Class A common stock of Digital Media Solutions, Inc. on a one-to-one basis. We define adjusted pro forma net loss per share as adjusted pro forma net loss divided by the weighted-average shares of Class A common stock outstanding, assuming the acquisition by Digital Media Solutions, Inc. of all outstanding DMSH LLC units (other than units held by subsidiaries of Digital Media Solutions, Inc.) for newly-issued shares of Class A common stock on a one-to-one-basis.
The following table presents a reconciliation between GAAP Earnings Per Share and Non-GAAP Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS (In thousands, except per share data):
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The following table summarizes certain key measures of our liquidity and capital resources (in thousands):
Our capital sources are focused on investments in our technology solutions, corporate infrastructure and strategic acquisitions to further expand into new business sectors and/or expand sales in existing sectors. We generate sufficient cash flows for working capital and expect to do so for the foreseeable future.
Our principal sources of liquidity on a short-term basis are cash and cash equivalents, and cash flows provided by operations. Our primary use of cash is compensation to our employees and payments for general operating expenses and interest expense as well as distribution payments. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we increased the capacity on our revolving commitment and borrowed the remaining availability as a precautionary measure to reinforce our cash position and preserve financial flexibility in light of the current uncertainty in the global economy resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our Unlevered Free Cash Flow conversion rate was 81% and 88% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decline was due to non-recurring investments in capital expenditures as a result of the consolidation of our software development platforms.
On July 15, 2020, the Company completed its Business Combination with Leo, and in accordance with the terms of the Business Combination Agreement, DMS received $40.0 million in cash and paid $10.0 million on the Monroe Facility.
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $9.6 million used in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to the acquisition of UE as well as the payout of earnout compensation related to a previous acquisition during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash flows from investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $50.0 million, or 79% to $13.2 million from $63.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the acquisition of UE in 2019 being significantly larger in cash investment than the acquisition of SmarterChaos in 2020, net of the increased investments in internal developed costs.
Cash flows from financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $24.5 million, reflecting a decrease of $46.6 million, or 66%, as compared to $71.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in inflows from financing is primarily due to new long term debt issued in 2020, and the net proceeds from the Business Combination.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any outstanding off-balance sheet guarantees, interest rate swap transactions or foreign currency forward contracts. In our ongoing business, we do not enter into transactions involving, or otherwise form relationships with, unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships that are established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The following table presents our expected future contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1) Our credit facility matures July 2023. Our interest rate as of December 31, 2019 was used to forecast the expected future interest rate payments. These payments are inherently uncertain due to fluctuations in interest rates and outstanding borrowings that will occur over the remaining term of the credit facility.
(2) Management analyzed our current leases due to the COVID-19 economic environment and recorded a reserve of approximately $4.2 million as a result of the cease of use of certain leased properties, which was included in General and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations during the year ended December 31, 2020.
(3) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods and services that are enforceable, legally binding and specify all significant terms.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We have prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. In doing so, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. A number of the estimates and assumptions relate to matters that are inherently uncertain as they pertain to future events. We base these estimates and assumptions on historical experience or on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, we reconsider and evaluate our estimates and assumptions.
We believe that the accounting policies listed below involve our more significant judgments, estimates and assumptions and, therefore, could have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. In addition, we believe that a discussion of these policies is necessary to understand and evaluate the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Refer to Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 1. Financial Statements of this Annual Report, for further information on our critical and other significant accounting policies.
Revenue recognition
The Company derives revenue primarily through the delivery of various types of services, including: customer acquisition, managed services and software services. Effective January 1, 2019, the Company adopted the new revenue recognition standard using the modified retrospective method. The adoption of this new standard did not have a material impact on the measurement, recognition and disclosure of revenue in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
The Company recognizes revenue when the Company transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The Company recognizes revenue pursuant to the five-step framework: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including any constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies the performance obligations.
The transaction price is measured based on the consideration the Company expects to receive from a contract with a customer and for which it is probable the Company will collect substantially all of the consideration to which it is entitled under the contract. The Company’s contracts with customers contain variable consideration; however, uncertainty related to variable consideration is resolved on a monthly basis. Therefore, the transaction price for any given period is fixed and no estimation of variable consideration is required (except as discussed within the Customer Acquisition subsection).
The Company’s standard payment terms are typically 30 days. The Company does not have any significant financing arrangements with customers.
If a customer pays consideration before the Company’s performance obligations are satisfied, such amounts are recorded as a contract liability (i.e., deferred revenue) on the consolidated balance sheets.
The Company elected to use the practical expedient which allows the Company to record costs to obtain a contract (i.e., sales commissions) as expense as incurred when the amortization period would have been one year or less. Costs to fulfill a contract, including nominal configuration costs, are not material.
The Company elected the practical expedient to not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for (i) contracts with an original expected length of one year or less and (ii) contracts for which revenue is recognized at the amount to which the Company has the right to invoice for services performed.
Customer acquisition
The Company’s performance obligation for Customer acquisition contracts is to deliver an unspecified number of potential customers or leads (i.e., number of clicks, emails, calls and applications) to the customer in real-time, on a daily basis as the leads are generated, based on predefined qualifying characteristics specified by our customer. The contracts generally have a one-month term and the Company has an enforceable right to payment for all leads delivered to the customer. The Company’s customers simultaneously receive and consume the benefits provided, as the Company satisfies its performance obligations. The Company recognizes revenue as the performance obligations are satisfied over time.
When there is a delay between the period in which revenue is recognized and when a customer invoice is issued, revenue is recognized and the corresponding amounts are recorded as unbilled revenue (i.e., contract assets) within Accounts receivable, net on the consolidated balance sheets. In line with industry practice, the Company applies the constraint on variable consideration and records revenue based on internally tracked conversions (leads delivered), net of the amount tracked and subsequently confirmed by customers. Substantially all amounts included within the unbilled revenue balance are invoiced to customers within the month directly following the period of service. Historical estimates related to unbilled revenue have not been materially different from actual revenue billed.
Managed services
The Company’s performance obligation for Managed service contracts is to provide continuous service of managing the customer’s media spend for the purpose of generating leads through a third-party supplier of leads, as requested by our customer. Each month of service is distinct, and any variable consideration is allocated to a distinct month. Therefore, revenue is recognized as the performance obligation is satisfied each month and there is no estimation of revenue required at each reporting period for managed services contracts.
The Company enters into agreements with internet search companies, third-party publishers and/or strategic partners to generate customer acquisition services for their Managed service customers. The Company receives a fee from its customers and separately pays a fee to the internet search companies, third-party publishers and/or strategic partners. The third-party supplier is primarily responsible for the performance and deliverable to the customer, and the Company solely arranges for the third-party supplier to provide services to the customer. Therefore, in certain cases, the Company acts as the agent and the net fees earned by the Company are recorded as revenue, with no associated costs of revenue attributable to the Company.
Software services
The Company’s performance obligation for Software services contracts is to provide the customer with continuous, daily access to the Company’s proprietary software. Service provided each month is distinct, and any variable consideration is allocated to a distinct month. Therefore, revenue is recognized as the performance obligations are satisfied each month and there is no estimation of revenue required at each reporting period for Software services contracts.
Business combinations
Under the acquisition method of accounting, the Company recognizes, separately from goodwill, the identifiable assets acquired, and liabilities assumed at their estimated acquisition date fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill.
The Company performs valuations of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and allocates the purchase price to its respective assets and liabilities. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management to use significant judgment and estimates, including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenue, costs and cash flows, discount rates, and selection of comparable companies. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. As a result, actual results may differ from these estimates. During the measurement period, the Company may record adjustments to acquired assets and assumed liabilities, with corresponding offsets to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of a measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
At the acquisition date, the Company measures the fair values of all assets acquired and liabilities assumed that arise from contractual contingencies. The Company also measures the fair values of all non-contractual contingencies if, as of the acquisition date, it is more likely than not that the contingency will give rise to an asset or a liability.
Acquisition related costs not considered part of the consideration are expensed as incurred.
Goodwill and other intangible assets
As of the acquisition date, the Company measures and recognizes goodwill as the excess of: (a) the aggregate of the fair value of consideration transferred, the fair value of any non-controlling interest in the acquiree (if any), and the acquisition date fair value of the Company’s previously held equity interest in the acquiree (if any), over (b) the fair value of net assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill acquired in business combinations is assigned to the reporting unit that is expected to benefit from the combination as of the acquisition date.
On an annual basis, the Company performs a qualitative assessment of goodwill to determine whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test or more frequently upon the occurrence of certain triggering events or substantive changes in circumstances. The Company is only required to perform the annual quantitative goodwill impairment test if it is concluded that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount.
Finite-lived intangible assets primarily consist of software with related technology, customer relationships, non-competition agreements and brand. These assets are initially capitalized based on actual costs incurred, acquisition cost, or fair value, if acquired as part of a business combination. The related costs are subsequently amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
The Company tests intangible assets with finite useful lives for impairment when a triggering event occurs, or circumstances change indicating that the fair value of the entity may be below its carrying amount. If no triggering event occurs, further impairment testing is not necessary.
Software development costs
Costs for software developed for internal use are capitalized during the preliminary stage and post-implementation stages and any research and maintenance costs are expensed as incurred. Costs incurred in the application development stage are capitalized when the internal use software is placed in service, and amortized over the estimated economic life of the software from the date of implementation.
The capitalization and ongoing assessment of recoverability of development costs require considerable judgment by management with respect to certain external factors, including, estimated economic life. Capitalized software development costs are amortized over an estimated useful life of three years.
Contingent consideration
The Company recognizes the fair value of any contingent consideration that is transferred to the seller in a business combination on the date at which control of the acquiree is obtained. Contingent consideration is classified as a liability or as equity on the basis of the definitions of an equity instrument and a financial liability. If the contingent consideration is payable in cash, the Company classifies its contingent consideration as a liability. Contingent consideration payments related to acquisitions are measured at fair value at each reporting period using Level 3 unobservable inputs. The Company’s estimates of fair value are based upon projected cash flow, estimated volatility and other inputs but which are uncertain and involve significant judgments by management. Any changes in the fair value of these contingent consideration payments are included in income from operations in the consolidated statements of operations.
Income taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more-likely-than-not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated by applying existing tax laws and the rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in the year of the enacted rate change.
The Company accounts for uncertainty in income taxes using a recognition and measurement threshold for tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return, which are subject to examination by federal and state taxing authorities. The tax benefit from an uncertain tax position is recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities based on technical merits of the position. The amount of the tax benefit recognized is the largest amount of the benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The effective tax rate and the tax basis of assets and liabilities reflect management’s estimates of the ultimate outcome of various tax uncertainties. The Company recognizes penalties and interest related to uncertain tax positions within the provision (benefit) for income taxes line in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
DMSH, the Company’s accounting predecessor, is a limited liability company treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes and is not subject to entity-level U.S. federal income tax (other than with respect to UE, as described above). As a result of the Business Combination, the Company’s allocable share of earnings from DMSH are subject to U.S. federal and state and local income taxes.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Refer to Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report, for a more detailed discussion on recent accounting pronouncements and the related impact on our consolidated financial statements.