Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are an emerging growth molecular diagnostic company developing and marketing novel non-invasive genomics tests that seek to transform the practice of dermatology and related fields. Our platform may change the diagnostic paradigm in dermatology from one that is subjective, invasive, less accurate and higher-cost to one that is objective, non-invasive, more accurate and lower-cost. Our initial focus is skin cancer. We currently have one clinical commercial test, with a second ready to commercialize, that enhance the early detection of skin cancer and related conditions. Our scalable genomics platform has been designed to work with a proprietary adhesive patch sample collection kit that provides a skin sample collected non-invasively. We process our tests in a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988, or CLIA, certified and College of American Pathologists accredited commercial laboratory located in La Jolla, California that is licensed by the State of California and all states requiring out-of-state licensure. We also provide our technology platform on a contract basis to large pharmaceutical companies who use the technology in their clinical trials to test for the existence of genetic targets of various diseases and to measure the response of new drugs under development. We have a history of net losses since our inception.
Events, Trends and Uncertainties
The Pigmented Lesion Assay, or PLA, became eligible for Medicare reimbursement on February 10, 2020. In late October 2019, the American Medical Association, or AMA, provided us with a Proprietary Laboratory Analyses Code, or PLA Code. Pricing of $760 for the PLA Code was published on December 24, 2019 as part of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Laboratory Fee Schedule, or CLFS, for 2020. The Medicare Final Coverage Decision, or Final LCD, expanded the coverage proposal in the Draft LCD from one to two tests per date of service and it allows clinicians to order our PLA if they have sufficient skill and experience to decide whether a pigmented lesion should be biopsied. Our local Medicare Administrative Contractor, Noridian Healthcare Solutions, LLC, or Noridian, has issued its own Local Coverage Decision, or LCD, announcing coverage of our PLA. Even though the effective date of Noridian’s LCD was June 7, 2020, Noridian began reimbursing us for our PLA as of February 10, 2020. With Medicare coverage granted, we have the opportunity to approach commercial payors, and as a result, we believe that the PLA may generate significant revenues in 2021 and 2022.
Despite the grant of Medicare coverage for the PLA, uncertainty surrounds commercial payor reimbursement, including governmental and commercial payors, of any test incorporating new technology, including tests developed using our technologies. Because each payor generally determines for its own enrollees or insured patients whether to cover or otherwise establish a policy to reimburse our tests, seeking payor approvals is a time-consuming and costly process. We cannot be certain that coverage for our current test and our planned future tests will be provided in the future by additional commercial payors or that existing policy decisions or reimbursement levels will remain in place or be fulfilled under existing terms and provisions. If we cannot obtain or maintain coverage and reimbursement from private and governmental payors such as Medicare and Medicaid for our current test, or new tests or test enhancements that we may develop in the future, our ability to generate revenues could be limited. This may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operation, and cash flows.
Revenue Effects Related to COVID-19 Pandemic
Assay Revenue
Beginning in March 2020 and continuing through the end of 2020, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has reduced patient access to clinician offices for in-person testing, which has resulted in a reduced volume of billable samples received relative to our pre-pandemic expectations. April 2020 billable sample volume was down by approximately 80%, commensurate with the closure of dermatology offices, compared to the average monthly billable sample volume for the two months preceding the beginning of the COVID-19 stay-at-home orders. Despite the downturn in billable samples in April 2020, we saw a stabilization of billable sample volume throughout the rest of the second quarter and through the fourth quarter as various states and dermatology offices opened throughout the country. Billable sample volume first exceeded pre-pandemic levels in July 2020 even without all dermatology practices returning to full operations. Billable sample volume for the three months ended December 31, 2020 was 24% higher than billable sample volume for the three months ended September 30, 2020, and billable sample volume for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was 75% higher than billable sample volume for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Billable sample volume for the three months ended December 31, 2020 was 69% higher than billable sample volume for the three months ended December 31, 2019. Billable sample volumes could continue to be impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and further impacted by a resurgence of the virus in the future.
We have made available beginning in late April 2020 a telemedicine option for the PLA, but the telemedicine market is relatively new and unproven, especially within dermatology, and it is uncertain whether it will achieve and sustain high levels of demand, consumer acceptance and market adoption. While the COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing and clinician offices could close again due to the rolling back of reopening plans in various states, or patients could worry about going into the dermatology clinic, we expect that our revenues will depend to an extent on the willingness of clinicians and their patients to use our telemedicine option for the PLA, as well as on our ability to demonstrate the value of our telemedicine option to health plans and other purchasers of healthcare for beneficiaries. We also expect that the duration and extent of the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic in reducing patient access to clinician offices for in-person testing, and access by our sales force for in-office sales calls will adversely affect our revenues.
Contract Revenue
Contract revenues with major pharmaceutical companies relate to ongoing clinical trial contracts and new contracts. Contract revenue can be highly variable as it is dependent on the pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trial progress which can be difficult to forecast due to variability of patient enrollment, drug safety and efficacy and other factors. Many of our contracts with third parties are structured to contain milestone billing payments, which typically are advance payments on work yet to be performed. These advanced payments are structured to help fund operations and are included in deferred revenue as the work has not yet been performed. These advance payments will remain in deferred revenue until we process the laboratory portion of the contracts allowing us to recognize the revenue.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected and will continue to negatively affect our pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trials. The extent of such effect on our future revenue is uncertain and will depend on the duration and extent of the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trials.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We generate revenue through laboratory services that are billed to Medicare, private medical insurance companies and to pharmaceutical companies who order our laboratory services, which can include sample collection kits, assay development, genomic analysis, data analysis and reporting. Our revenue is generated from two revenue streams: contract revenue and assay revenue. Assay revenue can be highly variable as it is based on payments received by private insurance payors that are not under contract and can vary based on patient insurance coverage, deductibles and co-pays. Contract revenue is ordered by customers on projects that may span over several years, which makes this type of revenue highly variable. Segments of these contracts may be increased, delayed or eliminated based on the success of each customers’ clinical trials or other factors.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses are primarily related to our specialty field sales force, market research, reimbursement efforts, trade show attendance, public relations, and general marketing. We expect these expenses to increase significantly as we expand our direct consumer marketing efforts and continue to add to our specialty sales force, marketing and payor access teams throughout 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development, or R&D, expenses consist primarily of salaries and fringe benefits, clinical trials, consulting costs, facilities costs, laboratory costs, equipment expense, and depreciation. We also conduct clinical trials to validate the performance characteristics of our tests and to show medical cost benefit in support of our reimbursement efforts. We expect these expenses to increase significantly as we continue to develop new products and expand the use of our existing products.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist of senior management compensation, consulting, legal, billing and collections, human resources, information technology, accounting, insurance, and general business expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses, especially employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation, insurance, accounting, and legal fees, to continue to increase due to operating as a publicly traded company.
Financing Activities
Convertible Bridge Notes
On May 23, 2019, DermTech Operations, Inc. (formerly known as DermTech, Inc.), or DermTech Operations, and various holders of its convertible bridge notes agreed to amend DermTech Operations’ then outstanding convertible notes that were issued prior to June 5, 2019. As part of the amendment, the maturity dates of the notes were extended to the earliest of (i) September 24, 2019; (ii) the occurrence of an Event of Default (as defined in such notes); (iii) the consummation of a liquidation or dissolution of DermTech Operations (iv) a Liquidation Transaction (as defined in such notes); or (v) the consummation of a merger with or into the Company or any of its subsidiaries.
Between June 5, 2019 and June 10, 2019, DermTech Operations issued additional convertible bridge notes to its existing investors for aggregate gross proceeds of $2.6 million. These convertible bridge notes carried an interest rate of 10% and matured after the earliest to occur of: (i) September 25, 2019; (ii) the occurrence of an Event of Default (as defined in such notes); (iii) the consummation of a liquidation or dissolution of DermTech Operations; (iv) a Liquidation Transaction (as defined in such notes); or (v) the consummation of a merger of DermTech Operations with DT Merger Sub, Inc., a previous subsidiary of the Company, in accordance with the Merger Agreement (as defined below).
On August 29, 2019, in connection with the completion of the Business Combination (as defined below), all of the outstanding convertible bridge notes of DermTech Operations converted into Company common stock, in accordance with their respective terms.
Business Combination
On August 29, 2019, the Company and DermTech Operations consummated the transactions contemplated by the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of May 29, 2019, by and among the Company, DT Merger Sub, Inc., or Merger Sub, and DermTech Operations. We refer to this agreement, as amended by that certain First Amendment to Agreement and Plan of Merger dated as of August 1, 2019, as the Merger Agreement. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub merged with and into DermTech Operations, with DermTech Operations surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. We refer to this transaction as the Business Combination.
Immediately following the completion of the Business Combination, the Company changed its name from Constellation Alpha Capital Corp. to DermTech, Inc. and effected a one-for-two reverse stock split of its common stock, or the Reverse Stock Split. Prior to the closing of the Business Combination, the Company’s stock was listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the ticker symbol “CNAC.” On August 30, 2019, the Company’s common stock commenced trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the ticker symbol “DMTK.”
2019 PIPE Financing
On August 29, 2019, immediately prior to the completion of the Business Combination, the Company issued to certain accredited investors, in a private placement transaction, or the 2019 PIPE Financing, an aggregate of 3,076,925 shares of common stock and 1,231 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock for aggregate gross proceeds of $24.0 million, or $6.50 per share of common stock on an as-converted basis. The 2019 PIPE Financing was conducted pursuant to the terms of separate Subscription Agreements and Amended and Restated Subscription Agreements, dated between May 22, 2019 and August 1, 2019, entered into by the Company and the investors. After giving effect to the Reverse Stock Split, each share of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock was convertible into 500 shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to conditions and adjustment as provided in the Certificate of Designation of Preferences, Rights and Limitations of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock.
On August 10, 2020, entities affiliated with Farallon Capital Management, L.L.C., or the Farallon entities, converted an aggregate of 1,231 shares of Series A Preferred Stock into 615,385 shares of common stock. On September 9, 2020, the Company filed a Certificate of Elimination of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware to eliminate its Series A Convertible Preferred Stock.
2020 PIPE Financing
On February 28, 2020, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional investors for a private placement of the Company’s equity securities, or the 2020 PIPE Financing. Cowen and Company, LLC served as lead placement agent for the 2020 PIPE Financing with William Blair & Company, L.L.C. acting as joint placement agent. Lake Street Capital Markets, LLC acted as co-placement agent. The 2020 PIPE Financing closed on March 4, 2020.
Pursuant to the 2020 PIPE Financing, on March 4, 2020 the Company issued an aggregate of 2,467,724 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $10.50 per share, 3,199 shares of Series B-1 Convertible Preferred Stock, or the Series B-1 Shares, at a purchase price
of $10.50 per share of common stock issuable upon conversion thereof, which were convertible into an aggregate of up to 3,198,942 shares of common stock, and 524 shares of Series B-2 Convertible Preferred Stock, or the Series B-2 Shares, at a purchase price of $10.50 per share of common stock issuable upon conversion thereof, which are convertible into an aggregate of up to 523,809 shares of common stock, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $65.0 million.
At the Company’s annual meeting held on May 26, 2020, the Company’s stockholders voted to approve the 2020 PIPE Financing, which resulted in the automatic conversion of the Series B-1 Shares into 3,198,949 shares of common stock on May 27, 2020. Each Series B-2 Share was convertible into 1,000 shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to conditions and adjustment as provided in the Certificate of Designation of Preferences, Rights and Limitations of Series B-2 Convertible Preferred Stock. On August 10, 2020, entities affiliated with Farallon Capital Management, L.L.C., or the Farallon entities, converted an aggregate of 524 shares of Series B-2 Preferred Stock into 523,814 shares of common stock. On September 9, 2020, the Company filed a Certificate of Elimination of Series B-1 Convertible Preferred Stock and Certificate of Elimination of Series B-2 Convertible Preferred Stock with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware to eliminate its Series B-1 and B-2 Convertible Preferred Stock.
2020 At-The-Market Offering
On November 10, 2020, the Company entered into a sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC relating to the sale of shares of the Company’s common stock from time to time with an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. In connection with this sales agreement, the Company issued an aggregate of 951,792 shares of common stock at a weighted average purchase price of $20.97, resulting in aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $20.0 million.
2021 Underwritten Public Offering
On January 6, 2021, the Company, entered into an Underwriting Agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC and William Blair & Company, L.L.C. as representatives of several underwriters, or the Underwriters. The Company agreed to issue and sell up to 4,237,288 shares of its common stock including up to 635,593 shares that could be purchased by the Underwriters pursuant to a 30-day option granted to the Underwriters by the Company.
On January 11, 2021, the Company closed the underwritten public offering of 4,872,881 shares of its common stock, which included the exercise in full by the Underwriters of their option to purchase up to 635,593 additional shares, at a price to the public of $29.50 per share. The Company’s aggregate gross proceeds from the offering, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, were $143.7 million.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Assay Revenue
Assay revenue grew $2.8 million or 202% to $4.2 million for fiscal year 2020 compared to $1.4 million for fiscal year 2019. Billable samples increased to approximately 24,000 for fiscal year 2020 compared to approximately 13,700 for fiscal year 2019. Sample volume is dependent on two major factors: the number of clinicians who order an assay in any given quarter and the number of assays ordered by each clinician during the period. The number of ordering clinicians and the utilization per clinician can vary based on a number of factors including the types of patients presenting skin cancer conditions, clinician reimbursement, office workflow, market awareness, clinician education and other factors. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected and will continue to negatively affect our assay revenue by, among other things, limiting patient access to clinician offices for in-person testing and limiting access by our sales force for in-office sales calls.
Contract Revenue
Contract revenue with major pharmaceutical companies decreased $0.4 million to $1.6 million for fiscal year 2020, or 16%, compared to $2.0 million for fiscal year 2019. Contract revenue can be highly variable as it is dependent on the pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trial progress, which can be difficult to forecast due to variability of patient enrollment, drug safety and efficacy and other factors. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected and will continue to negatively affect our pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trials. The extent of such effect on our future revenue is uncertain and will depend on the duration and extent of the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trials. Many of our contracts with third parties are structured to contain milestone billing payments, which typically are advanced payments on work yet to be performed. These advanced payments are structured to help fund operations and are included in deferred revenue as the work has not yet been performed. As of December 31, 2020, the deferred revenue amount for these contracts, which is the advanced payments minus the value of work performed, was $1.5 million. These advanced payments will remain in deferred revenue until we process the laboratory portion of the contracts allowing us to recognize the revenue.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased $2.7 million, or 81%, to $6.0 million for fiscal year 2020 compared to $3.3 million for fiscal year 2019. The increase was largely attributable to a higher billable sample volume in 2020, higher fixed facility costs and higher equipment costs. At current capacity, a large portion of the costs of revenue are fixed, and these costs include the CLIA facility, quality assurance, management and supervision and equipment calibration and depreciation. The variable cost of revenue expenses incurred primarily relate to compensation-related costs for our laboratory scientists and technicians, laboratory supplies, shipping costs, equipment maintenance and calibration, and utilities. We remain committed to continuing the automation of our laboratory processes in order to become more cost efficient and productive. We currently operate in a gross loss position due to our current manufacturing capacity, level of sample volume and average selling price (“ASP”). As we increase our ASP and volume, we expect our margin to improve.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $9.8 million, or 155%, to $16.1 million for fiscal year 2020 compared to $6.3 million for fiscal year 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to higher compensation-related costs from the expansion of the existing sales force and increased spending on advertising activities to increase market exposure. We expect to add to our specialty sales force, marketing and payor access teams throughout 2021 and 2022, and increase spending on direct-to-consumer marketing campaigns, which collectively would significantly increase our sales and marketing expenses.
Research and Development
R&D expenses increased $2.8 million, or 112%, to $5.3 million for fiscal year 2020 compared to $2.5 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase was due to higher compensation and recruiting costs of expanding the R&D team, including the addition of a new Chief Scientific Officer, increased clinical trial costs, and increased spend on laboratory supplies to support new product development. We expect these expenses to increase as we continue to grow the R&D team and focus on the development of our Luminate test, our basal and squamous cell skin cancer assays and other products in our pipeline.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $5.0 million, or 56%, to $13.8 million for fiscal year 2020 compared to $8.9 million for fiscal year 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher payroll-related costs, stock-based compensation and costs required to operate as a publicly traded company. We expect these expenses to continue to increase as we add additional infrastructure such as human resources, information technology and legal resources. Also included in general and administrative expenses fiscal year 2020 was a one-time $1.0 million litigation settlement charge related to the Settlement Agreement with LifeSci.
Gain on Debt Extinguishment
Gain on debt extinguishment decreased $0.9 million, or 100%, to $0 for the fiscal year 2020 compared to $0.9 million for the fiscal year 2019. The decrease in gain on debt extinguishment was due to the extinguishment of the convertible bridge notes that occurred in August 2019 in connection with the Business Combination.
Interest Income/(Expense), net
Interest income for fiscal year 2020 was $40,000 compared to interest expense of $2.7 million for fiscal year 2019. Interest income for fiscal year 2020 consists primarily of interest earned on our short-term investments as a result of the proceeds from the 2020 PIPE Financing in March 2020. The decrease in interest expense was due to the extinguishment of the convertible bridge notes that occurred in August 2019 in connection with the Business Combination. We do not expect to incur significant interest expense for future reporting periods in 2021.
Other Expense
Other expense decreased $0.4 million, or 100%, to $0 for the fiscal year 2020 compared to $0.4 million for fiscal year 2019. The significant decrease in other expense was due to the extinguishment of the convertible bridge notes that occurred in August 2019 in connection with the Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have never been profitable and have historically incurred substantial net losses, including net losses of $10.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018, $19.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, and $35.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit was $126.4 million, and we had negative operating cash flow of $28.7 million. In connection with the Business Combination, we completed the 2019 PIPE Financing that raised a total of $24.0 million in gross proceeds in addition to the $1.8 million in cash the Company had on hand at the closing of the Business Combination. We completed the 2020 PIPE Financing in March 2020, which raised a total of $65.0 million in gross proceeds. In addition, at the end of 2020, we raised approximately $20.0 million in gross proceeds facilitated through our At-The-Market Offering. We have historically financed operations through private placement equity offerings and convertible debt offerings.
We expect our losses to continue as a result of costs relating to ongoing R&D expenses, increased general and administrative expenses and increased sales and marketing costs for existing and planned products. These losses have had, and will continue to have, an adverse effect on our working capital. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with our commercialization and development efforts, we are unable to predict when we will become profitable, and we may never become profitable. Our inability to achieve and then maintain profitability would negatively affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $63.8 million. On January 11, 2021, we closed a public offering that resulted in aggregate gross proceeds of $143.7 million from the offering, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses. Based on our current business operations and the additional 2021 financing, we believe our current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next twelve months. While we believe we have enough capital to fund anticipated operating costs for at least the next 12 months, we expect to incur significant additional operating losses over at least the next several years. We anticipate that we will raise additional capital through equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations or licensing arrangements in order to support our planned operations and to continue developing and commercializing genomic tests. We may also consider raising additional capital in the future to expand our business, to pursue strategic investments or to take advantage of financing opportunities. Our present and future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
our revenue growth rate and ability to generate cash flows from operating activities;
•
the willingness of clinicians and their patients to use our telemedicine option for the PLA and the duration and extent of the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic in reducing patient access to clinician offices for in-person testing;
•
the duration and extent of the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trials;
•
our sales and marketing and R&D activities;
•
effects of competing technological and market developments;
•
costs of and potential delays in product development;
•
changes in regulatory oversight applicable to our tests; and
•
timing of and costs related to future international expansion.
There can be no assurances as to the availability of additional financing or the terms upon which additional financing may be available to us. If we are unable to obtain sufficient funding at acceptable terms, we may be forced to significantly curtail our operations, and the lack of sufficient funding may have a material adverse impact on our ability to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flow Analysis
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net cash used in operating activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 totaled $28.7 million, primarily driven by the $35.2 million net loss offset by non-cash related items, including $5.0 million in stock-based compensation and $0.5 million in depreciation. In addition, we had a cash inflow of $0.8 million through the increase of accounts payable and accrued compensation as well as a $1.6 million of cash inflow through the increase of accrued liabilities and deferred revenues. This was offset by the cash outflow through the increase of prepaid expenses and other assets of $0.5 million as well as an increase in accounts receivable of $0.8 million.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $41.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to the purchase of $41.7 million in short-term marketable securities and $1.8 million in purchases of property and equipment. This was offset by cash inflows from the sale and maturity of marketable securities of $2.2 million. As we scale our sales force, the expected timing of a corresponding increase in assay volume is uncertain due, in part, to challenges presented by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, such as related limits on patient access to clinician offices for in-person testing. Additional laboratory equipment investment will be needed to install complex automation systems and other genomic testing equipment needed to expand testing capacity.
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $78.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, which was predominantly driven by the $59.9 million and $19.1 million in net proceeds raised from the 2020 PIPE Financing and At-the-Market Offering, respectively, and $1.3 million from the exercise of stock options and warrants. This was offset by the payment made by the Company of the deferred underwriting fees of $1.4 million.
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net cash used in operating activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 totaled $17.8 million, primarily driven by the $19.7 million net loss offset by non-cash related items, including $2.0 million in amortization of the convertible bridge notes debt discount, $1.3 million in stock-based compensation and $0.4 million in the change in the convertible bridge notes derivative liability, offset by the gain on extinguishment of convertible notes of $0.9 million and a tax payment of $1.6 million related to the release of certain employees’ restricted stock units. In addition, we had $1.3 million of cash inflow through the increase of accounts payables and accrued compensation as well as a $0.5 million of cash inflow through the increase of accrued liabilities and deferred revenues. This was offset by the cash outflow of $1.0 million related to payments for prepaid insurance as well as an increase in accounts receivable of $0.1 million.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $0.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, which related predominantly to the purchase of laboratory equipment. As we scale our sales force and the resulting expected increase to assay volume, additional laboratory equipment investment will be needed to install complex automation systems and other genomic testing equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $28.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, which was predominantly driven by the $25.6 million in net proceeds raised from the Business Combination and related 2019 PIPE financing and issuing $2.6 million in convertible notes.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as such term is defined under Item 303 of Regulation S-K, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) requires that management make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the amounts of revenues and expenses reported during the period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates these estimates and judgments, including but not limited to those related to revenue, warrants, stock-based compensation, accounts receivable, expense accruals, convertible debt, the realization of deferred tax assets, and common and preferred stock valuations. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
The SEC has defined a company’s critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of the company’s financial condition and results of operations, and which require the company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 of our consolidated financial statements included in this report, we believe that the following accounting policies and judgments are most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results based upon the SEC’s defined criteria.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is generated from two revenue streams, contract revenue and assay revenue. We account for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). The core principle of ASC 606 is that the Company recognizes revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The ASC 606 revenue recognition model consists of the following five steps: (1) identify the contracts with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
(a)
Assay Revenue
We generate revenues from our PLA, and Nevome tests we provide to healthcare clinicians in various states throughout the United States to assist in a clinician’s diagnosis of melanoma. We provide prescribing clinicians with our adhesive sample collection kits to perform non-invasive skin biopsies of clinically ambiguous pigmented skin lesions on patients. The Company also offers clinicians a telemedicine solution where they can request the PLA collection kit be sent to the patient’s home for a clinician-guided remote collection on ambiguous pigmented skin lesions. Once the sample is collected by the healthcare clinician or the patient via the telemedicine solution, it is returned to the Company’s CLIA laboratory for analysis. The patient’s ribonucleic acid (“RNA”) and deoxyribonucleic acid (“DNA”) are extracted from the adhesive patch collection kit and analyzed using gene expression technology to determine if the pigmented skin lesion contains certain genomic features indicative of melanoma. Upon completion of the gene expression analysis, a final report is drafted and provided to the dermatologists detailing the test results for the pigmented skin lesion indicating whether the sample collected is indicative of melanoma or not. A detailed analysis of payments made to us by private health insurance payors for the assays over several quarters is used to estimate the ultimate receipt of funds for payment of billed amounts. These payments can vary widely from payor to payor and can be halted for routine audits or other reasons.
(b)
Contract Revenue
Contract revenue is generated from the sale of laboratory services and adhesive sample collection kits to third party companies through contract research agreements. Revenues are generated from providing gene expression tests to facilitate the development of drugs designed to treat dermatologic conditions. The provision of gene expression services may include sample collection using the Company’s patented adhesive patch collection kits, assay development for research partners, RNA extraction, isolation, expression, amplification and detection, including data analysis and reporting.
See Note 1(k) of our consolidated financial statements for a full discussion of our revenue recognition policy around assay revenue and contract revenue.
Stock-Based Compensation
Compensation costs associated with stock option awards and other forms of equity compensation are measured at the grant-date fair value of the awards and recognized over the requisite service period of the awards on a ratable basis.
We grant stock options to purchase common stock to employees with exercise prices equal to the fair market value of the underlying stock, as determined by the board of directors, management, outside valuation experts and subsequent to the completion of the Business Combination, the closing stock price on the date of grant. The board of directors and outside valuation experts determine the fair value of the underlying stock by considering a number of factors, including historical and projected financial results, the risks we faced at the time, the preferences of our debt holders and preferred stockholders, and the lack of liquidity of our common stock that occurred prior to the Business Combination.
The fair value of each stock option award is estimated using the Black-Scholes-Merton valuation model. Such value is recognized as expense over the requisite service period using the straight-line method. The expected term of options is based on the simplified method which defines the expected term as the average of the contractual term of the options and the weighted average vesting period for all option tranches. The expected volatility of stock options is based upon the historical volatility of a number of related publicly traded companies in similar stages of development as well as the volatility of the Company’s common stock. The risk-free interest rate is based on the average yield of U.S. Treasury securities with remaining terms similar to the expected term of the share-based awards. The assumed dividend yield was based on our expectation of not paying dividends in the foreseeable future.
We account for stock options to non-employees using the fair value approach. The fair value of these options is measured using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model, reflecting the same assumptions applied to employee options, other than expected life, which is assumed to be the remaining contractual life of the award. Options that are granted to employees generally have a requisite service period of three to four years.
Restricted stock units (“RSUs”) are considered restricted stock. The fair value of restricted stock is equal to the fair market value of the underlying stock, as determined by the board of directors, management, input from outside valuation experts and subsequent to the completion of the Business Combination, the closing stock price on the date of grant. We recognize stock-based compensation expense based on the fair value on a ratable basis over the requisite service periods of the awards. RSUs that are granted to employees have a requisite service period typically between two and four years.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See Note 1(s) of our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the impact of new accounting pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company within the meaning of the JOBS Act. Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can use the extended transition period, provided in Section 102(b) of the JOBS Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period and, as a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. We also intend to rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including without limitation, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of (i) the last day of the fiscal year during which we had total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion, (ii) the day we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million, measured as of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter, (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period, and (iv) December 31, 2022.