Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc.’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere herein. Unless otherwise noted, all dollar amounts in tables are in millions. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contain forward-looking statements. See "Forward-Looking Statements" and "Item 1A.-Risk Factors" for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
Overview
Dun & Bradstreet is a leading global provider of business decisioning data and analytics. Our mission is to deliver a global network of trust, enabling clients to transform uncertainty into confidence, risk into opportunity and potential into prosperity. Clients embed our trusted, end-to-end solutions into their daily workflows to inform commercial credit decisions, confirm suppliers are financially viable and compliant with laws and regulations, enhance salesforce productivity and gain visibility into key markets. Our solutions support our clients’ mission critical business operations by providing proprietary and curated data and analytics to help drive informed decisions and improved outcomes.
Leveraging our category-defining commercial credit data and analytics, our Finance & Risk solutions are used in the critical decisioning processes of finance, risk, compliance and procurement departments worldwide. We are a market leader in commercial credit decisioning, with many of the top businesses in the world utilizing our solutions to make informed decisions when considering extending business loans and trade credit. We are also a leading provider of data and analytics to businesses looking to analyze supplier relationships and more effectively collect outstanding receivables. We believe our proprietary Paydex score, a numerical indicator based on promptness of a business's payments to its suppliers and vendors, is widely relied upon as an important measure of credit health for businesses. We are well positioned to provide accessible and actionable insights and analytics that mitigate risk and uncertainty, and ultimately protect and drive increased profitability for our clients.
Our Sales & Marketing solutions combine firmographic, personal contact, intent and non-traditional, or “alternative,” data to assist clients in optimizing their sales and marketing strategy by cleansing customer relationship management ("CRM") data and narrowing their focus and efforts on the highest probability prospects. As global competition continues to intensify, businesses need assistance with focusing their sales pipelines into a condensed list so that they can have their best sellers target the highest probability return accounts. We provide invaluable insights into businesses that can help our clients grow their businesses in a more efficient and effective manner.
We leverage these differentiated capabilities to serve a broad set of clients across multiple industries and geographies. As of December 31, 2020, we have a global client base of approximately 137,000, including some of the largest companies in the world. Covering nearly all industry verticals, including financial services, technology, communications, government, retail, transportation and manufacturing, our data and analytics support a wide range of use cases. In terms of our geographic footprint, we have an industry-leading presence in North America, a growing presence in the United Kingdom, Ireland, India and Greater China through our majority or wholly-owned subsidiaries and a broader global presence through our Worldwide Network alliances ("WWN alliances"). On January 8, 2021, we acquired Bisnode Business Information Group AB ("Bisnode") and expect the acquisition to position us to expand across Europe, increase our client base, and expand and enhance our constantly expanding business database, known as our "Data Cloud".
We believe that we have an attractive business model that is underpinned by highly recurring, diversified revenue, significant operating leverage, low capital requirements and strong free cash flow. The proprietary and embedded nature of our data and analytics solutions and the integral role that we play in our clients’ decision-making processes have historically
translated into high client retention and revenue visibility. We also benefit from strong operating leverage given our centralized database and solutions, which allow us to generate strong contribution margins and free cash flow.
Segments
Since the Take-Private Transaction, management has made changes to transform our business. As a result, during the fourth quarter of 2019, we changed the composition of our reportable segments, the classification of revenue by solution set and our measure of segment profit (from operating income to adjusted earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization ("EBITDA") in the information that we provide to our chief operating decision makers ("CODMs") to better align with how they assess performance and allocate resources. Latin America Worldwide Network, which was previously included in the Americas reportable segment, is currently included in the International segment. Accordingly, prior period results have been recast to conform to the current presentation of segments, revenue by solution set, and the measure of segment profit. These changes do not impact our consolidated results.
Our segment disclosure is intended to provide the users of our consolidated financial statements with a view of the business that is consistent with management of the Company.
We manage our business and report our financial results through the following two segments:
•North America offers Finance & Risk and Sales & Marketing data, analytics and business insights in the United States and Canada; and
•International offers Finance & Risk and Sales & Marketing data, analytics and business insights directly in the United Kingdom/Ireland ("U.K."), Greater China, India and indirectly through our WWN alliances.
Factors Affecting our Results of Operations
Economic Conditions
Our business is impacted by general economic conditions. For example, in the event of a difficult economy, such as the one we are experiencing as a result of the global coronavirus ("COVID-19") pandemic, the probability of businesses, including the businesses of our clients, becoming insolvent increases. Disruptions in the financial markets could limit the ability or willingness of our clients to extend credit to their customers or cause our clients to constrain budgets, which could adversely impact demand for our data and analytics solutions. Further, continuing mandates that employees work remotely, prolonged travel restrictions or general economic uncertainty could negatively impact our suppliers’ ability to provide us with data and services, our ability to deliver or market our solutions, our ability to acquire new customers or expand our services with existing customers and client demand for our solutions. In contrast, during such times the need for better insights related to the extension of credit is magnified, and we believe our Finance & Risk solutions become even more critical to our clients. The impacts of a weakened economy on our business, financial condition and results operations, especially as it relates to the COVID-19 global pandemic, is highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors".
Regulatory Requirements
In recent years, there has been an increased legislative and regulatory focus on data privacy practices. As a result, federal and state governments have enacted various new laws, rules and regulations. One example of such legislation is the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 ("CCPA"), which became effective January 1, 2020. The CCPA applies to certain businesses that collect personal information from California residents, and bestows broad rights on individuals, including a right to know what personal information is being collected about them and whether and to whom it is sold, a right to access their personal information and have it deleted, a right to opt out of the sale of their personal information and a right to equal service and price regardless of exercise of these rights. This has led businesses to seek data providers and solutions that assist them in satisfying their regulatory compliance obligations in the face of a changing regulatory environment. We have developed solutions that comply with this need, which may result in additional revenues. See "Business-Regulatory Matters" in Item 1.
Acquisitions
On March 11, 2020, we acquired substantially all of the assets of coAction.com. coAction.com is a leader in revenue cycle management in the order-to-cash process, serving mid to large size companies across multiple industries. The results of coAction.com, which are not material, have been included in our North America segment from the date of the acquisition.
On January 7, 2020, we acquired a 100% ownership interest in Orb Intelligence ("Orb"). Orb is a prominent digital business identity and firmographic data provider, which allows us to better capture the digital footprint of businesses as well as
the digital exhaust that businesses generate. The results of Orb, which are not material, have been included in our North America segment from the date of the acquisition.
On July 1, 2019, we acquired a 100% ownership interest in Lattice Engines, Inc. ("Lattice"). Lattice is a leading artificial intelligence powered customer data platform, enabling B2B organizations to scale their account-based marketing and sales programs across every channel. The results of Lattice, which are not material, have been included in our North America segment since the date of the acquisition.
Recent Developments
Bisnode Acquisition
On January 8, 2021, we acquired 100% ownership of Bisnode, a leading European data and analytics firm and long-standing member of the Dun & Bradstreet WWN alliances, for a total purchase price of $805.8 million. The transaction closed with a combination of cash of $646.9 million and 6,237,087 newly issued shares of common stock in a private placement valued at $158.9 million based on the stock closing price on January 8, 2021, Upon the close of the transaction, we settled a zero-cost foreign currency collar and received $21.0 million, which reduced our net cash payment for the acquisition. We expect the acquisition to position us to expand across Europe, increase our client base, and expand and enhance our Data Cloud.
Initial Public Offering ("IPO") and Private Placement
On July 6, 2020, we completed an IPO of 90,047,612 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share at a public offering price of $22.00 per share. Immediately subsequent to the closing of the IPO, a subsidiary of Cannae Holdings, a subsidiary of Black Knight and affiliates of CC Capital purchased from us in a private placement $200.0 million, $100.0 million and $100.0 million, respectively, of our common stock at a price per share equal to 98.5% of the IPO price, or $21.67 per share. We issued 18,458,700 shares of common stock in connection with the private placement. A total of 108,506,312 shares of common stock were issued in the IPO and concurrent private placement for gross proceeds of $2,381.0 million. See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion, regarding the use of proceeds.
COVID-19 Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused disruptions in supply chains, affecting workforce, production and sales across the world, leading to disruptions and volatility in the global financial markets and economy. Further discussion regarding the impact of the pandemic to our operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 is provided within this MD&A section. However, there is considerable continuing uncertainty regarding the extent of the impact and the duration of the pandemic. The extent of the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance depends on the effect on our clients and vendors, all of which are uncertain at this time and cannot be predicted.
Since March 2020, substantially all of our employees have been working from home. We are following the requirements and protocols published by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control, the World Health Organization and country, state and local governments. We continue to serve our clients with the high level of service they have come to expect from us. Our transition to working from home has been successful and has not significantly affected our operations. In November 2020, we decided to change our workforce model in the United States and certain international markets effective December 31, 2020. As a result, only a small portion of our employees will return full time in the office when conditions allow. Most of our employees will be on either a hybrid work from home schedule or complete work from home schedule. We intend to sublease most of the vacated office spaces. This change allows us to configure a more flexible work and work location strategy.
While our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 have not been materially affected, our usage-based solutions across our Finance & Risk business and certain of our Sales and Marketing products and international markets have been impacted by COVID-19 as discussed further within the revenue section of the MD&A. In addition, we are experiencing longer collection cycles for certain groups of customers. As a result, we considered our current expectations of future economic conditions, including the impact of COVID-19, when estimating our allowance for doubtful accounts. We made an immaterial increase to our allowance for doubtful accounts as of December 31, 2020, as a result of our current estimate of the impact COVID-19 will have on the collectability of our accounts receivable.
Given the economic conditions, we continue to carefully monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our business including, but not limited to, implementing additional operational processes to monitor customer sales and collections, taking precautionary measures to ensure sufficient liquidity and adjusting operations to ensure business continuity. While our productivity and financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2020 have not been impacted materially by the
pandemic, the ultimate impact will be difficult to predict and depends on, among many factors, the duration of the pandemic and its ultimate impact to our customers, vendors, and the financial markets.
In response to liquidity issues that businesses are facing as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act” or “Act”) was signed into law on March 27, 2020 by the U.S. government. On December 27, 2020, Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 ("CAA") was signed into law providing for additional COVID-19 focused relief. Among other reliefs, the Act provides assistance to businesses through the modification of rules related to net operating losses and interest expense deductions. Many of these modifications are designed to provide critical cash flow and liquidity to businesses during the COVID-19 pandemic, including allowing the amendment of prior tax returns to obtain tax refunds. The Act also allows for the deferral of 2020 employer FICA payroll taxes to 2021 and 2022 as well as delaying any federal tax payments due April 15, 2020 and June 15, 2020 until July 15, 2020. The Company utilized the relief opportunities provided by the Act. The application of the Act will result in a net cash benefit of $98.4 million, of which $57.8 million is reflected in our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020. We have also deferred 2020 FICA payroll tax payments of approximately $9 million, with half due at the end of 2021 and the remaining half at the end of 2022. We don't expect significant benefits associated with CAA.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for disclosure of the impact that recent accounting pronouncements may have on the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In preparing our consolidated financial statements and accounting for the underlying transactions and balances reflected therein, we have applied the significant accounting policies described in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements. Of those policies, we consider the policies described below to be critical because they are both most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results, and they require management’s subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
If actual results in a given period ultimately differ from previous estimates, the actual results could have a material impact on such period.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenues in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("ASC 606"). Application of the various accounting principles related to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, complex arrangements with non-standard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting, including whether multiple goods and services in the contract are each separate performance obligations. Other judgments include determining whether we are acting as the principal in a transaction, primarily as it relates to transactions with alliances and partners, and whether separate contracts with the same client entered into at or about the same time should be combined into a single contract. We also use judgment to assess whether it is probable we will collect the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services transferred. We base our judgment on the client’s ability and intention to pay that amount of consideration when it falls due which includes an assessment of their historical payment experience, credit risk indicators and the market and economic conditions affecting the client.
We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation deliverable based on the relative standalone selling price basis. When the standalone selling price is not directly observable from actual standalone sales, we estimate a standalone selling price making maximum use of any observable data and estimates of what a client in the market would be willing to pay for those goods or services.
Pension and Postretirement Benefit Obligations
Our defined-benefit pension plans are accounted for on an actuarial basis, which requires the selection of various assumptions. For each plan, the most significant assumptions include an expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, a discount rate, mortality rates of participants and expectation of mortality improvement.
The expected long-term rate of return on the plan assets that is utilized in determining pension expense is derived based on target asset allocation as well as expected returns on asset categories of plan investments. For the U.S. Qualified Plan, our most significant pension obligation, the long-term rate of return assumption was 6.50% for 2020 and 7.00% for each of
2019 and 2018. For 2021, we will use a long-term rate of return of 6.00%. The 6.00% assumption represents our best estimate of the expected long-term future investment performance of the U.S. Qualified Plan, after considering expectations for future capital market returns and the plan’s asset allocation. As of December 31, 2020, the U.S.Qualified Plan was 61% invested in return-seeking assets and 39% invested in liability-hedging assets.
Another key assumption is the discount rate, which is used to measure the present value of pension plan obligations and postretirement health care obligations. The discount rates are derived using a yield curve approach which matches projected plan benefit payment streams with bond portfolios, reflecting actual liability duration unique to our plans. We use the Spot Rate Approach to measure service and interest cost components of net periodic benefit costs by applying the specific spot rates along that yield curve to the plans’ liability cash flows. We believe this approach provides a more precise measurement of service and interest costs by improving the correlation between projected benefit cash flows and their corresponding spot rates on the yield curve.
Mortality assumptions are used to estimate life expectancy of plan participants, determining projected pension obligations and the period over which retirement plan benefits are expected to be paid. For our U.S. plans mortality assumptions, we used PRI 2012 mortality table (“PRI-2012”) at December 31, 2020 and 2019, together with mortality improvement projection scales MP-2020 and MP-2019, respectively. At December 31, 2020, the adoption of the updated mortality improvement scale MP-2020 resulted in a reduction of the projected benefit obligations for the U.S. plans of approximately $11 million. At December 31, 2019, the adoption of the updated mortality table PRI-2012 and MP-2019 improvement projection scales (from RP-2014 and MP-2018) resulted in a reduction of the projected benefit obligations for the U.S. plans of approximately $43 million.
Changes in the above key assumptions for our global pension plans would have the following effects to our pension obligations at December 31, 2020 (amounts in millions):
We believe that the assumptions used are appropriate, though changes in these assumptions would affect our pension and other postretirement obligations and benefit costs.
See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements for more information regarding costs of, and assumptions for, our pension and postretirement benefit obligations and costs.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our consolidated balance sheet included goodwill of $2,856.2 million and $2,840.1 million, respectively. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase consideration over the fair value of assets and liabilities of businesses acquired. Goodwill is not subject to regular periodic amortization. Instead, the carrying amount of goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually at December 31, and between annual tests if events or circumstances warrant such a test.
We assess recoverability of goodwill at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment or a component of an operating segment which is a business and for which discrete financial information is available and reviewed by a segment manager. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our reporting units are Finance & Risk and Sales & Marketing within the North America segment, and the United Kingdom, Greater China, India and our WWN alliances within the International segment.
We record goodwill impairment charges if a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value. The impairment charge is also limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. An impairment charge, if any, is recorded as an operating expense in the period that the impairment is identified.
For the purpose of the goodwill impairment test, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If an initial qualitative assessment identifies that it is more likely than not that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, an additional quantitative evaluation is performed. Alternatively, we may elect to proceed directly to the quantitative goodwill impairment test.
For the qualitative goodwill impairment test, we analyze actual and projected reporting unit growth trends for revenue and profits, as well as historical performance. We also assess critical factors that may have an impact on the reporting units, including macroeconomic conditions, market-related exposures, regulatory environment, cost factors, changes in the carrying amount of net assets, any plans to dispose of all or part of the reporting unit, and other reporting unit specific factors such as changes in key personnel, strategy, customers or competition.
For quantitative goodwill impairment test, we determine the fair value of our reporting units based on the market approach and also in certain instances using the income approach to further validate our results. Under the market approach, we estimate the fair value based on market multiples of current year EBITDA, adjusted as necessary for non-recurring items, for each individual reporting unit. We use judgment in identifying the relevant comparable company market multiples (i.e., recent divestitures/acquisitions, facts and circumstances surrounding the market, dominance, growth rate, etc.). For income approach, we use the discounted cash flow method to estimate the fair value of a reporting unit. The projected cash flows are based on management’s most recent view of the long-term outlook for each reporting unit. Factors specific to each reporting unit could include revenue growth, profit margins, terminal value, capital expenditure projections, assumed tax rates, discount rates and other assumptions deemed reasonable by management.
Our determination of EBITDA multiples and projected cash flows are sensitive to the risk of future variances due to market conditions as well as business unit execution risks. Management assesses the relevance and reliability of the multiples and projected cash flows by considering factors unique to its reporting units, including recent operating results, business plans, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows, recent market transactions involving comparable businesses and other data. EBITDA multiples and projected cash flows can also be significantly impacted by the future growth opportunities for the reporting unit as well as for the Company itself, general market and geographic sentiment and pending or recently completed merger transactions.
Consequently, if future results fall below our forward-looking projections for an extended period of time, the results of future impairment tests could indicate that impairment exists. Although we believe the multiples of EBITDA in our market approach and the projected cash flows in our income approach are reasonable assumptions about our business, a significant increase in competition or reduction in our competitive capabilities could have a significant adverse impact on our ability to retain market share and thus on the projected values for our reporting units.
When applicable, as a reasonableness check, we reconcile the estimated fair values derived in the valuations for the total Company based on the individual reporting units to our total enterprise value (calculated by multiplying the closing price of our common stock by the number of shares outstanding at that time, adjusted for the value of our debt).
For 2020 and 2019, we performed the qualitative test for each of our reporting units and the results of our tests indicated that it was not more likely than not that the goodwill in any reporting unit was impaired.
Indefinite-lived intangibles other than goodwill are also assessed annually for impairment at December 31, or, under certain circumstances which indicate there may be an impairment. An impairment loss is recognized if the carrying value exceeds the fair value. The estimated fair value is determined by utilizing the expected present value of the future cash flows of the assets. We perform both qualitative and quantitative impairment tests to compare the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset with its carrying value. We perform a qualitative impairment test based on macroeconomic and market conditions, industry considerations, overall performance and other relevant factors. We may also perform a quantitative impairment test primarily using an income approach based on projected cash flows.
No impairment charges related to goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles have been recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor).
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense is recognized over the award’s vesting period on a straight-line basis. The compensation expense is determined based on the grant date fair value. For profit interests and stock option grants, we determine the grant date fair value using the Black Scholes valuation model. During the period subsequent to the Take-Private Transaction and prior to the IPO, our stock was not publicly traded. We did not have a history of market prices for our common stock. Thus, estimating grant date fair value for awards primarily granted in 2019 required us to make assumptions including stock price, expected time to liquidity, expected volatility and discount for lack of marketability. The fair value of the underlying shares and unit grants was determined contemporaneously with the grants.
For our 2019 grants, we determined stock price per unit equal to the closing price of our Class A equity unit price on February 8, 2019, also the closing date of the Take-Private Transaction. Approximately 94% of the units issued in 2019 were granted in February 2019 and March 2019 and almost all of the remaining units were granted by June 2019. As these grant dates were shortly after the Take-Private Transaction closed on February 8, 2019 and there was no indication that the value of
our Company changed, we believe it was reasonable to assume the Take-Private Transaction date price approximated the fair value of the enterprise value on each of the grant dates.
For the expected time to liquidity assumption, management estimated, on the valuation date, the earliest expected change of control or liquidity event was approximately three and half years. The estimate was based on available facts and circumstances on the valuation date, such as our performance and outlook, investors’ strategy and need for liquidity, market conditions, and our financing needs, among other considerations.
For the expected volatility assumption, we utilized the observable data of a group of similar public companies ("peer group") to develop our volatility assumption. The expected volatility of our stock was determined based on the range of the measure of the implied volatility and the historical volatility for our peer group of companies, re-levered to reflect our capital structure and debt, for a period which is commensurate with the expected holding period of the units. Based on this analysis, our weighted average expected volatility rate was 43.9% for the 2019 profit interest grants.
All other assumptions remaining constant, the increase or decrease in the expected time to liquidity of six months would have the effect of increasing or decreasing both our 2020 and 2019 annual compensation cost by approximately $4 million.
All other assumptions remaining constant, a decrease in the expected volatility of 10% would have the effect of decreasing both our 2020 and 2019 compensation expense by approximately $2 million, while an increase in the volatility of 10% would have the effect of increasing both our 2020 and 2019 annual compensation cost by approximately $4 million.
We recognize forfeitures and the corresponding reductions in expense as they occur.
Our stock-based compensation programs are described more fully in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements.
Fair Value Measurements
Assets and liabilities are subject to fair value measurements in certain circumstances, including purchase accounting applied to assets and liabilities acquired in a business combination and long-lived assets that are written down to fair value when they are impaired. Upon the completion of an acquisition, we identify the acquired assets and liabilities, including intangible assets and estimate their fair values. A fair value measurement is determined as the price we would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In the absence of active markets for the identical assets or liabilities, such measurements involve developing assumptions based on market observable data and, in the absence of such data, internal information that is consistent with what market participants would use in a hypothetical transaction that occurs at the measurement date. The determination of fair value often involves significant judgments about assumptions such as determining an appropriate discount rate that factors in both risk and liquidity premiums, identifying the similarities and differences in market transactions, weighting those differences accordingly and then making the appropriate adjustments to those market transactions to reflect the risks specific to the asset or liability being valued. Fair value measurements also require us to project our future cash flows based on our business plans and outlook which can be significantly impacted by our future growth opportunities, general market and geographic sentiment. See Notes 11, 13, 15, 16 and 22 to the consolidated financial statements for further information on fair value measurements and acquisitions.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our consolidated balance sheet included non-current deferred tax liabilities of $1,105.0 million and $1,233.5 million, respectively. We are subject to income taxes in the United States and many foreign jurisdictions. In determining our consolidated provision for income taxes for financial statement purposes, we must make certain estimates and judgments. These estimates and judgments affect the determination of the recoverability of certain deferred tax assets and the calculation of certain tax liabilities, which arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenue and expense and net operating losses.
In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence including our past operating results, as applicable, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years and our forecast of future taxable income. In estimating future taxable income, we develop assumptions, including the amount of future pre-tax operating income, the reversal of temporary differences and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying businesses.
We currently have recorded valuation allowances in certain jurisdictions that we will maintain until it is more likely than not the deferred tax assets will be realized. Our income tax expense recorded in the future may be reduced to the extent of decreases in our valuation allowances. The realization of our remaining deferred tax assets is primarily dependent on future taxable income in the appropriate jurisdiction. Any reduction in future taxable income may require that we record an additional
valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. An increase in the valuation allowance could result in additional income tax expense in such period and could have a significant impact on our future earnings.
Changes in tax laws and rates could also affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future. Management records the effect of a tax rate or law change on our deferred tax assets and liabilities in the period of enactment. Future tax rate or law changes could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate our North America and International segment revenue primarily through subscription-based contractual arrangements that we enter into with clients to provide data, analytics and analytics-related services either individually, or as part of an integrated offering of multiple services. These arrangements occasionally include offerings from more than one business unit to the same client.
• We provide Finance & Risk solutions that offer clients access to our most complete and up-to-date global information, comprehensive monitoring and portfolio analysis. We also provide various business information reports that are consumed in a transactional manner across multiple platforms. Clients also use our services to manage supply chain risks and comply with anti-money laundering and global anti-bribery and corruption regulations.
• We generate our Sales & Marketing revenue by providing sophisticated analytics and solutions to help our clients increase revenue from new and existing businesses, enabling B2B sales and marketing professionals to accelerate sales, enhance go-to-market activity, engage clients in a meaningful way, close business faster and improve efficiency in advertising campaigns.
Expenses
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses primarily include data acquisition and royalty fees, costs related to our databases, service fulfillment costs, call center and technology support costs, hardware and software maintenance costs, telecommunication expenses, personnel-related costs associated with these functions and occupancy costs associated with the facilities where these functions are performed.
Selling and Administrative Expenses
Selling and administrative expenses primarily include personnel-related costs for sales, administrative and corporate management employees, costs for professional and consulting services, advertising and occupancy and facilities expense of these functions.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses consist of depreciation related to investments in property, plant and equipment, as well as amortization of purchased and developed software and other intangible assets, principally database and client relationships recognized in connection with the Take-Private Transaction.
Non-Operating Income and Expense
Non-operating income and expense includes interest expense, interest income, dividends from cost-method investments, gains and losses from divestitures, mark-to-market expense related to certain derivatives, early repayment premiums, and other non-operating income and expenses.
Provision for Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Provision for income tax expenses (benefit) represents international, U.S. federal, state and local income taxes based on income in multiple jurisdictions for our corporate subsidiaries.
Key Metrics
In addition to reporting GAAP results, we evaluate performance and report our results on the non-GAAP financial measures discussed below. We believe that the presentation of these non-GAAP measures provides useful information to investors and rating agencies regarding our results, operating trends and performance between periods. These non-GAAP financial measures include adjusted revenue, adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("adjusted EBITDA"), adjusted EBITDA margin and adjusted net income. Adjusted results are non-GAAP measures that adjust for the impact due to purchase accounting application and divestitures, restructuring charges, equity-based compensation, acquisition and divestiture-related costs (such as costs for bankers, legal fees, due diligence, retention payments and contingent consideration adjustments) and other non-core gains and charges that are not in the normal course of our business (such as gains and losses on sales of businesses, impairment charges, effect of significant changes in tax laws and material tax and legal settlements). We exclude amortization of recognized intangible assets resulting from the application of purchase accounting because it is non-cash and not indicative of our ongoing and underlying operating performance. Recognized intangible assets arise from acquisitions, or primarily the Take-Private Transaction. We believe that recognized intangible assets by their nature are fundamentally different from other depreciating assets that are replaced on a predictable operating cycle. Unlike other
depreciating assets, such as developed and purchased software licenses or property and equipment, there is no replacement cost once these recognized intangible assets expire and the assets are not replaced. Additionally, our costs to operate, maintain and extend the life of acquired intangible assets and purchased intellectual property are reflected in our operating costs as personnel, data fee, facilities, overhead and similar items. Management believes it is important for investors to understand that such
intangible assets were recorded as part of purchase accounting and contribute to revenue generation. Amortization of recognized intangible assets will recur in future periods until such assets have been fully amortized. In addition, we isolate the effects of changes in foreign exchange rates on our revenue growth because we believe it is useful for investors to be able to compare revenue from one period to another, both after and before the effects of foreign exchange rate changes. The change in revenue performance attributable to foreign currency rates is determined by converting both our prior and current periods’ foreign currency revenue by a constant rate. As a result, we monitor our adjusted revenue growth both after and before the effects of foreign exchange rate changes. We believe that these supplemental non-GAAP financial measures provide management and other users with additional meaningful financial information that should be considered when assessing our
ongoing performance and comparability of our operating results from period to period. Our management regularly uses our supplemental non-GAAP financial measures internally to understand, manage and evaluate our business and make operating decisions. These non-GAAP measures are among the factors management uses in planning for and forecasting future periods. Non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative to our reported results prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Our non-GAAP or adjusted financial measures reflect adjustments based on the following items, as well as the related income tax.
Adjusted Revenue
We define adjusted revenue as revenue adjusted to include revenue for the period from January 8 to February 7, 2019 ("International lag adjustment") for the Predecessor related to the lag reporting for our International operations. On a GAAP basis, we report International results on a one-month lag, and for 2019 the Predecessor period for International is December 1, 2018 through January 7, 2019. The Successor period for International is February 8, 2019 (commencing on the closing date of the Take-Private Transaction) through November 30, 2019 for the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019. The International lag adjustment is to facilitate comparability of 2018 periods to 2019 periods and 2019 periods to 2020 periods.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We define adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) attributable to Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc. (Successor) / The Dun & Bradstreet Corporation (Predecessor) excluding the following items:
•depreciation and amortization;
•interest expense and income;
•income tax benefit or provision;
•other expenses or income;
•equity in net income of affiliates;
•net income attributable to non-controlling interests;
•dividends allocated to preferred stockholders;
•revenue and expense adjustments to include results for the period from January 8 to February 7, 2019, for the Predecessor related to the International lag adjustment (see above discussion);
•other incremental or reduced expenses from the application of purchase accounting (e.g. commission asset amortization);
•equity-based compensation;
•restructuring charges;
•merger and acquisition-related operating costs;
•transition costs primarily consisting of non-recurring incentive expenses associated with our synergy program;
•legal reserve and costs associated with significant legal and regulatory matters; and
•asset impairment.
We calculate adjusted EBITDA margin by dividing adjusted EBITDA by adjusted revenue.
Adjusted Net Income
We define adjusted net income as net income (loss) attributable to Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc. (Successor) / The Dun & Bradstreet Corporation (Predecessor) adjusted for the following items:
•revenue and expense adjustments to include results for the period from January 8 to February 7, 2019, for the Predecessor related to the International lag adjustment (see above discussion);
•incremental amortization resulting from the application of purchase accounting. We exclude amortization of recognized intangible assets resulting from the application of purchase accounting because it is non-cash and is not indicative of our ongoing and underlying operating performance. The Company believes that recognized intangible assets by their nature are fundamentally different from other depreciating assets that are replaced on a predictable operating cycle. Unlike other depreciating assets, such as developed and purchased software licenses or property and equipment, there is no replacement cost once these recognized intangible assets expire and the assets are not replaced. Additionally, the Company’s costs to operate, maintain and extend the life of acquired intangible assets and purchased intellectual property are reflected in the Company’s operating costs as personnel, data fee, facilities, overhead and similar items;
•other incremental or reduced expenses from the application of purchase accounting (e.g. commission asset amortization);
•equity-based compensation;
•restructuring charges;
•merger and acquisition-related operating costs;
•transition costs primarily consisting of non-recurring incentive expenses associated with our synergy program;
•legal reserve and costs associated with significant legal and regulatory matters;
•change in fair value of the make-whole derivative liability associated with the Series A Preferred Stock;
•asset impairment;
•non-recurring pension charges, related to pension settlement charge and actuarial loss amortization eliminated as a result of the Take-Private Transaction;
•dividends allocated to preferred stockholders;
•merger, acquisition and divestiture-related non-operating costs;
•debt refinancing and extinguishment costs; and
•tax effect of the non-GAAP adjustments and the impact resulting from the enactment of the CARES Act. See Note 9 for further details.
Adjusted Net Earnings Per Diluted Share
We calculate adjusted net earnings per diluted share by dividing adjusted net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period plus the dilutive effect of common shares potentially issuable in connection with awards outstanding under our stock incentive plan. For consistency purposes, we assume the stock split effected on June 23, 2020 to be the number of shares outstanding during the Predecessor periods.
Results of Operations
GAAP Results
As a result of the Take-Private Transaction on February 8, 2019, the historical financial statements and information are presented on a Successor and Predecessor basis. In the accompanying consolidated financial statements, references to Predecessor refer to the results of operations and cash flows of The Dun & Bradstreet Corporation and its subsidiaries prior to the closing of the Take-Private Transaction. References to Successor refer to the consolidated financial position of Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc. and its subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the results of operations and cash flows of Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc. and its subsidiaries after the Take-Private Transaction for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019. During the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019, Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc. had no significant operations and limited assets and had only incurred transaction related expenses prior to the Take-Private Transaction. The Predecessor and Successor consolidated financial information presented herein is not comparable primarily due to financing of the Take-Private Transaction and the application of acquisition accounting in the Successor financial statements as of February 8, 2019, as further described in Note 15, of which the most significant impacts are (i) transaction costs incurred and the pension settlement charge associated with the Take-Private Transaction; (ii) a shorter Successor period for our International operations for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019; (iii) increased amortization expense for the intangible assets; and (iv) additional interest expense associated with debt financing arrangements entered into in connection with the Take-Private Transaction.
To facilitate comparability of the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019 and the comparability of the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2018, we present below the combination of consolidated results from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019, comprising the Successor consolidated results from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019, the Predecessor consolidated results for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 and certain pro forma adjustments that give effect to the Take-Private Transaction as if it had occurred on January 1, 2019 (combined pro forma results for the year ended December 31, 2019). These pro forma adjustments are prepared in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation S-X to include additional deferred revenue adjustment, additional amortization related to the recognized intangible assets and additional interest expenses associated with the Successor debt. In addition, non-recurring transaction costs directly attributable to the transaction, acceleration vesting costs related to the Predecessor’s restricted stock units, one-time pension settlement charge and actuarial loss amortization are eliminated from the respective period. We compare results for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) to the combined pro forma results for the year ended December 31, 2019, and the combined pro forma results for the year ended December 31, 2019 to results for the year ended December 31, 2018. We present the information for the year ended December 31, 2019 in this format to assist readers in understanding and assessing the trends and significant changes in our results of operations on a comparable basis. We believe this presentation is appropriate because it provides a more meaningful comparison and more relevant analysis of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. The following table sets forth our historical results of operations for the periods indicated below (in millions):
(1)Successor financials reflect results for North America for the period from February 8, 2019 to December 31, 2019 for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019. Successor financials reflect results for International for the period from February 8, 2019 through November 30, 2019 for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019, due to International’s one-month lag reporting and the Take-Private Transaction which occurred on February 8, 2019.
(2)Predecessor financials reflect results for North America for the period from January 1, 2019 through February 7, 2019, and for International for the period from December 1, 2018 through January 7, 2019, due to International’s one-month lag reporting.
Notes for the Pro Forma Adjustments for the Year Ended December 31, 2019
(a)Pro forma adjustments are prepared to give effect to the Take-Private Transaction as if it had occurred on January 1, 2019. The adjustments are prepared in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation S-X. No adjustment has been made for the “lag” month of International results due to the impact of the one-month lag described in footnotes (1) and (2) to the above table.
(b)Represents deferred revenue purchase accounting adjustments as a result of the Take-Private Transaction. In accordance with ASC 805, deferred revenue is recognized at fair value representing direct costs to fulfill plus a reasonable margin. The pro forma adjustment reflects the purchase accounting associated with the Take-Private Transaction as if it had occurred on January 1, 2019.
(c)Consists of Successor transaction costs of $147.4 million included in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019, Predecessor transaction costs of $52.0 million included in the Predecessor period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019, $3.1 million related to amortization expense associated with deferred commissions and $10.4 million expense associated with the acceleration of Predecessor’s stock options and restricted stock units in connection with the Take-Private Transaction. The commission asset purchase accounting adjustment and one-time costs are directly attributable to the Take-Private Transaction.
(d)Represents incremental amortization expenses related to intangible assets recognized as a result of the Take-Private Transaction in accordance with ASC 805, giving effect to the purchase accounting associated with the Take-Private Transaction as if it had occurred on January 1, 2019. The pro forma incremental amortization expenses are calculated based on the fair value of the acquired assets.
(e)Represents incremental interest expenses resulting from the new debt issuance in connection with the Take-Private Transaction, giving effect to the transaction as if it had occurred on January 1, 2019.
(f)Eliminates one-time pension settlement charge of $85.8 million related to Dun & Bradstreet’s then-existing U.S. Non-Qualified Plan, eliminates $3.8 million of actuarial loss amortization as a result of unrecognized actuarial losses as of February 8, 2019 being set to zero in accordance with ASC 805 and records $0.1 million additional amortization expense related to deferred issuance costs associated with our new revolving credit facility, giving effect to the Take-Private Transaction as if it had occurred on January 1, 2019.
(g)Represents net tax effect of the above pro forma adjustments. A blended statutory tax rate of 22.3% is applied to the pro forma adjustments.
(h)Provides for additional preferred dividends for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019, giving effect to the Take-Private Transaction as if it had occurred on January 1, 2019.
Key Performance Measures
Management, including our CODMs, evaluates the financial performance of our businesses based on a variety of key indicators. These indicators include the non-GAAP measures adjusted revenue, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin and adjusted net income. Adjusted results are non-GAAP measures that adjust for certain acquisition and divestiture related revenue and expenses (such as banker fees, legal fees, due diligence, retention payments and contingent consideration adjustments), restructuring charges, equity-based compensation, and non-core gains and charges that are not in the normal course of our business (such as gains and losses on sales of businesses, impairment charges, effect of significant changes in tax laws and material tax and legal settlements). In addition, we isolate the effects of changes in foreign exchange rates on our revenue growth because we believe it is useful for investors to be able to compare revenue from one period to another, both after and before the effects of foreign exchange rate changes. The change in revenue performance attributable to foreign currency rates is determined by converting both our prior and current periods’ foreign currency by a constant rate. As a result, we monitor our adjusted revenue growth both after and before the effects of foreign exchange rate changes.
The table below sets forth our key performance measures for the periods indicated (amounts in millions, except per share amounts):
Reconciliations of the above non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures are presented in the tables below (in millions, except per share amounts):
Revenue
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus Year Ended December 31, 2019
Total revenue was $1,738.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), $1,413.9 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), and $178.7 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor). Total revenue increased $324.2 million, or 23%, and $1,559.4 million, or 873%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The increase was primarily due to the impact of the partial period results reflected in each of the prior year periods resulting from the Take-Private Transaction. In addition, revenue was reduced by $21.1 million and $138.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) and for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), respectively, as a result of deferred revenue adjustments arising from the Take-Private Transaction. Revenue for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) was reduced by $25.9 million due to the International lag adjustment.
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) increased $161.5 million, or 10% (both after and before the effect of foreign exchange), compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis. The increase was primarily due to the net impact of lower purchase accounting deferred revenue adjustments of $133.8 million (inclusive of pro forma deferred revenue adjustment), which had an impact of approximately eight percentage points on the year over year increase, and the International lag adjustment of $25.9 million included in the prior year period which had an impact of approximately two percentage points on the year over year increase. Total segment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) increased $1.8 million, or less than 1% (both after and before the effect of foreign exchange), compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis, driven by a decrease in North America total revenue of $4.8 million, or less than 1% (both after and before the effect of foreign exchange) and an increase in International total revenue of $6.6 million, or 2% (1% increase before the effect of foreign exchange).
Revenue by segment was as follows (in millions):
(1)See further details discussed in notes to “GAAP Results,” for the Pro Forma Adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2019 included elsewhere within Item 7.
(2)Revenue for Corporate and other represents deferred revenue purchase accounting and International lag adjustments recorded in accordance with GAAP related to the Take-Private Transaction and recent acquisitions.
North America Segment
For the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), North America revenue increased $143.4 million, or 11%, and $1,311.7 million, or 886%, compared to the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The increase was primarily due to the impact of the partial period results reflected in each of the prior year periods resulting from the Take-Private Transaction.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, North America revenue decreased $4.8 million, or less than 1% (both after and before the effect of foreign exchange) compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis. See further discussion below on revenue by solutions.
Finance & Risk
For the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), North America Finance & Risk revenue increased $82.9 million, or 11%, and $730.7 million, or 910%, compared to the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The increase was primarily due to the impact of the partial period results reflected in each of the prior year periods resulting from the Take-Private Transaction.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, North America Finance & Risk revenue increased $2.5 million, or less than 1% (both after and before the effect of foreign exchange) compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis. The increase was primarily due to higher subscription-based revenue of approximately $30 million, partially offset by lower revenue of approximately $17 million of lower usage, primarily attributable to the impact of COVID-19 and lower revenue of approximately $11 million primarily due to structural changes we made within our legacy Credibility solutions and lower usage.
Sales & Marketing
For the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), North America Sales & Marketing revenue increased $60.5 million, or 10%, and $581.0 million, or 857%, compared to the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The increase was primarily due to the impact of the partial period results reflected in each of the prior year periods resulting from the Take-Private Transaction.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, North America Sales & Marketing revenue decreased $7.3 million, or 1% (both after and before the effect of foreign exchange) compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis. The decrease was primarily due to lower royalty revenue of approximately $20 million from Data.com legacy partnership along with lower usage revenue across our Sales & Marketing solutions partially due to the impact of COVID-19. The aforementioned decreases were partially offset by a net increase in revenue across our Sales & Marketing solutions of approximately $6 million largely attributable to our D&B Direct solution. In addition, revenue increased by $6.5 million from the acquisition of Lattice, which was acquired at the beginning of the third quarter of 2019.
International Segment
For the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), International revenue increased $63.0 million, or 27%, and $242.9 million, or 430%, compared to the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The increase was primarily due to the impact of the partial period results reflected in each of the prior year periods resulting from the Take-Private Transaction.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, International revenue increased $6.6 million, or 2% (1% increase before the effect of foreign exchange) compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis. Excluding the positive impact of foreign exchange of $2.3 million, revenue increased $4.3 million. See further discussion below on revenue by solutions.
Finance & Risk
For the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), International Finance & Risk revenue increased $52.3 million, or 27%, and $200.2 million, or 462%, compared to the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The increase was primarily due to the impact of the partial period results reflected in each of the prior year periods resulting from the Take-Private Transaction.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, International Finance & Risk revenue increased $8.9 million, or 4% (3% increase before the effect of foreign exchange) compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis. Excluding the positive impact of foreign exchange of $1.9 million, increased revenue of $7.0 million was driven primarily by higher revenue of approximately $10 million from WWN alliances due to higher cross border data sales, higher revenue of approximately $1 million from increased sales of Risk solutions in the U.K., and $2 million from our Greater China market driven by solutions targeted at small businesses, partially offset by non-recurring revenues in the WWN alliances and UK business of approximately $6 million and lower usage volume in our Asia markets of approximately $2 million primarily due to the impact of COVID-19.
Sales and Marketing
For the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) International Sales & Marketing revenue increased $10.7 million, or 24%, and $42.7 million, or 327%, compared to the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The increase was primarily due to the impact of the partial period results reflected in each of the prior year periods resulting from the Take-Private Transaction.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, International Sales & Marketing revenue decreased $2.3 million, or 4% (5% decrease before the effect of foreign exchange) compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis. Excluding the positive impact of foreign exchange of $0.4 million, the $2.7 million decrease in revenue was driven primarily by lower product royalties from our WWN alliances of approximately $1 million, and lower usage volume in our Asia market of approximately $1 million primarily due to the impact of COVID-19.
Consolidated Operating Costs
Consolidated operating costs were as follows (in millions):
(1)See further details discussed in notes to “GAAP Results,” for the Pro Forma Adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2019 included elsewhere within Item 7.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses were $545.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), an increase of $97.1 million, or 22%, compared to the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) and an increase of $488.9 million, or 860%, compared to the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), primarily due to the impact of the partial period results reflected in each of the prior year periods resulting from the Take-Private Transaction.
Operating expenses increased $40.4 million, or 8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis, primarily due to additional costs of $11.6 million from the acquisition of Lattice, which was acquired at the beginning of the third quarter of 2019, increased fulfillment and data acquisition costs of
approximately $16 million, higher data processing costs of approximately $20 million and a technology transition cost of approximately $10 million. Also contributing to the increase was the International lag adjustment of $14.8 million included in the prior year associated with the Take-Private Transaction. The aforementioned increases were partially offset by lower costs of approximately $7 million resulting from ongoing cost management efforts, and lower net personnel expenses of approximately $20 million.
Selling and Administrative Expenses
Selling and administrative expenses were $557.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), a decrease of $93.4 million, or 14%, compared to the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), and an increase of $435.4 million, or 356%, compared to the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2020 (Predecessor). The decrease compared to the prior year Successor period was primarily due to the Successor transaction costs of $147.4 million included in the prior year period, partially offset by the impact of the partial period results reflected in the prior year period resulting from the Take-Private Transaction. The increase compared to the prior year Predecessor period was primarily due to the impact of partial period results reflected in the prior year period as a result of the Take-Private Transaction, partially offset by the Predecessor transaction costs of $52.0 million included in the prior year period.
Selling and administrative expenses decreased $2.9 million, or less than 1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis. Selling and administrative expenses were $560.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis, excluding one-time transaction costs directly attributable to the Take-Private Transaction. The decrease was primarily due to lower personnel, travel and marketing costs of approximately $38 million primarily resulting from ongoing cost management efforts and lower transition related bonus of approximately $19 million, substantially offset by higher equity-based compensation of approximately $32 million in the current year primarily related to options granted in connection with the IPO, the International lag adjustment of $8.3 million included in the prior year associated with the Take-Private Transaction, higher costs of approximately $6 million related to the effort to modernize our financial systems, and additional costs of approximately $5 million incurred in connection with the acquisition of Bisnode. In addition, increased costs of $3.0 million were related to the acquisition of Lattice, which was acquired at the beginning of the third quarter of 2019.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses were $536.9 million, $482.4 million and $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), and the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. Higher depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) compared to each of the prior year periods was primarily due to the impact of the partial period results reflected in each of the prior year periods as a result of the Take-Private Transaction. In addition, higher depreciation and amortization in each of the Successor periods was related to recognized intangible assets arising from the Take-Private Transaction.
Depreciation and amortization decreased $1.7 million, or less than 1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis, primarily due to the accelerating amortization method applied to the customer relationship and database intangible assets recognized in connection with the Take-Private Transaction, largely offset by higher amortization due to higher amortizable internally developed software during 2020 compared to the prior year period.
Restructuring Charges
We recorded restructuring charges of $34.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), $51.8 million for the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), and $0.1 million for the Predecessor period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019, respectively. Higher restructuring charges in the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 was as a result of the restructuring plan management implemented after the Take-Private Transaction to remove duplicate headcount, reduce future operating expenses, and improve operational performance and profitability. These initiatives have resulted in approximately $241 million of net annualized run-rate savings as of December 31, 2020. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail of restructuring charges.
Operating Income (Loss)
Consolidated operating income was $63.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to operating loss of $220.0 million and $11.6 million the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019, and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019, respectively. Higher operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) was primarily due to Successor transaction costs of $147.4 million included in the prior year Successor period, the net impact of lower deferred revenue adjustments of $117.8 million and the net impact of partial period results reflected in the prior year period resulting from the Take-Private Transaction. Higher operating income for the Successor year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the Predecessor period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 was primarily due to the net impact of partial period results and the Predecessor transaction costs of $52.0 million reflected in the prior year Predecessor period.
Consolidated operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $63.0 million compared to consolidated operating loss of $79.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis, an improvement of $142.8 million, or 179%. The increase was primarily due to increased revenue of $161.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, largely as a result of the net impact of lower deferred revenue adjustments of $133.8 million (inclusive of pro forma deferred revenue adjustment), lower personnel, travel and marketing costs of approximately $55 million in the current year period primarily resulting from ongoing cost management efforts, lower restructuring charge of approximately $17 million and lower transition related bonus of approximately $19 million, partially offset by higher equity-based compensation of approximately $32 million primarily related to stock options granted on June 30, 2020 in connection with the IPO, increased technology costs of approximately $42 million related to data processing and data acquisition costs, a technology related transition cost of approximately $10 million in the current year period and higher operating loss of $5.3 million attributable to the acquisition of Lattice, which was acquired at the beginning of the third quarter of 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin by segment was as follows (amounts in millions):
(1)See further details discussed in notes to “GAAP Results,” for the Pro Forma Adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2019 included elsewhere within Item 7.
Consolidated
Consolidated adjusted EBITDA was $715.4 million, $502.1 million and $66.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), and the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. Higher adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) compared to each of the prior year periods was primarily due to the impact of the partial period results reflected in each of the prior year periods resulting from the Take-Private Transaction.
Consolidated adjusted EBITDA was $715.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to $552.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis, an increase of $163.0 million, or 30%. Consolidated adjusted EBITDA margin was 41.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 34.5% for the year
ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis, an improvement of 670 basis points. The improvement in adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to higher revenue of $161.5 million mainly due to the net impact of lower purchase accounting deferred revenue adjustments of $133.8 million (inclusive of pro forma deferred revenue adjustment), which had an impact of five percentage points on the year over year margin improvement. Also contributing to the improvement of the adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 is lower personnel, travel and marketing costs of approximately $55 million in the current year period primarily resulting from ongoing cost management efforts, partially offset by increased technology costs of approximately $42 million related to data processing and data acquisition costs.
North America Segment
North America adjusted EBITDA increased $6.5 million, or 1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis. Adjusted EBITDA margin increased 60 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year on a combined pro forma basis. The improvement in both adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin was due to lower operating costs primarily resulting from ongoing cost management, driven by lower net personnel expenses.
International Segment
International adjusted EBITDA decreased $3.7 million, or 4%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis. Adjusted EBITDA margin decreased 190 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis. The decrease in both adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin was primarily due to higher WWN alliances data expense.
Corporate and Other
Corporate adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) improved by $160.2 million, or 68%, compared to the prior year on a combined pro forma basis. The improvement was primarily due to the net impact of lower purchase accounting deferred revenue adjustments of $133.8 million (inclusive of pro forma deferred revenue adjustment), which had an impact of 35 percentage points on the year over year increase. Also contributing to the improvement in adjusted EBITDA was lower net personnel costs.
Interest Income (Expense) - Net
Interest income (expense) - net was as follows (in millions):
(1)See further details discussed in notes to “GAAP Results,” for the Pro Forma Adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2019 included elsewhere within Item 7.
Interest income decreased $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) compared to the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), primarily attributable to lower average interest rates on invested cash and one-time interest income related to the settlement fund in connection with the Take-Private Transaction recorded in the prior year Successor period.
Interest expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) and for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), compared to the Predecessor period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019. The increase was attributable to higher average amounts of debt outstanding, the write off of debt issuance costs and discount, and the impact of the partial period results reflected in the Predecessor period resulting from the Take-Private Transaction.
Interest expense decreased $67.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to the prior year on a combined pro forma basis, primarily due to lower interest rates in the year ended December 31, 2020 and lower debt outstanding subsequent to the IPO transaction, partially offset by the write off of debt issuance costs and discount. See Note 6 for further discussion.
Other Income (Expense) - Net
Other income (expense) - net was as follows (in millions):
(1)See further details discussed in notes to “GAAP Results,” for the Pro Forma Adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2019 included elsewhere within Item 7.
(2)Related to the make-whole provision associated with the Series A Preferred Stock. See Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements.
Non-operating pension income (expense) was an income of $45.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), an income of $35.9 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), and an expense of $85.7 million for the Predecessor period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor). A one-time settlement charge of $85.8 million related to our U.S. Non-Qualified plan was included in the period from January 1, 2019 to February 8, 2019 (Predecessor). Higher income for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) and the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) was also due to the elimination of actuarial loss amortization as a result of the application of purchase accounting in connection with the Take-Private Transaction. Excluding the impact of the one-time settlement charge and the actuarial loss amortization included in the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), both attributable to the Take-Private Transaction, non-operating pension income was $39.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis.
The change in fair value of make-whole derivative liability relates to the valuation of a derivative bifurcated in accordance with GAAP from the Series A Preferred Stock that was issued in February 2019 to finance the Take-Private Transaction. Beginning in November 2019, we determined that there was a more than remote likelihood that the Series A Preferred Stock would become redeemable before November 8, 2021, which would trigger a make-whole payment. We recorded a loss of $32.8 million and $172.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) and for the period from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), respectively, to adjust the fair value of the make-whole derivative liability based on management’s estimate of probability and timing of the triggering event associated with the make-whole derivative liability. Upon the closing of the IPO on July 6, 2020 (see further discussion in Note 2), we redeemed all of the outstanding Series A Preferred Stock as required by the Certificate of Designation. In addition, we made the total make-whole payment of $205.2 million.
The changes in miscellaneous other income (expense) - net of $43.3 million and $25.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively, were primarily driven by a gain associated with the change in fair value related to the foreign currency collar we entered into in connection with the Bisnode acquisition and foreign currency exchange gains related to the revaluation of our intercompany loans.
Provision for Income Taxes
(1)The impact was due to the establishment of a reserve for uncertain tax positions in our U.S. jurisdiction.
(2)The impact was related to non-deductible transaction costs associated with the Take-Private Transaction.
(3)The impact was related to deductible legacy transaction costs incurred in predecessor historical periods.
(4)The impact was related to the release of valuation allowance for net operating losses.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income (loss) attributable to Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc. (Successor) / The Dun & Bradstreet Corporation (Predecessor) was a net loss of $175.6 million, $674.0 million and $75.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), and the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The improvement of $498.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), was primarily due to:
•transaction costs of $147.4 million incurred in connection with the Take-Private Transaction included in the 2019 Successor period, inclusive of $56.3 million expense associated with incentive units granted to certain investors;
•lower net purchase accounting deferred revenue adjustment of $117.8 million;
•lower loss of $139.6 million in the year of December 31, 2020 (Successor) related to the change in the fair value of the make-whole derivative liability recorded in connection with the make-whole provision for the Series A Preferred Stock;
•higher gains of $43.3 million primarily resulting from fair value change related to the foreign currency collar we entered into in connection with the Bisnode acquisition and foreign currency exchange gains related to the revaluation of our intercompany loans;
•restructuring costs that were lower by $17.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor); and
•the remaining reduction in net loss attributable to the net impact resulting from the partial period results reflected in the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor);
•partially offset by,
•total expenses of $66.3 million recognized for the partial redemption of our 10.250% Senior Unsecured Notes and the 6.875% Senior Secured Notes in the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor);
•higher depreciation and amortization of $54.5 million in the current year; and
•higher equity-based compensation of approximately $32 million primarily due to options granted in connection with the IPO.
Higher net loss of $100.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) compared to the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) was primarily driven by the net impact of the partial period results reflected in the prior year Predecessor period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 resulting from the Take-Private Transaction.
Net income (loss) attributable to Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc. was a net loss of $175.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to net loss of $598.9 million for prior year on a combined pro forma basis. The improvement of $423.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to:
•improvement in operating income (loss) of $142.8 million in the current year largely due to lower deferred revenue purchase accounting adjustments and lower personnel and travel costs discussed in more detail within the operating income (loss) section of the MD&A;
•lower loss of $139.6 million in the year of December 31, 2020 (Successor) related to the change in the fair value of the make-whole derivative liability recorded in connection with the make-whole provision for the Series A Preferred Stock;
•lower interest expense of $67.6 million in the current year;
•lower preferred dividends of $63.6 million allocated to preferred stockholders in the current year;
•higher gains of $43.7 million primarily resulting from fair value change related to the foreign currency collar we entered into in connection with the Bisnode acquisition and foreign currency exchange gains related to the revaluation of our intercompany loans; and
•higher income tax benefit of $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) primarily related to the CARES Act;
partially offset by
•total expense of $66.3 million recognized for the partial redemption of our 10.250% Senior Unsecured Notes and the 6.875% Senior Secured Notes in the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor).
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings Per Share
Adjusted net income was $349.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) compared to $174.8 million for the prior year on a combined pro forma basis, an increase of $174.9 million, or 100%. Adjusted net earnings per share was $0.95 in the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) compared to $0.56 for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis, an increase of $0.39, or 71%. The increase was primarily driven by the net impact of lower deferred revenue adjustment in the current year, lower net personnel and travel costs primarily driven by ongoing cost management and lower interest expense, partially offset by higher technology costs primarily related to data processing and data acquisition costs discussed within the adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin section of the MD&A.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 versus Year Ended December 31, 2018
Revenue
Our total revenue was $1,413.9 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), $178.7 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and $1,716.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). Our total revenue for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) decreased $302.5 million, or 18%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The decrease was primarily due to the impact of the partial year results reflected in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 as a result of the Take-Private Transaction. In addition, revenue was reduced by $138.9 million for the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019, as a result of deferred revenue adjustments arising from the Take-Private Transaction. Revenue for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) was reduced by $25.9 million due to the International lag adjustment.
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis decreased $139.8 million, or 8% (both after and before the effect of foreign exchange), compared to the Predecessor revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018. Decrease in total revenue was primarily due to the negative impact of the $154.9 million purchase accounting deferred revenue adjustments arising from the Take-Private Transaction and the Lattice acquisition which had an impact of nine percentage points to the year over year decrease. In addition, revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis has one less month of International revenue of $25.9 million due to the impact on lag reporting arising from the Take-Private Transaction, which had an impact of 1.5 percentage points to the year over year decrease. The above decreases were partially offset by the net increase in our segment revenue consisting of increased North America revenue of $44.1 million, or 3% (both after and before the effect of foreign exchange), and a decreased International total revenue of $3.1 million, or 1% (2% increase before the effect of foreign exchange).
Revenue by segment was as follows (in millions):
(1)See further details discussed in notes to “GAAP Results,” for the Pro Forma Adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2019 included elsewhere within Item 7.
(2)Revenue for Corporate and other represents deferred revenue purchase accounting and International lag adjustments recorded in accordance with GAAP related to the Take-Private Transaction and recent acquisitions.
North America Segment
North America revenue was $1,316.5 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), $148.2 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and $1,420.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). North America revenue for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) decreased $104.1 million, or 7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The decrease was primarily due to the impact of the partial year results reflected in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 as a result of the Take-Private Transaction.
North America revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis increased $44.1 million, or 3% (both after and before the effect of foreign exchange), compared to the Predecessor revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to growth in both our Sales & Marketing and Finance & Risk solutions, as discussed below.
Finance & Risk
North America Finance & Risk revenue was $728.2 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), $80.4 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), and $792.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). North America Finance & Risk revenue for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) decreased $64.4 million, or 8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The decrease was primarily due to the impact of the partial year results reflected in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 as a result of the Take-Private Transaction.
North America Finance & Risk revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis increased $16.0 million, or 2% (both after and before the effect of foreign exchange), compared to the Predecessor revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to higher demand related to our Risk & Compliance businesses of approximately $11 million and our D&B Credibility products of approximately $4 million.
Sales & Marketing
North America Sales & Marketing revenue was $588.3 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), $67.8 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and $628.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). North America Sales & Marketing revenue for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) decreased $39.7 million, or 6%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The decrease was primarily due to the impact of the partial year results reflected in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 as a result of the Take-Private Transaction.
North America Sales & Marketing revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis increased $28.1 million, or 4% (both after and before the effect of foreign exchange), compared to the Predecessor revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to higher revenue in our Master Data solution of approximately $17 million. Revenue also increased by approximately $12 million from the acquisition of Lattice, which was acquired at the beginning of the third quarter of 2019.
International Segment
International revenue was $236.3 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), $56.4 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and $295.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). International revenue for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) decreased $59.5 million, or 20%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The decrease was primarily due to the impact of the partial year results reflected in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 as a result of the Take-Private Transaction.
International revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis decreased $3.1 million, or 1% (2% increase before the effect of foreign exchange), compared to the Predecessor revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018. The negative impact of foreign exchange was $9.5 million. Excluding the impact of foreign exchange, growth of $6.4 million was primarily due to increased revenue in our U.K. market driven by higher demand and usage related to our Finance & Risk solutions, including Risk & Compliance products, as discussed below.
Finance & Risk
International Finance & Risk revenue was $191.3 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), $43.4 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and $233.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). International Finance & Risk revenue for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) decreased $42.3 million, or 18%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The decrease was primarily due to the impact of the partial year results reflected in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 as a result of the Take-Private Transaction.
International Finance & Risk revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis increased $1.1 million, or less than 1% (4% increase before the effect of foreign exchange), compared to the Predecessor revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018. The negative impact of foreign exchange was $7.1 million. Excluding the impact of foreign exchange, growth of $8.2 million was driven primarily by our U.K. market from our D&B Finance Analytics and D&B Onboard products.
Sales & Marketing
International Sales & Marketing revenue was $45.0 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), $13.0 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and $62.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). International Sales & Marketing revenue for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) decreased $17.2 million, or 28%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The decrease was primarily due to the impact of the partial year results reflected in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 as a result of the Take-Private Transaction.
International Sales & Marketing revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis decreased $4.2 million, or 7% (3% decrease before the effect of foreign exchange), compared to the Predecessor revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018. The negative impact of foreign exchange was $2.4 million. Excluding the impact of foreign
exchange, $1.8 million of decline was primarily from our U.K. market, largely as a result of transferring legacy Avention contracts to our WWN alliances pursuant to pre-existing agreements governing partner exclusivity in certain territories.
Consolidated Operating Costs
Consolidated operating costs were as follows (in millions):
(1)See further details discussed in notes to “GAAP Results,” for the Pro Forma Adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2019 included elsewhere within Item 7.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses were $448.5 million, $56.7 million and $563.4 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), respectively. Operating expenses for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) decreased $114.9 million, or 20%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) primarily due to the impact of the partial year results reflected in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 as a result of the Take-Private Transaction.
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis decreased $58.2 million, or 10%, compared to the Predecessor operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2018. Excluding the International lag adjustment of $14.8 million, the decrease was primarily due to lower net personnel costs resulting from ongoing cost management efforts.
Selling and Administrative Expenses
Selling and administrative expenses were $651.2 million, $122.4 million and $610.0 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), respectively. Selling and administrative expenses for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) increased $41.2 million, or 7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) primarily due to the Successor transaction costs of $147.4 million, attributable to the Take-Private Transaction, included in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019, partially offset by the impact of the partial year results reflected in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019, also as a result of the Take-Private Transaction. For the 2019 Predecessor period, selling and administrative expenses decreased $487.6 million, or 80%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), primarily due to the impact of the partial year results included in the 2019 Predecessor period, partially offset by the Predecessor transaction costs of $52.0 million, attributable to the Take-Private Transaction.
Selling and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis decreased $49.3 million, or 8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). Combined pro forma selling and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $560.7 million, excluding one-time transaction costs directly attributable to the Take-Private Transaction. The decrease was primarily due to lower net personnel costs of approximately $39 million resulting from ongoing cost management efforts, lower professional fees of approximately $32 million and the International lag adjustment of $8.3 million, partially offset by higher transition related bonuses of approximately $38 million. One-time transaction costs primarily consisted of costs incurred related to sponsor fees, bank fees,
legal fees, costs associated with the acceleration of the vesting of the outstanding Predecessor’s equity-based incentive grants and other professional fees.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization were $482.4 million, $11.1 million and $88.7 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), respectively. Depreciation and amortization for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) increased $393.7 million, or 444%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) primarily due to the increase in the carrying values of amortizable recognized intangible assets arising from the Take-Private Transaction.
Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis increased $449.9 million, or 507%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The increase in depreciation and amortization was primarily due to the increase in the carrying values of amortizable intangible assets after the application of purchase accounting in connection with the Take-Private Transaction on February 8, 2019. Furthermore, additional pro forma amortization expense of $45.1 million was included in the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis, giving effect to the Take-Private Transaction as if it had occurred on January 1, 2019.
Restructuring Charge
We recorded restructuring charges of $51.8 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), $0.1 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and $25.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), respectively. Higher restructuring charges in the Successor period was as a result of the restructuring plan management implemented after the Take-Private Transaction to remove duplicate headcount, reduce future operating expenses, and improve operational performance and profitability. As of December 31, 2019, these initiatives have resulted in approximately $203 million of net annualized run-rate savings. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements.
Operating Income (Loss)
Consolidated operating loss was $220.0 million and $11.6 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively, compared to consolidated operating income of $428.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). Higher loss of $648.9 million, or 151%, during the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) was primarily due to the impact of the Take-Private Transaction, resulting in higher depreciation and amortization of approximately $404 million due to recognized intangible assets, reduction of revenue of approximately $139 million associated with deferred revenue fair value adjustment, and Successor transaction costs of $147.4 million, partially offset by the impact of the partial year results included in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019.
Consolidated operating loss was $79.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis compared to consolidated operating income of $428.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), a decrease of $508.7 million, or 119%. The decrease was primarily due to the negative impact of the application of purchase accounting of approximately $605 million primarily in connection with the Take-Private Transaction, resulting in the reduction of deferred revenue recognized as revenue and higher depreciation and amortization. Additionally, after the Take-Private Transaction, we incurred higher transition costs of approximately $38 million and higher restructuring costs of approximately $26 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis. These higher costs were partially offset by lower ongoing net personnel costs of approximately $57 million and professional costs of approximately $32 million, resulting from ongoing cost management efforts.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
Adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin by segment was as follows (amounts in millions):
(1)See further details discussed in notes to “GAAP Results,” for the Pro Forma Adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2019 included elsewhere within Item 7.
Consolidated
Consolidated adjusted EBITDA was $502.1 million, $66.3 million and $568.6 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), respectively. Consolidated adjusted EBITDA for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) decreased by $66.5 million, or 12%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), primarily due to the impact of deferred revenue purchase accounting adjustment of $138.9 million in connection with the Take-Private Transaction and the Lattice acquisition, which had an impact of 24 percentage points to the year over year decrease, partially offset by lower net personnel costs of approximately $73 million resulting from ongoing cost management efforts.
Consolidated adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis was $552.4 million, compared to $568.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), a decrease of $16.2 million, or 3%. The decrease was primarily due to the impact of deferred revenue purchase accounting adjustment of $154.9 million (inclusive of the pro forma deferred revenue adjustment), which had an impact of 27 percentage points to the year over year decrease, partially offset by higher segment revenue of approximately $41 million. The remaining increase was primarily due to lower operating costs resulting from ongoing cost management efforts. Consolidated adjusted EBITDA margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis was 34.5% compared to 33.1% for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), an increase of 140 basis points.
North America Segment
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis increased $114.0 million, or 20%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). Adjusted EBITDA margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis increased 660 basis points compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The improvement in both adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin was primarily due to lower net personnel costs of $69.3 million resulting from ongoing cost management efforts. Furthermore, higher revenue of $44.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis also contributed to the improvement of North America’s adjusted EBITDA.
International Segment
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis increased $7.3 million, or 8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). Adjusted EBITDA margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis increased 280 basis points, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The improvement in both adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin was primarily due to lower net personnel costs resulting from ongoing cost management efforts.
Corporate and Other
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis declined by $137.5 million, or 140%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The decrease was primarily attributable to the deferred revenue purchase accounting adjustment of $154.9 million (inclusive of pro forma deferred revenue adjustment) as a result of the Take-Private Transaction and the Lattice acquisition, partially offset by lower professional fees resulting from ongoing cost management efforts.
Interest Income (Expense)-Net
Interest income (expense) - net was as follows (amounts in millions):
(1)See further details discussed in notes to “GAAP Results,” for the Pro Forma Adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2019 included elsewhere within Item 7.
Interest income for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) increased $0.5 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), primarily due to higher average investable balances in the United States at higher interest rates, as well as one-time interest income related to the settlement fund in connection with the Take-Private Transaction, partially offset by the impact of the partial year results included in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019. Interest income increased $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The increase in interest income was primarily attributable to higher average investable balances in the United States at higher interest rates, as well as one-time interest income related to the settlement fund in connection with the Take-Private Transaction for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis.
Interest expense for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) increased $249.1 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), primarily due to higher average interest rates on our outstanding debt balances and higher average amounts of debt outstanding during the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019, partially offset by the partial year results included in the Successor period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019.
Interest expense increased $284.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The increase in interest expense was primarily attributable to higher average interest rates on our outstanding debt balances and higher average amounts of debt outstanding. In addition, additional pro forma interest expense of $29.7 million was included in the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis to give effect to the Take-Private Transaction as if it had occurred on January 1, 2019.
Other Income (Expense)-Net
Other income (expense) - net was as follows (amounts in millions):
(1)See further details discussed in notes to “GAAP Results,” for the Pro Forma Adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2019 included elsewhere within Item 7.
(2)Related to the make-whole provision associated with the Series A Preferred Stock. See Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements.
Non-operating pension income (expense) was an income of $35.9 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), an expense of $85.7 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), and an expense of $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). A one-time settlement charge of $85.8 million related to our U.S. Non-Qualified plan was included in the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor). Higher income for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) was primarily due to the elimination of actuarial loss amortization as a result of the application of purchase accounting in connection with the Take-Private Transaction. The higher income for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily driven by the elimination of actuarial loss amortization discussed above.
The change in fair value of make-whole derivative liability for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) only occurs in the Successor period as it relates to the valuation of a derivative bifurcated in accordance with GAAP from the Series A Preferred Stock that was issued in February 2019 to finance the Take-Private Transaction. Beginning in November 2019, we determined that there was a more than remote likelihood that the Series A Preferred Stock would become redeemable before November 8, 2021.
Higher miscellaneous other expense-net of $17.4 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) was primarily driven by higher foreign exchange loss in the current year period due to certain intercompany loan exposures no longer being hedged and higher dividend income from minority-interest investment included in the prior year period.
The increase in miscellaneous other expense-net of $17.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) was primarily due to the same reasons discussed above.
Provision for Income Taxes
(1)The impact was related to the reduction in the statutory U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% as a result of the 2017 Act.
(2)Expense in 2018 was due to lower rate differential between the U.S. tax rate and foreign rates in 2018 as compared to the prior year period as a result of the 2017 Act.
(3)The impact was primarily due to Canadian taxes paid on an intercompany dividend in 2017.
(4)The impact was due to the provisional toll charge recorded in 2017 and the incremental measurement period adjustments recorded in 2018 as a result of the 2017 Act.
(5)The impact was related to the 2017 Act recorded in the prior year period which did not reoccur in 2018.
(6)The impact was due to Internal Revenue Service approval of a tax accounting method change.
(7)The impact was due to the establishment of a reserve for uncertain tax positions in our U.S. jurisdiction.
(8)The impact was related to non-deductible transaction costs associated with the Take-Private Transaction.
(9)The impact was related to deductible legacy transaction costs incurred in predecessor historical periods.
(10)The impact was related to the release of valuation allowance for net operating losses.
Net Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations
Consolidated net income (loss) was a net loss of $553.5 million, a net loss of $74.8 million and net income of $294.3 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), respectively. Higher net losses for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) were primarily due to:
•the negative impact of the application of purchase accounting in connection with the Take-Private Transaction and the Lattice acquisition, resulting in the reduction of deferred revenue of approximately $139 million;
•higher depreciation and amortization of approximately $394 million;
•significant one-time transaction costs of approximately $147 million incurred in connection with the Take-Private Transaction in 2019 in the Successor period;
•higher interest expense of approximately $249 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) attributable to higher interest rates and higher debt balances related to the financing of the Take-Private Transaction;
• a change in fair value of the make-whole derivative liability expense of $172.4 million recorded in connection with the make-whole provision for the Series A Preferred Stock, and
• higher restructuring costs of approximately $26 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor); partially offset by
• higher tax benefit of approximately $200 million and lower ongoing net personnel costs and professional costs of approximately $89 million discussed above.
Loss in the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) was primarily driven by the pension settlement charge of $85.8 million and transaction costs of $52.0 million attributable to the Take-Private Transaction.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings per Share
Adjusted net income was $174.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis compared to $383.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), a decrease of $209.1 million, or 54%. Adjusted net earnings per share was $0.56 in the year ended December 31, 2019 on a combined pro forma basis compared to $1.22 for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor), a decrease of $0.66, or 54%. The decrease was primarily driven by the net impact of higher deferred revenue adjustment and higher interest expense in the current year, partially offset by higher tax benefit and lower personnel and travel costs primarily driven by ongoing cost management.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity consist of cash flows provided by operating activities, cash and cash equivalents on hand and our short-term borrowings under our senior secured credit facility. Our principal uses of liquidity are working capital, capital investments (including computer software), debt service and other general corporate purposes.
We believe that cash provided by operating activities, supplemented as needed with available financing arrangements, is sufficient to meet our short-term needs for at least the next twelve months, including restructuring charges, our capital investments, contractual obligations, interest payments and tax liabilities related to our distributed and undistributed foreign earnings. We continue to generate substantial cash from ongoing operating activities and manage our capital structure to meet short- and long-term objectives including investing in existing businesses and strategic acquisitions. In addition, we have the ability to use the short-term borrowings from the New Revolving Facility to supplement the seasonality in the timing of receipts in order to fund our working capital needs. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors that are difficult to predict, including the size, timing and structure of any future acquisitions, future capital investments and future results of operations.
On July 6, 2020, we completed an IPO and a concurrent private placement (see Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion). We raised net proceeds of $2,249.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and IPO related expenses. We used the net proceeds to redeem all of our Series A Preferred Stock and repay 40%, or $300 million, of our 10.250% Senior Unsecured Notes, plus to pay fees and expenses related to the repayment and accrued interest. See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion. As a result, our debt to EBITDA ratio and ongoing debt costs are lower. On July 9, 2020, our credit rating was upgraded to B+ from B- by S&P Global and on July 16, 2020, Moody’s upgraded our debt rating to a B2 from a B3. On August 20, 2020, Fitch upgraded our debt rating to B+ and subsequently to a BB- on September 18, 2020.
On September 11, 2020, an amendment was made to the existing credit agreement, specifically related to the New Revolving Facility, which increased the aggregate amount available under the New Revolving Facility from $400 million to $850 million, and extended the maturity date from February 8, 2024 to September 11, 2025, with a five year term.
On September 26, 2020, we repaid $280 million in aggregate principal amount of our 6.875% New Senior Secured Notes outstanding due August 15, 2026, and paid fees and expenses related to the repayment and accrued interest with a portion of the proceeds from our IPO.
On November 18, 2020, we amended our credit agreement dated February 8, 2019, specifically related to the Term Loan Facility. The amendment establishes Incremental Term Loans in an aggregate principal amount of $300 million. The proceeds of the Incremental Term Loans were used to finance a portion of the purchase price for the acquisition of the outstanding shares of Bisnode. See Note 23 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion on the Bisnode acquisition. The Incremental Term Loans have the same terms as the existing term loans. As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any outstanding borrowings under the Incremental Term Loans.
The COVID-19 global pandemic has caused disruptions in the economy and volatility in the financial markets, and considerable uncertainty regarding its duration and the speed of recovery. The extent of the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic on our operations and financial performance depends on the effects on our clients and vendors, which are uncertain at this time and cannot be predicted. Given the current economic condition, we have been carefully monitoring the COVID-19 global pandemic and its impact on our business including, but not limited to, implementing additional operational processes to monitor client sales and collections, taking precautionary measures during 2020 to ensure sufficient liquidity, including a proactive draw of $200 million on our New Revolving Facility to preserve cash flow flexibility at the onset of the pandemic, which was repaid, and adjusting operations to ensure business continuity. While our productivity and financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2020 have not been impacted materially by the pandemic, the ultimate impact will be difficult to predict, and depends on, among many factors, the duration of the pandemic and its ultimate impact to our clients, vendors, and the financial markets.
In response to liquidity issues that businesses are facing as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the CARES Act was signed into law on March 27, 2020, by the U.S. government. Among many other reliefs, the Act provides assistance to businesses through the modification of rules related to net operating losses and interest expense deductions. Many of these modifications are designed to provide critical cash flow and liquidity to businesses during the COVID-19 pandemic, including allowing the amendment of prior tax returns to obtain tax refunds. The Act also allows for the deferral of 2020 employer FICA payroll taxes to 2021 and 2022 as well as delaying any federal tax payments due April 15, 2020 and June 15, 2020 until July 15, 2020. The Company has utilized the relief opportunities provided by the Act. The application of the Act will result in a net cash benefit of $98.4 million. On January 22, 2021 we received $66.2 million of the $98.4 million due to us. We have also deferred 2020 FICA payroll tax payments of approximately $9 million, with half due at the end of 2021 and the remaining half at the end of 2022.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $354.5 million, of which $149.4 million was held by our foreign operations. We intend to reinvest indefinitely all earnings post 2017 from our China and India subsidiaries. Cash held in our China and India operations totaled $44.4 million as of December 31, 2020.
In connection with the Take-Private Transaction on February 8, 2019, we received equity funding of $3,076.8 million and entered into credit facility arrangements and issued notes, resulting in total principal borrowings of $4,043.0 million. The proceeds were used to (i) finance the consummation of the Take-Private Transaction, (ii) repay in full all outstanding indebtedness under the Prior Term Loan Facility and Prior Revolving Credit Facility, (iii) fund the redemption of the Predecessor senior notes and (iv) pay related fees, costs, premiums and expenses in connection with these transactions.
On June 12, 2019, in connection with the acquisition of Lattice, Star Parent issued capital call notices to its Class A and B unit owners to raise up to $100.0 million by July 15, 2019. Star Parent received the total capital funding of $100.0 million during July 2019 from the Class A and B unit owners. The funding was ultimately contributed to Dun & Bradstreet as capital surplus.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Information about our cash flows, by category, is presented in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus Year Ended December 31, 2019
Higher operating cash flows in the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), was primarily driven by the net impact of partial period results reflected in the prior year period and transaction cost payments and pension settlement payments in connection with the Take-Private Transaction on February 8, 2019 totaling approximately $197 million during the 2019 Successor period.
Higher operating cash flows in the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), was primarily driven by the net impact of partial period results reflected in the prior year period and transaction cost payments and pension settlement payments in connection with the Take-Private Transaction on February 8, 2019 totaling approximately $243 million during the 2019 Predecessor period, partially offset by the effect of higher interest payments primarily due to higher debt balances also as a result of the Take-Private Transaction.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 versus Year Ended December 31, 2018
Net cash used in operating activities was $63.0 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) and $65.4 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor). Net cash provided by operating activities was $325.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The decrease in operating cash flows in the 2019 Successor period and 2019 Predecessor period, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) was primarily driven by transaction cost payments and pension settlement payments in connection with the Take-Private Transaction, totaling approximately $197 million during the 2019 Successor period and approximately $243 million during the 2019 Predecessor period. In addition, we had higher interest payments of $178.6 million during the 2019 Successor period, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor).
Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus Year Ended December 31, 2019
Lower net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) was primarily driven by the net payment of $6,078 million in the prior year Successor period to acquire the Predecessor company in connection with the Take-Private Transaction, including payments to settle the Predecessor line of credit and term loan.
Higher net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) was primarily driven by the net payments of $20.6 million to acquire Orb and coAction in the current year period and higher spending of approximately $116 million on capital expenditures and computer software primarily due to the net impact of partial period results reflected in the prior year period.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 versus Year Ended December 31, 2018
Net cash used in investing activities was $6,154.6 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor), $5.3 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) and $65.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The increase in net cash used in the 2019 Successor period was primarily driven by the net payment of $6,078 million to acquire the Predecessor company in connection with the Take-Private Transaction and the acquisition of Lattice, including payments to settle the Predecessor line of credit and term loan.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus Year Ended December 31, 2019
The decrease in net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to net cash provided by financing activities in the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) was primarily related to the raising of equity and debt financing for the Take-Private Transaction, totaling $7,046.6 million in the prior year period. Also contributing to the decrease was payment of $1,273.1 million for the redemption (inclusive of make-whole liability) of the Series A Preferred Stock, partial repayments of our 10.250% New Senior Unsecured Notes and 6.875% New Senior Secured Notes totaling $630 million (inclusive of early payment premium), and the repayment of $63.0 million related to the New Repatriation Bridge Facility in the current year period. These decreases were partially offset by net proceeds from the IPO transaction in the current year period of $2,248.2 million (inclusive of $0.9 million IPO costs paid prior to the IPO transaction date) and payments of $625.1 million to retire Predecessor Senior Notes in the prior year period.
The increase in net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), compared to net cash provided by financing activities in the prior year period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor) was primarily due to net proceeds of $2,248.2 million from the IPO transaction in the current year, partially offset by payment of $1,273.1 million for the redemption (inclusive of make-whole liability) of the Series A Preferred Stock, partial repayments of our 10.250% New Senior Unsecured Notes and 6.875% New Senior Secured Notes totaling $630 million (inclusive of early payment premium), and preferred dividend payments of $64.1 million in the current year.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 versus Year Ended December 31, 2018
Net cash provided by financing activities was $6,321.8 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (Successor) and $96.9 million for the period from January 1, 2019 to February 7, 2019 (Predecessor), compared to net cash used in financing activities of $609.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor). The increase in cash provided by financing activities during the 2019 Successor period, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) was primarily related to the raising of equity and debt financing for the Take-Private Transaction, totaling $7,046.6 million. The increase in cash provided by financing activities during the 2019 Predecessor period, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) was primarily driven by payments during 2018 to reduce borrowings related to the Predecessor debt.
Below is a summary of our borrowings as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
New Senior Secured Credit Facilities
Borrowings under the New Senior Secured Credit Facilities bear interest at a rate per annum equal to an applicable margin over a LIBOR rate for the interest period relevant to such borrowing, subject to interest rate floors, and they are secured by substantially all of the Company’s assets.
Other details of the New Senior Secured Credit Facilities (See Note 6 for further discussion):
•As required by the credit agreement, beginning June 30, 2020, the principal amount of the New Term Loan Facility began to be paid down in equal quarterly installments in an aggregate annual amount equal to 1.00% of the original principal amount, with the balance being payable on February 8, 2026. The margin to LIBOR was 500 basis points initially. On February 10, 2020, an amendment was made to the existing credit agreement, specifically related to the New Term Loan Facility, which reduced the margin to LIBOR to 400 basis points. Subsequent to the IPO transaction, the spread was further reduced by 25 basis points to 375 basis points. The interest rate associated with the New Term Loan Facility at December 31, 2020 was 3.898% and at December 31, 2019 was 6.792%.
• The margin to LIBOR for borrowings under the New Revolving Facility was 350 basis points initially. Subsequent to the IPO transaction, the spread was reduced by 25 basis points to 325 basis points, subject to a ratio-based pricing grid.
•The New Repatriation Bridge Facility had a principal balance of $63.0 million and matured on February 7, 2020. The margin to LIBOR was 350 basis points. The interest rate associated with the Repatriation Bridge Facility at December 31, 2019 was 5.292%. The outstanding balance of the New Repatriation Bridge Facility was fully repaid in February 2020.
New Senior Notes
The New Senior Secured Notes and the New Senior Unsecured Notes may be redeemed at our option, in whole or in part, following specified events and on specified redemption dates and at the redemption prices specified in the indenture governing the New Senior Secured Notes and the New Senior Unsecured Notes.
The New Senior Secured Credit Facilities and Successor senior notes contain certain covenants that limited our ability to enter into certain transactions. In addition, the New Revolving Facility contains a financial covenant requiring the maintenance of debt to EBITDA ratios which are defined in the facility credit agreement in effect. We were in compliance with the respective financial and non-financial covenants at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Tax Liability under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
The enactment of the law commonly known as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “2017 Act”) resulted in a significant impact on our financial statements. One of the key provisions in the 2017 Act was to impose a one-time mandatory U.S. tax on accumulated undistributed foreign earnings as of December 31, 2017. The 2017 Act also allows us to remit our future earnings to the United States without incurring additional U.S. taxes. As of December 31, 2020 (Successor), our total tax liability associated with the 2017 Act was $55.0 million, of which $5.2 million was included in “Accrued Income Tax” and $49.8 million was included in “Other Non-Current Liabilities.” As of December 31, 2019 (Successor), our total tax liability associated with the 2017 Act was $60.2 million, of which $5.2 million was included in “Accrued Income Tax” and $55.0 million was included in “Other Non-Current Liabilities.”
Redeemable Preferred Stock
In connection with the Take-Private Transaction on February 8, 2019, Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc. issued 1,050,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock for $1,028.4 million, net of issuance discount of $21.6 million. Together with other financing sources, the net proceeds were contributed to us to consummate the Take-Private Transaction. Each outstanding share of Series A Preferred Stock had a liquidation preference equal to the sum of (a) the stated value ($1,000.00 per share) (the "Stated Value") plus (b) all accrued, accumulated and unpaid dividends. The Series A Preferred Stock was entitled to cumulative dividend at (a) 12% per annum from February 7, 2019 to February 7, 2027; (b) 13% per annum from February 8, 2027 to February 8, 2028; and (c) 14% per annum from and after February 8, 2028. Unpaid dividends were accumulated and compounded quarterly regardless of whether they are declared. The Series A Preferred Stock (inclusive of unpaid dividends) had a ranking senior and in priority of payment to all other capital stock in any liquidation or winding up of our Company.
The Series A Preferred Stock was redeemable upon the occurrence of a material event including a qualified IPO at applicable price depending on when the redemption event occurs. Upon the closing of the IPO on July 6, 2020 (see further discussion in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statement), we redeemed all of the outstanding Series A Preferred Stock as required by the Certificate of Designation. In addition, we made the total make-whole payment of $205.2 million.
On May 14, 2020, March 4, 2020, December 16, 2019, July 30, 2019 and May 31, 2019, the board of directors of Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc. declared a cash dividend of $30.51 per share to all holders of shares of Series A Preferred Stock, respectively. An aggregate amount of $32.1 million, $32.0 million, $32.0 million, $32.1 million, $10.7 million and $21.3 million was paid on June 26, 2020, March 27, 2020, December 27, 2019, September 27, 2019, June 28, 2019 and on June 19, 2019, respectively.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 except as noted below:
(1)Because future cash flows are uncertain, other non-current liabilities are excluded from the table.
(2)Amounts include interest. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail on the existing debt as of December 31, 2020. Amounts reflect $300 million draw down of the incremental term loan on January 8, 2021.
(3)See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail.
(4)See Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail.
(5)Represents projected contributions to our U.S. Qualified and Non-U.S. defined benefit plans as well as projected benefit payments related to our unfunded plans, including our postretirement benefit plans. The projected contributions are estimated based on the same assumptions used to measure our benefit obligation at the end of 2020 and include benefits attributable to estimated future employee service. A closed group approach is used in calculating the projected benefit payments, assuming only the participants who are currently in the valuation population are included in the projection and the projected benefits continue for up to approximately 99 years. These estimates will change as a result of changes in the economy, as well as other mandated assumption changes that could occur in future years.
(6)We have a total amount of unrecognized tax benefits of $18.8 million for the year ending December 31, 2020. Although we do not anticipate payments within the next 12 months for these matters, these could require the aggregate use of cash totaling $19.7 million. As we cannot make reliable estimates regarding the timing of the cash flows by period, we have included unrecognized tax benefits within the "All Other" column in the table above.
(7)Related to the one-time mandatory tax and foreign withholding tax on the cumulative undistributed earnings from our non-U.S. subsidiaries as a result of the enactment of the 2017 Act.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any transactions, obligations or relationships that could be considered off-balance sheet arrangements, other than our foreign exchange forward contracts and interest rate swaps discussed in Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements.