ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. See the section entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the section entitled “Risk Factors” or elsewhere in this Report. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to “we”, “us”, “our”, “Danimer”, “Danimer Scientific”, and the “Company” are intended to mean the business and operations of Danimer and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Introductory Note
On December 29, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), Live Oak Acquisition Corp. (“Live Oak”), consummated the merger pursuant to that certain Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of October 3, 2020 (as amended by Amendment No.1 thereto, dated as of October 8, 2020, and Amendment No. 2 thereto, dated as of December 11, 2020, collectively the “Merger Agreement”), by and among Live Oak, Green Merger Corporation, a Georgia corporation (“Merger Sub”), Meredian Holdings Group, Inc., a Georgia corporation (“Meredian Holdings Group” or “MHG”), Live Oak Sponsor Partners, LLC, as representative for Live Oak for certain purposes described in the Merger Agreement, and John A. Dowdy, Jr., as representative of the shareholders of Legacy Danimer for certain purposes described in the Merger Agreement. Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, a business combination between the Company and Legacy Danimer was effected through the merger of Merger Sub with and into Legacy Danimer, with Legacy Danimer surviving as the surviving company and as a wholly owned subsidiary of Live Oak (the “Merger” and, collectively with the other transactions described in the Merger Agreement, the “Business Combination”). On the Closing Date, and in connection with the closing of the Business Combination (the “Closing”), the registrant changed its name from Live Oak Acquisition Corp. to Danimer Scientific, Inc. (“Danimer”).
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations describes the business historically operated by Meredian Holdings Group and its subsidiaries (“Legacy Danimer”) under the “Danimer Scientific” name as an independent enterprise prior to the Business Combination.
Overview
We are a performance polymer company specializing in bioplastic replacement for traditional petroleum-based plastics. Through our principal operating subsidiaries, Meredian, Inc., Danimer Scientific, L.L.C. and Danimer Scientific Kentucky, Inc., we bring together innovative technologies to deliver renewable, environmentally friendly bioplastic materials to global consumer product companies. We believe that we are the only commercial company in the bioplastics market to combine the production of a base polymer along with the reactive extrusion capacity in order to give customers a “drop-in” replacement for a wide variety of petroleum-based plastics.
PHA-Based Resins
We are a leading producer of polyhydroxyalkanoate (“PHA”), a new, 100% biodegradable plastic feedstock alternative sold under the proprietary Nodax® brand name, for usage in a wide variety of plastic applications including water bottles, straws, food containers, among other things. We originally acquired the technology to produce PHA from Procter & Gamble in 2007. PHA is made through a fermentation process where bacteria consume vegetable oil and make PHA within their cell membranes as energy reserves. We harvest the PHA from the bacteria, purify and filter the bioplastic before extruding the PHA into pellets, which we sell to converters. PHAs are a complete replacement for petroleum-based plastics where the convertors do not have to purchase new equipment to switch to the new biodegradable plastic. Utilizing PHA as a base resin significantly expands the number of potential applications for bioplastics in the industry and enables us to produce resin that is not just compostable, but also fully biodegradable.
Having successfully scaled up PHA production from the laboratories to a contract manufacturer and later to our own commercial development plant, we recently have begun making PHA on a commercial scale. In December 2018, we acquired a fermentation facility in Winchester, Kentucky (the “Kentucky Facility”) and simultaneously entered into a long-term sale and leaseback transaction with a large, diversified commercial property REIT with respect to the Kentucky Facility and certain facilities located in Bainbridge, Georgia. We embarked on a two-phase commissioning strategy for the Kentucky Facility. We commenced scale-up fermentation runs in December 2019 and had completed several components of the Phase I improvements by the end of the third quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had invested $54.7 million since the acquisition of the Kentucky Facility, excluding capitalized interest. Of this total, $7.3 million in real-estate improvements for the Kentucky Facility were reimbursed by the REIT in May 2020 in exchange for an increase in the monthly lease payment for the Kentucky Property. Once Phase I is producing at full capacity, we expect to produce approximately 20 million pounds of finished product per year. We believe that the capacity of the plant can be expanded by another 45 million pounds of finished product, bringing total plant capacity up to 65 million pounds per year, by investing approximately $100 million for the Phase II expansion. We have commenced Phase II construction and expect to complete the buildout during the second quarter of 2022. We have invested $16.6 million in the Phase II expansion through December 31, 2020.
PLA-Based Resins
Since 2004, we have been producing proprietary plastics using a natural plastic called Polylactic Acid (“PLA”) as a base resin. While PLA is produced by other biopolymer manufacturers, PLA has limited functionality in its neat (“unformulated”) form. We purchase PLA and formulate it into bioplastic applications by leveraging the expertise of our chemists and our proprietary reactive extrusion process. Our formulated PLA products allow many companies to begin to use renewable and compostable plastics to meet their customers’ growing sustainability needs. We were the first company in the world to create a bioplastic suitable for coating disposable paper cups to withstand the temperatures of hot liquids such as coffee. We have expanded our product portfolio and now supply customers globally.
Research and Development (“R&D”) and Other Services
Our technology team partners with global consumer product companies to develop custom biopolymer formulations for specific applications. R&D contracts are designed to develop a formulated resin using PHA, PLA and other biopolymers that can be run efficiently on existing conversion equipment. We expect successful R&D contracts to culminate in supply agreements with the customers. Our R&D services not only provide revenue but also a pipeline of future products.
In addition to producing our own products, we also toll manufacture for customers that need the unique extruder or reactor setup we employ for new or scale-up production. Our specialty tolling services primarily involve processing customer-owned raw materials to assist them in addressing their extrusion capacity constraints or manufacturing challenges.
Comparability of Financial Information
Our results of operations and statements of assets and liabilities may not be comparable between periods as a result of the Business Combination.
We were originally known as Live Oak Acquisition Corp. On December 29, 2020, Live Oak consummated the merger of its wholly owned subsidiary, Merger Sub, with and into Legacy Danimer, pursuant to the Merger Agreement. In connection with the Closing, Live Oak changed its name to Danimer Scientific, Inc.
Following the Closing, Legacy Danimer was deemed the accounting acquirer in accordance with the criteria outlined in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805, Business Combinations, and the Business Combination is accounted for as a reverse recapitalization. Under this method of accounting, Live Oak is treated as the acquired company for financial statement reporting purposes and the successor registrant for SEC purposes, meaning that Legacy Danimer’s financial statements for previous periods are disclosed in our periodic reports filed with the SEC.
The most significant change in our reported financial position is an increase in cash and cash equivalents (as compared to our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2019) of $371.3 million. Total non-recurring transaction costs incurred in connection with the Business Combination were $27.1 million, of which $22.8 million were recorded as an offset to equity. Transaction costs of $6.7 million were previously recorded in the legal acquirer’s results and therefore are not reflected in the amounts discussed above. See Note 3 to our 2020 Consolidated Financial Statements.
As a result of the Merger, Danimer is an SEC-registered and NYSE-listed company, which will require us to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting and legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
Key Factors Affecting Operating Results
We believe that our performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section of this Report titled “Risk Factors.”
Factors Impacting Our Revenue
We derive our revenue from product sales of PLA- and PHA-based resins as well as from services such as R&D and tolling.
Our product revenue is significantly impacted by our ability to successfully scale the Kentucky Facility for commercial production of PHA. The completion of Phase I and Phase II of the Kentucky Facility will significantly increase our capacity to produce and sell PHA, which is in high demand by our customers. Using our PHAs as base resin significantly expands the number of potential applications for bioplastics and also enables us to produce a resin that is not just compostable, but also fully biodegradable. Since we just recently introduced our PHA on a commercial scale, our product revenues are also impacted by the timing and success of customer trials as well as product degradation testing and certifications. Our product revenue from PLA-based resins is primarily impacted by the effective launch of new product offerings in new markets by our customers as well as the ability of our suppliers to continue to grow their production capacity of neat PLA. Finally, our product revenue is impacted by our ability to deliver biopolymer formulations that can be efficiently run on customer conversion equipment and meet customer application specifications and requirements. Revenue from product sales is generally recognized when the finished products are shipped to customers, as this represents the transfer of control of the product. Due to the highly specialized nature of our products, returns are infrequent and we do not offer rebates or volume discounts that would impact selling prices.
Our services revenue is primarily impacted by the timing of, and execution against, customer contracts. Research and development services generally involve milestone-based contracts to develop PHA-based solutions designed to a customer’s specifications and may involve single or multiple performance obligations with the transaction price being allocated to each performance obligation based on the standalone selling price of the performance obligation. Service revenues are recognized over time with progress measured using an input method based on personnel costs incurred to date as a percentage of total estimated personnel costs for each performance obligation within the contract. Upon the completion of research and development contracts, customers generally have the option to enter into long-term supply agreements with us for the developed product solutions. Our ability to grow our services revenue depends on our ability to develop a track record of developing successful biopolymer formulations for our customers and our ability to effectively transition those customer formulations to commercial scale production.
Factors Impacting Our Operating Expenses
Costs of revenue
Cost of revenue is comprised of costs of goods sold and direct costs associated with research and development service projects. Costs of goods sold consists of raw materials and ingredients, labor costs including stock-based compensation for production staff, related production overhead, rent and depreciation costs. Costs associated with research and development service contracts include labor costs, related overhead costs and outside consulting and testing fees incurred in direct relation to the specific service contract.
Selling, general and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative expense consists of salaries, marketing expense, corporate administration expenses, stock-based compensation not allocated to research and development or costs of revenue personnel, and elements of depreciation, rent and facility expenses that are not directly attributable to direct costs of production or associated with research and development activities.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense include salaries, stock-based compensation, third-party consulting and testing fees, and rent and related facility expenses directly attributable to research and development activities not associated with revenue generating service projects.
Impacts Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 to be a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. In response, government authorities have issued an evolving set of mandates, including requirements to shelter-in-place, curtail business operations, restrict travel and avoid physical interaction. These mandates and the continued spread of COVID-19 have disrupted normal business activities in many segments of the global economy, resulting in weakened economic conditions. Government mandates have been lifted by certain public authorities and economic conditions have improved in certain sectors of the economy. Certain regions of the world have experienced increasing numbers of COVID-19 cases, however, and if this continues and if public authorities intensify efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19, normal business activity may be further disrupted and economic conditions could weaken.
Our ability to continue to operate without any significant negative impacts will in part depend on our ability to protect our employees and our supply chain. We have endeavored to follow actions recommended by governments and health authorities to protect our employees, with particular measures in place for those working in our manufacturing and laboratory facilities. We have been able to broadly maintain our operations, and we intend to continue to work with our stakeholders (including customers, employees, suppliers and local communities) to responsibly address this global pandemic. However, uncertainty resulting from the global pandemic could result in an unforeseen disruption to our supply chain (for example a closure of a key manufacturing or distribution facility or the inability of a key material or transportation supplier to source and transport materials) that could impact our operations.
Although our revenue has continued to grow during the continuing global pandemic, we believe that some of our customers have deferred decision making and commitments regarding future orders and new contracts. The global pandemic has also resulted in delays in performing trials with new customers and obtaining certification for new products. During this period and especially prior to the merger, we have delayed certain capital expenditures in order to conserve financial resources, resulting in a slower than expected scale up of the Kentucky Facility. We have not observed any material impairments of our assets or a significant change in the fair value of assets due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
For additional information on risk factors that could impact our results, please refer to “Risk Factors” located elsewhere in this Report.
Current Developments
On March 29, 2021, we announced that we have selected Bainbridge, Georgia as the site of our planned greenfield PHA plant. We anticipate this 2 million square foot facility will require a capital investment of approximately $700 million and employ approximately 400 people when fully operational. This facility has a planned annual production capacity of approximately 250 million pounds and we expect it will be operational in mid-to-late 2023.
Critical accounting policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported periods. The more critical accounting estimates include estimates related to revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, and leases. We also have other key accounting policies, which involve the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that are significant to understanding our results, which are described in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 appearing elsewhere in this Report.
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue from product sales and services in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). This standard applies to all contracts with customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards, such as leases, insurance, collaboration arrangements and financial instruments. Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To assess and determine when and how to recognize revenue, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once we determine that the contract is within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine which are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
We derive our revenues from: 1) product sales of developed compostable resins based on polyactic acid (“PLA”), polyhydroxyalkanoates (“PHA”), and other renewable materials; and 2) research and development (R&D) services related to developing customized formulations of biodegradable resins based on PHA as well as tolling revenues.
We generally produce and sell finished products, for which we recognize revenue upon shipment, which is typically when control of the underlying product is transferred to the customer and all other revenue recognition criteria have been met. Due to the highly specialized nature of our products, returns are infrequent, and therefore we do not estimate amounts for sales returns and allowances. We offer a standard quality assurance warranty related to the fitness of our finished goods. There are no forms of variable consideration such as discounts, rebates, or volume discounts that we estimate to reduce our transaction price.
R&D service revenues generally involve milestone-based contracts under which we work with a customer to develop a PHA-based specific solution designed to the customer’s specifications, which may involve a single or multiple performance obligations. When an R&D contract has multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations utilizing a cost-plus approach to estimate the stand-alone selling price, which contemplates the level of effort to satisfy the performance obligations, and then allocate the transaction price to each of the performance obligations based on the relative percentage of the stand-alone selling price. We recognize revenue for these R&D services over time with progress measured utilizing an input method based on personnel costs incurred to date as a percentage of total estimated personnel costs for each performance obligation identified within the contract. Upon completion of the R&D services, the customers have an option to enter into long-term supply agreements with us for the product(s) that were developed within the respective contracts. We concluded these customer options were marketing offers, not separate performance obligations, since the options did not provide a material right to any of our customers.
Stock-based compensation
Awards to employees have been granted with either service-based conditions only or market-based and service-based conditions that affect vesting. Service-based condition only awards have graded vesting features, usually over three-year periods. Expense associated with service-based only condition awards with graded vesting features is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Expense associated with market-based and service-based vesting conditions is recognized on a straight-line basis over the longest of the explicit, implicit or derived service period of the award.
Stock-based compensation awards have a contractual life that ranges from less than one year to ten years and are recognized in the Consolidated Financial Statements based on their grant date fair value. The fair value of each stock option award is estimated using an appropriate valuation method. We use a Black-Scholes option pricing model to value service-based only option awards and a Monte Carlo simulation to value market-based and service-based option awards. The resulting value for the employee options is used for financial reporting purposes.
We estimate forfeitures and record compensation expense based on this estimate over the vesting periods of our equity compensation awards. If actual pre-vesting forfeitures differ from our estimated forfeitures, we record a true-up to ensure that expense is fully recognized for awards that have vested.
Leases
We account for leases in accordance with ASC 842, Leases, and we determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. We record right-of-use assets and lease liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets for operating leases. The right of use assets and lease liabilities are recognized as the present value of the future lease payments over the lease term at commencement date, adjusted for lease incentives, prepaid or accrued rent and unamortized initial direct costs, as applicable. As most of the leases do not provide a readily determinable rate implicit in the lease, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date, such as rates recently offered to us by lenders on proposed borrowings, in determining the present value of future payments. Our incremental borrowing rate for a lease is the rate of interest it would have to pay on a collateralized basis to borrow an amount equal to the lease payments under similar terms. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease, typically at our own discretion. We evaluate the renewal options at commencement and if they are reasonably certain of exercise, we include the renewal period in the lease term.
Lease costs associated with operating leases consist of both fixed and variable components. Expense related to fixed lease payments are recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Variable payments, such as insurance and property taxes, are recorded as incurred and are not included in the initial lease liability.
Recent accounting pronouncements
A discussion of recently issued accounting standards applicable to us is included in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Consolidated Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $47.3 million compared to total revenue of $32.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue from product sales was $40.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $26.9 million for the same period in 2019. Driving this 51% increase in product revenue was a 35% increase in pounds sold and an approximately 13% increase in our weighted average selling price. The $13.8 million increase in product revenue was primarily attributable to increases in PLA-based product sales of $9.4 million and in PHA-based product sales of $4.4 million. The increase in PLA-based product sales was primarily the result of increasing customer demand for a specific application of a recently introduced PLA solution for a developing consumer market application. Additionally, some of our customers purchasing PLA-based products decided to increase their inventory levels to protect against potential supply chain disruptions that may arise due to the spread of the COVID-19 virus. PHA-based product revenue increased due to the start-up of Phase I of the Kentucky plant. Services revenue was $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in services revenue relates primarily to a $0.6 million increase in tolling services and a $0.5 million increase in revenue from paid research and development projects. We have three customers that accounted for 58% of the total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, which compares with four customers that accounted for 65% of the total revenue during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cost of revenue and gross profit
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $35.9 million compared to $21.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 69%. The increase in cost of revenue is primarily a result of the 35% increase in the pounds of products sold and shipped during the period. Included in the increase in cost of revenue was a $1.2 million increase in depreciation expense and a $1.0 million increases in rent expense primarily related to completing the installation of certain assets at the Kentucky facility and commencing production. We anticipate that rent and depreciation will become a smaller portion of our cost of revenue as we continue to scale up PHA production in Kentucky. Gross margin percentage decreased to 24.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 34.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decline in our gross profit margin was primarily the result of commencing limited PHA manufacturing activities in 2020 at the Kentucky Facility and the incurrence of associated incremental ramp-up costs. There were no material PHA manufacturing activities at the Kentucky Facility allocated to cost of revenue until December 2019.
Operating expense
Operating expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $5.7 million, or 26.4%, compared to the same period in 2019. Selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $19.4 million compared to $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 while research and development expense totaled $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in selling, general and administrative expense was due primarily to an increase in compensation expense of $4.6 million primarily related to a $3.8 million bonus payable to the CEO upon the completion of the Business Combination, an increase in salaries of $0.8 million, increases in accounting and auditing expenses of $0.8 million primarily related to our preparation for the Business Combination, and increases in general office expense. These increases were offset by a reduction in stock-based compensation of $1.7 million. The increase in research and development expense period over period was primarily attributed to increased salaries of $1.4 million, increased third-party consulting fees of $0.6 million, and increased legal services of $0.6 million.
Gain on disposal of assets
The gain on disposal of assets was negligible for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was $0.3 million from the sale of excess machinery and equipment during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Legal settlement
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a liability and recorded an expense of $8.0 million in connection with the settlement of certain legal proceedings originating in 2015 related to a former executive and a related advisory contract. Further details regarding the settlement are contained in Note 16 of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $1.0 million to $2.4 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily resulting from the capitalization of $3.7 million of interest for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was partially offset by an increase in noncash interest expense of $0.9 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. The interest capitalization primarily relates to the purchase, modification and installation of machinery and equipment at the Kentucky Facility.
Gain on loan extinguishment.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized gains on the extinguishment of New Markets Tax Credit (“NMTC”) loans totaling $5.3 million and $5.5 million, respectively. The gains on extinguishment in each period were the results of simultaneous repurchases of NMTC loans for nominal amounts from community development entities and extinguishments of a leveraged loan receivable in October 2020 and in July 2019, as further described in Note 6 of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other income, net
Other income, net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $0.3 million and $0.6 million, respectively. Other income, net for each period related primarily to interest income earned on leveraged loans receivable and other miscellaneous income.
Income tax expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had no income tax expense/benefit. Our effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 21% due to our net loss position and maintaining a full valuation allowance.
Income tax expense was $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, at an effective tax rate of negative 35.6%, due to an increase in our valuation allowance. Our effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 21% due to our net loss position and concluding during the period that a full valuation allowance was required.
On December 31, 2020, we continued to maintain a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty surrounding realization of such assets. There have been no significant changes in the estimated uncertain tax benefits recorded as of December 31, 2020.
Net loss
The net loss was $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a net loss of $19.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change from 2019 to 2020 was primarily attributable to the effect of the legal settlement of $8.0 million and income tax provision of $4.1 million recorded in 2019 offset by the increase in operating expenses in 2020 of $5.7 million as discussed in the sections above.
Liquidity and capital resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are operations, equity issuances, and debt financings. We had an accumulated deficit of $62.5 million and $49.9 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $377.6 million in cash and cash equivalents and working capital of $351.9 million. As of December 31, 2019, we had $6.3 million in cash and cash equivalents and a deficit in working capital of $15.0 million. While we believe we have established an ongoing source of revenue that is sufficient to cover our ongoing operating costs, we are currently experiencing a period of significant capital expenditures resulting from the ongoing expansion and construction of our manufacturing and production facilities.
2019 Debt Financings
In March 2019, we entered into a credit agreement (“2019 Term Loan”) for a $30 million term loan maturing on October 13, 2023. Principal payments were due in quarterly payments of $375,000 beginning April 1, 2019 with the outstanding principal balance due at maturity. Annual payments of principal were also due if we generate “excess cash flow”, as defined in the agreement. The 2019 Term Loan was secured by all real and personal property of Danimer Scientific Holdings, LLC and its subsidiaries (“DSH”). The 2019 Term Loan provided for financial covenants including a maximum capital expenditures limit, leverage ratio and fixed charge coverage ratio, each of which becomes more restrictive over time. In July 2020, we modified the 2019 Term Loan such that the applicable margin in the interest rate formula (formerly calculated as the greater of (a) 2.25% or (b) Three-month LIBOR, plus 4.5%) changed from 4.5% to a five-level tiered amount ranging from 4.5% if the consolidated senior leverage ratio, as defined in the 2019 Term Loan, is less than 1.5, to as high as 6.35% if the consolidated senior leverage ratio is greater than 2.25. When the amendment was executed, the applicable margin was 6.35% and was to remain at 6.35% until the first day of the first full fiscal quarter after the delivery of the annual audited financial statements for the year ending December 31, 2020. Thereafter, the applicable margin would be adjusted on a quarterly basis. On December 31, 2020, we delivered notice to lender that the 2019 Term Loan would be voluntarily prepaid in the total amount of $27.7 million (the “Prepayment Amount”) including the outstanding principal amount of $27.0 million, a prepayment fee of $0.5 million along with $0.2 million in accrued unpaid interest. The Prepayment Amount was paid on January 27, 2021, terminating the 2019 Term Loan agreement and all security interests held by the lender were released.
In March 2019, we entered into a subordinated second credit agreement (“Subordinated Term Loan”) for $10.0 million in term loans consisting of two loans in the amounts of $5.5 million and $4.5 million. The terms of the two loans are essentially the same. The term loans mature on February 13, 2024 and require monthly interest only payments, with the outstanding principal balance due at maturity. The base interest rate is the “Prime Rate” as quoted by the Wall Street Journal (adjusted each calendar quarter; 3.25% and 4.75% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively) plus 2.75%. We have the option to pay up to two percent (2%) in any interest payable in any fiscal quarter by adding such interest payment to the principal balance of the related note (“PIK Interest”). During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used the PIK Interest option and an additional $0.2 million was included in the principal balance at December 31, 2020. The Subordinated Term Loan is secured by all real and personal property of DSH and its subsidiaries but is subordinated to all other existing lenders. The Subordinated Term Loan provides for financial covenants including a maximum capital expenditures limit, leverage ratio, fixed charge coverage ratio and adjusted EBITDA, certain of which become more restrictive over time. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all financial covenants. In connection with the terms of the Subordinated Term Loan, the lender purchased 16,667 shares of Legacy Danimer common stock for $1.0 million. The lender had the option to require us to repurchase the shares at the original issue price at the earlier of 1) repayment in full of the outstanding balance of the loan, 2) March 14, 2025 or 3) a change in control of the Company, as defined. On December 29, 2020, as part of the Business Combination, the lender’s shares in Legacy Danimer were exchanged for our shares based on the exchange ratio established in the Merger Agreement. In March 2021, we modified the Subordinated Term Loan such that the base interest rate is annual LIBOR rate (currently 0.28% as of March 18, 2021) plus 2.00%. The amendment also provided that we are not permitted to voluntarily prepay or repay the Subordinated Term Loan until after July 1, 2022. The amendment also expanded our equity cure rights and further provided that we would not be required to comply with certain financial covenants so long as DSH has qualified cash in an amount not less than $10.0 million. In April and November 2019, we entered into financing arrangements under the NMTC program with various unrelated third-party financial institutions (individually and collectively referred to as “Investors”) in the amounts of $9.0 million and $12.0 million, respectively. Proceeds of these NMTC notes were primarily used to purchase and install new equipment at our facilities in Bainbridge, Georgia and Winchester, Kentucky. We make interest-only payments on a quarterly basis with interest calculated annually at 1.96% on the $9.0 million note and under the same terms at a rate of 1.06% on the $12.0 million note. As further described in Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, these arrangements also include a put/call feature which becomes enforceable at the end of the seven-year compliance periods whereby we may be obligated or entitled to repurchase the Investor’s interests in each of the Investment Funds for a nominal amount or fair value. We believe the Investors will exercise their put options at the end of the compliance periods for each of the transactions for nominal amounts, which would result in the extinguishment of these NMTC notes payable and a corresponding gain recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
2019 Equity Issuances
At various times during 2019, we sold 155,869 shares of Legacy Danimer Common Stock for $8.8 million, net of issuance costs.
2020 Debt Financings
In January 2020, we issued convertible notes in an aggregate principal amount of $2.3 million. The convertible notes bear interest at 8% payable monthly. The proceeds of the convertible notes were used for general corporate purposes. The convertible notes could be converted into shares of Legacy Danimer Common Stock at the option of the holder by dividing the amount of principal and accrued interest due under the note by the lesser of (i) $60 per Legacy Danimer share and (ii) the price per share at which shares of equity securities were offered in the most recent stock offering.
In April 2020, we received $1.8 million in funds under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP Loan”). The PPP Loan has a two-year term and bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum. The PPP Loan is being used to retain employees, as well as other permitted uses under the terms and conditions of the PPP Loan program. In connection with the Business Combination, proceeds at closing were deposited into an escrow account to fully fund repayment of this loan to the extent any portion is not forgiven. See Note 9 to Consolidated Financial Statements.
In August 2020, we issued an additional $0.4 million of convertible notes under terms similar to those discussed above; however, these notes were not issued at a discount. These notes could be converted into shares of Legacy Danimer Common Stock at the option of the holder by dividing the amount of principal and accrued interest due under the note by the lesser of (i) $63 per Legacy Danimer share and (ii) the price per share at which shares of equity securities were offered in the then most recent stock offering.
In September 2020, a convertible debt noteholder converted his note with a principal plus accrued interest balance of $0.7 million into 10,912 shares of Legacy Danimer Common Stock based on a conversion price of $60 per Legacy Danimer share as defined in the applicable debt agreement.
Immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination, all remaining convertible noteholders converted their outstanding debt into 184,157 shares of Legacy Danimer common stock based on the terms of the conversion arrangements described above. The Legacy Danimer shares were then exchanged for 1,686,507 shares of our common stock based on the exchange ratio established in the Merger Agreement.
2020 Equity Issuances
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 516,763 shares of Legacy Danimer Common Stock for $32.5 million, net of issuance costs. In addition, 184,567 Legacy Danimer employee and nonemployee stock options were exercised for aggregate proceeds of $5.5 million. In connection with the Business Combination, we realized net proceeds after transaction costs of approximately $381 million.
Cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities:
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $13.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash used in operating activities of $1.7 million during the comparable period for 2019. The period-to-period change was primarily attributable to changes in working capital, such as increases in our accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid expenses and other current assets, and contract liabilities, partially offset by a decrease in the net loss (after adjusting for non-cash items). In addition, accrued and other long-term liabilities increased $5.3 million in 2020 due to $6.2 million in real-estate improvements for the Kentucky Facility that were directly reimbursed by the REIT (lessor).
Cash flows from investing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $38.3 million for the purchase of property, plant and equipment which compares to $36.6 million for the purchase of property, plant and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we invested $13.4 million in leveraged loans related to NMTC financing arrangements. Also, during the year ended December 31, 2019, we had proceeds of $0.9 million attributable to the sale of unused machinery and equipment. During 2020, we commenced a further expansion of the production capacity of our Kentucky Facility (Phase II). Through December 31, 2020, we have invested $16.6 million of the $100 million planned for the Phase II expansion project.
Cash flows from financing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $422.7 million which consisted of:
· Proceeds of $32.5 million from sales of common stock, net of issuance costs
· Proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $5.5 million
· Proceeds of $4.5 million from long-term debt
· Proceeds of $382.1 million from the Business Combination and PIPE offering, net of cash transaction costs
These amounts were partially offset by $1.9 million in repayments of long-term debt.
This compares to net cash provided by financing activities of $53.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which consisted of:
· Proceeds of $48.3 million from long-term debt
· Proceeds from NMTC financing arrangements of $21.0 million
· Proceeds of $8.8 million from the issuance of common stock, net of issuance costs
These were partially offset by the repayments of our long-term debt of $15.2 million, repurchases of common stock of $4.6 million and cash paid for debt financing costs of $4.7 million.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
As of the date of this Report, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. The term “off-balance sheet arrangement” generally means any transaction, agreement, or other contractual arrangement to which an unconsolidated entity is a party, under which we have any obligation arising under a guarantee contract, derivative instrument, or variable interest or a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to such entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity, or market risk support for such assets.
Currently we do not engage in off-balance sheet financing arrangements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company (“EGC”), as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act permits companies with EGC status to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards, delaying the adoption of these accounting standards until they would apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period to enable us to comply with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting standards as of public company effective dates.
In addition, we intend to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an EGC, we intend to rely on such exemptions, we are not required to, among other things: (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; and (iii) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
We will remain an EGC under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (i) the last day of our first fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the closing of Live Oak’s initial public offering, (ii) the last date of our fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC with at least $700.0 million of outstanding securities held by non-affiliates or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the previous three-years.