ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial information include the accounts of the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries. All significant intercompany transactions and accounts have been eliminated.
General Overview
We are a global distributor to the oil and gas and industrial markets with a legacy of over 150 years. We operate primarily under the DistributionNOW and DNOW brands. Through our network of approximately 195 locations and approximately 2,500 employees worldwide, we stock and sell a comprehensive offering of energy products as well as a selection of products for industrial applications. Our energy product offering is consumed throughout all sectors of the oil and gas industry - from upstream drilling and completion, E&P, midstream infrastructure development to downstream petrochemical and petroleum refining - as well as in other industries, such as chemical processing, mining, utilities and renewables. The industrial distribution end markets include refineries and engineering and construction firms. We also provide supply chain and materials management solutions to the same markets where we sell products.
Our global product offering includes consumable MRO supplies, pipe, valves, fittings, flanges, gaskets, fasteners, electrical, instrumentation, artificial lift, pumping solutions, valve actuation and modular process, measurement and control equipment. We also offer procurement, warehouse and inventory management solutions as part of our supply chain and materials management offering. We have developed expertise in providing application systems, work processes, parts integration, optimization solutions and after-sales support.
Our solutions include outsourcing portions or entire functions of our customers’ procurement, warehouse and inventory management, logistics, point of issue technology, project management, business process and performance metrics reporting. These solutions allow us to leverage the infrastructure of our SAP™ ERP system and other technologies to streamline our customers’ purchasing process, from requisition to procurement to payment, by digitally managing workflow, improving approval routing and providing robust reporting functionality.
We support land and offshore operations for all the major oil and gas producing regions around the world through our network of locations. Our key markets, beyond North America, include Latin America, the North Sea, the Middle East, Asia Pacific and the FSU. Products sold through our locations support greenfield expansion upstream capital projects, midstream infrastructure and transmission and MRO consumables used in day-to-day production. We provide downstream energy and industrial products for petroleum refining, chemical processing, LNG terminals, power generation utilities and industrial manufacturing operations and customer on-site locations.
We stock or sell more than 300,000 SKUs through our branch network. Our supplier network consists of thousands of vendors in approximately 40 countries. From our operations in over 20 countries, we sell to customers operating in approximately 80 countries. The supplies and equipment stocked by each of our branches is customized to meet varied and changing local customer demands. The breadth and scale of our offering enhances our value proposition to our customers, suppliers and shareholders.
We employ advanced information technologies, including a common ERP platform across most of our business, to provide complete procurement, warehouse and inventory management and logistics coordination to our customers around the globe. Having a common ERP platform allows immediate visibility into our inventory assets, operations and financials worldwide, enhancing decision making and efficiency.
Our revenue and operating results are related to the level of worldwide oil and gas drilling and production activities and the profitability and cash flow of oil and gas companies and drilling contractors, which in turn are affected by current and anticipated prices of oil and gas. Oil and gas prices have been and are likely to continue to be volatile. See Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” We conduct our operations through three business segments: United States, Canada and International. See Item 1. “Business-Summary of Reportable Segments” for a discussion of each of these business segments.
Unless indicated otherwise, results of operations data are presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). In an effort to provide investors with additional information regarding our results as determined by GAAP, we may disclose non-GAAP financial measures. The primary non-GAAP financial measure we focus on is earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, excluding other costs (“EBITDA excluding other costs”). This financial measure excludes the impact of certain amounts and is not calculated in accordance with GAAP. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliations” in Results of Operations for an explanation of our use of non-GAAP financial measures and reconciliations to the corresponding measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Operating Environment Overview
Our results are dependent on, among other things, the level of worldwide oil and gas drilling and completions, well remediation activity, crude and natural gas prices, capital spending by oilfield service companies and drilling contractors, and the worldwide oil and gas inventory levels. Key industry indicators for the past three years include the following:
*
Averages for the years indicated. See sources on following page.
The following table details the U.S., Canadian, and international rig activity and West Texas Intermediate (“WTI”) oil prices for the past nine quarters ended December 31, 2020:
Sources: Rig count: Baker Hughes, Inc. (www.bakerhughes.com); Effective June 2019, the Baker Hughes International Rig Count now includes the number of active drilling rigs in the country of Ukraine and the historical periods will not be updated; West Texas Intermediate Crude and Natural Gas Prices: Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration (www.eia.doe.gov); Hot-Rolled Coil Prices: SteelBenchmarker™ Hot Roll Coil USA (www.steelbenchmarker.com).
The worldwide average rig count declined 37.9% (from 2,177 rigs to 1,352 rigs) and the U.S. declined 53.8% (from 944 rigs to 436 rigs) in 2020 compared to 2019. The average price of WTI crude declined 31.2% (from $56.98 per barrel to $39.23 per barrel), and natural gas prices declined 20.6% (from $2.57 per MMBtu to $2.04 per MMBtu) in 2020 compared to 2019. The average price of Hot-Rolled Coil declined 7.4% (from $620.53 per short ton to $574.67 per short ton) in 2020 compared to 2019.
U.S. rig count at January 22, 2021 was 378 rigs, down 58 rigs from the 2020 average. The price for WTI crude was $52.28 per barrel at January 22, 2021, up 33.3% from the 2020 average. The price for natural gas was $2.45 per MMBtu at January 22, 2021, up 20.1% from the 2020 average. The price for Hot-Rolled Coil was $1,037.00 per short ton at January 25, 2021, up 80.5% from the 2020 average.
Executive Summary
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company generated a net loss of $427 million, or $(3.91) per fully diluted share on $1,619 million in revenue. Net loss worsened for the year ended December 31, 2020 by $330 million when compared to the corresponding period of 2019. Revenue decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 by $1,332 million, or 45.1%, when compared to the corresponding period of 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating loss was $420 million compared to operating loss of $83 million for the corresponding period of 2019.
For the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2020, the Company generated a net loss of $44 million, or $(0.40) per fully diluted share on $319 million in revenue. Net loss improved for the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2020 by $95 million when compared to the corresponding period of 2019. Revenue decreased for the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2020 by $320 million, or 50.1%, when compared to the corresponding period of 2019. For the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2020, operating loss was $37 million, compared to operating loss of $137 million for the corresponding period of 2019.
Outlook
Our outlook for the Company remains tied to crude oil and natural gas commodity prices, global oil and gas drilling and completions activity, oil and gas spending, and global demand for oil, its refined petroleum products, crude oil, natural gas liquids and natural gas production and decline rates. Crude oil prices and natural gas as well as crude oil and natural gas storage levels are primary catalysts determining customer activity.
Throughout the year 2020, the macro environment changed rapidly and dramatically. The rising global oil supply and sudden demand shock from the COVID-19 pandemic drove significant reduced global demand of oil resulting in declines in oil prices and significant builds of oil inventory. Continuing to the date of this filing, levels of uncertainty still exist concerning the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the magnitude of its impact on the global economy and global oil and gas demand. The outlook for oil and gas demand and supply appears equally uncertain and is expected to largely be driven by the pace of approved vaccines produced and administered on a global basis, which will impact the magnitude, pace and timing of an economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Amid these dynamics, we will continue to optimize our operations, advance our strategic goals and manage the Company based on market conditions. To navigate this challenging environment, we have taken decisive actions to cut costs, accelerate structural changes and deploy various technologies to optimize processes, increase productivity and grow revenue through expanding digital channels. We have prioritized cost transformation and warehousing, selling and administrative expense reductions as a key response to declining activity. We will continue to optimize our operations and adapt to market activity as appropriate to position DNOW for the challenges ahead.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Results
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
A summary of the Company’s revenue and operating loss by segment in 2020 and 2019 follows (in millions):
United States
Revenue was $1,153 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decline of $1,087 million or 48.5% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the period was primarily driven by the decline in U.S. drilling and completions activity.
Operating loss was $281 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decline of $275 million compared to operating loss of $6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating loss worsened in 2020 primarily due to an increase of $146 million in impairment charges compared to 2019, coupled with the decline in revenue discussed above, partially offset by a reduction in operating expenses.
Canada
Revenue was $209 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decline of $110 million or 34.5% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the period was primarily driven by a decline in Canadian rig count.
Our Canadian revenue was approximately 13% of total revenue in 2020, similar to 2019. We are subject to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar. Our Canadian revenue is favorably impacted as the U.S. dollar weakens relative to the Canadian dollar, and unfavorably impacted as the U.S. dollar strengthens relative to the Canadian dollar.
Operating loss was $60 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decline of $41 million compared to operating loss of $19 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating losses worsened in 2020 primarily due to an increase of $33 million in impairment charges compared to 2019, coupled with the decline in revenue discussed above, partially offset by a reduction in operating expenses which was favorably impacted by the Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy.
International
Revenue was $257 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decline of $135 million or 34.4% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a depressed market generally and softer project activity.
Our international revenue was approximately 16% of total revenue in 2020, similar to 2019. We are subject to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar. Our international revenue is favorably impacted as the U.S. dollar weakens relative to other foreign currencies, and unfavorably impacted as the U.S dollar strengthens relative to other foreign currencies. Our international segment revenue was unfavorably impacted by approximately $4 million due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates over the prior year.
Operating loss was $79 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decline of $21 million compared to operating loss of $58 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating loss worsened in 2020 primarily due to an increase of $14 million in impairment charges compared to 2019, coupled with the decline in revenue discussed above, partially offset by a reduction in operating expenses which was unfavorably impacted by an increase in bad debt charges.
Cost of products
Cost of products was $1,327 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $2,365 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $1,038 million. The decrease was primarily due to lower revenue in the period. Cost of products includes the cost of inventory sold and related items, such as vendor consideration, inventory allowances, amortization of intangibles and inbound and outbound freight. Cost of products included inventory charges of $54 million in 2020 due to discontinued product lines and overall decline in market demand.
Warehousing, selling and administrative expenses
Warehousing, selling and administrative expenses were $391 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $541 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $150 million. The decrease was primarily due to improved operating efficiencies and workforce reductions. Warehousing, selling and administrative expenses include branch location, distribution center and regional expenses (including costs such as compensation, benefits and rent) as well as corporate general selling and administrative expenses.
Impairment charges
Impairment charges were $321 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $128 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company recognized $230 million of goodwill impairment, $84 million of intangible asset impairment, $6 million of impairment for other long-lived assets and $1 million of loss related to business divestitures.
Other expense
Other expense was $10 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. These charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 were mainly attributable to expenses related to our pension plans and fees associated with our credit facility, partially offset by favorable impact from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
Provision for income taxes
The effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019 was 0.6% and (4.4%), respectively. The effective tax rate is affected by recurring items, such as differing tax rates on income earned in foreign jurisdictions, nondeductible expenses and state income taxes. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, was impacted by changes in the valuation allowance in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions and nondeductible goodwill impairment. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the effective tax rate was impacted by changes in the valuation allowance in the United States, Canada and other foreign jurisdictions, nondeductible goodwill impairment and the recognition of deferred taxes related to outside basis differences in subsidiaries classified as held for sale.
Consolidated Results
Years Ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018
For discussion related to the results of operations and changes in financial condition for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2019 Form 10-K, which was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on February 19, 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliations
In an effort to provide investors with additional information regarding our results of operations as determined by GAAP, we disclose non-GAAP financial measures. The primary non-GAAP financial measure we disclose is earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, excluding other costs (“EBITDA excluding other costs”). This financial measure excludes the impact of certain amounts and is not calculated in accordance with GAAP. A reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure, to its most comparable GAAP financial measure, is included below.
We use EBITDA excluding other costs internally to evaluate and manage the Company’s operations because we believe it provides useful supplemental information regarding the Company’s ongoing economic performance. We have chosen to provide this information to investors to enable them to perform more meaningful comparisons of operating results.
The following table sets forth the reconciliations of EBITDA excluding other costs to the most comparable GAAP financial measures (in millions):
(1)
We believe that net income (loss) is the financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP that is most directly comparable to EBITDA excluding other costs. EBITDA excluding other costs measures the Company’s operating performance without regard to certain expenses. EBITDA excluding other costs is not a presentation made in accordance with GAAP and the Company’s computation of EBITDA excluding other costs may vary from others in the industry. EBITDA excluding other costs has important limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of the Company’s results as reported under GAAP.
(2)
Other costs for 2020 included $321 million of impairment charges and $18 million in net separation and transaction-related expenses, which are included in operating loss. Other costs for 2020 also included $6 million in pension expense related to the de-risking of our defined benefit plans which is included in other expense. Other costs for 2019 included $128 million of impairment charges and $7 million in separation expenses and transaction costs, approximately half of which are related to the CEO departure, which are included in operating loss. Other costs for 2018 primarily included separation expenses and transaction costs associated with acquisitions, which are included in operating profit.
(3)
EBITDA % excluding other costs is defined as EBITDA excluding other costs divided by Revenue.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We assess liquidity in terms of our ability to generate cash to fund operating, investing and financing activities. We expect resources to be available to reinvest in existing businesses, strategic acquisitions and capital expenditures to meet short and long-term objectives. We believe that cash on hand, cash generated from expected results of operations and amounts available under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fund operations, anticipated working capital needs and other cash requirements, including capital expenditures.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash and cash equivalents of $387 million and $183 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, $86 million of our cash and cash equivalents was maintained in the accounts of our various foreign subsidiaries. With the exception of the Company’s earnings in Canada and the United Kingdom, the Company’s foreign earnings continue to be indefinitely reinvested. The Company makes a determination each period concerning its intent and ability to indefinitely reinvest the cash held by its foreign subsidiaries. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we repatriated $34 million from our Canadian operations. No additional income taxes have been provided for other foreign earnings as these amounts continue to be indefinitely reinvested. Future changes to our indefinite reinvestment assertion could result in additional U.S. federal and state taxes (subject to an adjustment for foreign tax credits) and withholding taxes payable in various foreign jurisdictions, where applicable.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings against our revolving credit facility, and had $197 million in availability (as defined in the Credit Agreement) resulting in the excess availability (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of 97%, subject to certain restrictions. Borrowings that result in the excess availability dropping below the greater of 12.5% of the borrowing base or $60 million are conditioned upon compliance with or waiver of a minimum fixed charge ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement). The credit facility contains usual and customary affirmative and negative covenants for credit facilities of this type including financial covenants. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants. We continuously monitor compliance with debt covenants. A default, if not waived or amended, may prevent us from taking certain actions, such as incurring additional debt.
The following table summarizes our net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, net cash provided by (used in) investing activities and net cash provided by (used in) financing activities for the periods presented (in millions):
Fiscal Year 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities was $189 million in 2020 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $224 million in 2019. In 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by net loss of $427 million offset by $446 million of reconciling adjustments to net loss, which included $321 million of impairment charges, and net increase of $170 million from changes in working capital. In 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by net loss of $97 million offset by $223 million of reconciling adjustments to net loss, which included $128 million of impairment charges, and net increase of $98 million from changes in working capital.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $22 million in 2020 compared to net cash used in investing activities of $22 million in 2019. In 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was primarily attributed to proceeds received of $26 million related to business divestitures compared to in 2019, net cash used in investing activities was related to $8 million in business acquisitions.
Net cash used in financing activities was $8 million in 2020 compared to net cash used in financing activities of $138 million in 2019. In 2020, net cash used in financing activities was primarily attributed to payments relating to finance leases. In 2019, net cash used in financing activities was primarily attributed to net repayments under the revolving credit facility.
Effect of the Change in Exchange Rates
The effect of the change in exchange rates on cash flows was an increase of $1 million and $3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Capital Spending
We intend to pursue additional acquisition candidates, but the timing, size or success of any acquisition effort and the related potential capital commitments cannot be predicted. We continue to expect to fund future cash acquisitions primarily with cash flow from operations and the usage of the available portion of the revolving credit facility. We expect capital expenditures for fiscal year 2021 to be approximately $10 million, primarily related to purchases of property, plant and equipment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are often party to certain transactions that require off-balance sheet arrangements such as standby letters of credit and performance bonds and guarantees that are not reflected in our consolidated balance sheets. These arrangements are made in our normal course of business and they are not reasonably likely to have a current or future material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity or cash flows.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our aggregate contractual fixed and variable obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in millions):
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In preparing the financial statements, the Company makes assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported. The Company periodically evaluates its estimates and judgments that are most critical in nature, which are related to allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory reserves, goodwill and long-lived assets, purchase price allocation of acquisitions, vendor consideration, stock-based compensation and income taxes. Its estimates are based on historical experience and on its future expectations that the Company believes are reasonable. The combination of these factors forms the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results are likely to differ from our current estimates and those differences may be material.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The Company grants credit to its customers, which operate primarily in the energy, industrial and manufacturing markets. Concentrations of credit risk are limited because the Company has a large number of geographically diverse customers, thus spreading trade credit risk. The Company controls credit risk through credit evaluations, credit limits and monitoring procedures. The Company performs periodic credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition and generally does not require collateral, but may require letters of credit or prepayments for certain sales. Allowances for doubtful accounts are established based on an evaluation of accounts receivable aging, and, where applicable, specific reserves on a customer-by-customer basis. With the adoption of ASU 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, the estimated allowance for doubtful accounts (“AFDA”) reflects the Company’s immediate recognition of current expected credit losses by incorporating the historical loss experience, as well as current and future market conditions that are reasonably available. Judgments in the estimate of AFDA include global economic and business conditions, oil and gas industry and market conditions, customer’s financial conditions and accounts receivable past due. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, allowance for doubtful accounts totaled $28 million and $16 million, or 12.4% and 4.1% of gross accounts receivable, respectively.
Inventory Reserves
Inventories consist primarily of oilfield and industrial finished goods. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value and using average cost methods. Allowances for excess and obsolete inventories are determined based on the Company’s historical usage of inventory on hand as well as its future expectations. The Company’s estimated carrying value of inventory therefore depends upon demand driven by oil and gas spending activity, which depends in turn upon oil, gas and steel prices, the general outlook for economic growth worldwide, available financing for the Company’s customers, political stability in major oil and gas producing areas and the potential obsolescence of various inventory items the Company stocks, among other factors. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, inventory reserves totaled $39 million and $26 million, or 13.0% and 5.3% of gross inventory, respectively. Changes in our estimates can be material under different market conditions.
Goodwill and Long-lived Assets
The Company has no goodwill as of December 31, 2020. Generally accepted accounting principles require the Company to test goodwill for impairment at least annually or more frequently whenever events or circumstances occur indicating that it might be impaired. The Company conducts goodwill impairment testing annually in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, and more frequently on an interim basis, when an event occurs or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of a reporting unit may have declined below its carrying value. Events or circumstances which could indicate a probable impairment include, but are not limited to, a significant reduction in worldwide oil and gas prices or drilling; a significant reduction in profitability or cash flow of oil and gas companies or drilling contractors; a significant reduction in worldwide well completion and remediation activity; a significant reduction in capital investment by other oilfield service companies; or a significant increase in worldwide inventories of oil or gas.
Impairment of goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level by comparing the reporting unit's carrying amount, including goodwill, to the estimated fair value of the reporting unit. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, goodwill impairment is recorded based on that difference up to the total amount of goodwill for that reporting unit. During 2020, to align with the updates to the operational and management structure, the Company combined two reporting units within the U.S. reportable segment, U.S. Energy and U.S. Supply Chain, each with goodwill of zero prior to and after the combination. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has four reporting units; U.S. Energy, U.S. Process Solutions, Canada and International.
Long-lived assets other than goodwill include property, plant and equipment, operating right-of-use assets and intangible assets. The Company evaluates the recoverability of long-lived assets other than goodwill for possible impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of property and equipment and intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value.
The fair values of reporting units are determined based on valuation techniques using the best available information, primarily discounted cash flow projections and multiple-based market approach for comparable companies, where applicable. The discounted cash flow is based on management’s short-term and long-term forecast of operating performance for each reporting unit. The two main assumptions used in measuring goodwill and other long-lived asset impairment, which bear the risk of change and could impact the impairment analysis, include the cash flow from operations from each of the Company’s individual business units and the discount rate. The starting point for the reporting unit’s projected cash flow from operations is the detailed annual plan or updated forecast. The detailed planning and forecasting process takes into consideration a multitude of factors including worldwide rig activity, inflationary forces, pricing strategies, customer analysis, operational issues, competitor analysis, capital spending requirements, working capital requirements and customer needs among other items which impact the individual reporting unit projections. Cash flows beyond the specific operating plans were estimated using a terminal value calculation, which incorporated historical and forecasted financial cyclical trends for each reporting unit and also consider long-term earnings growth rates. The financial and credit market volatility impacts the fair value measurement by adjusting the discount rate. During times of volatility, significant judgment must be applied to determine whether credit changes are a short-term or long-term trend. The Company makes significant assumptions and estimates, which utilize level 3 measures, about the extent and timing of future cash flows, growth rates and discount rates that represent unobservable inputs into valuation methodologies. In evaluating the reasonableness of the Company’s fair value estimates, the Company considers, among other factors, the relationship between the market capitalization of the Company and the estimated fair value of its reporting units.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company’s market capitalization declined significantly driven by current macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions including the collapse of oil prices caused by both surplus production and supply as well as the decrease in demand caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the uncertainty related to oil demand continues to have a significant impact on the investment and operating plans of our primary customers. Based on these events, the Company concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair values of certain of its reporting units were less than their carrying values. Therefore, the Company performed an interim goodwill impairment test and recognized impairment of $125 million, $60 million and $45 million for the U.S., Canada and International reporting units, respectively, which were included in impairment charges in the consolidated statements of operations.
During the first quarter of 2020, the results of the Company's test for impairment of goodwill and the other negative market indicators described above were a triggering event that indicated that its long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, operating right-of-use assets and intangible assets, were possibly impaired. As a result, the Company performed a recoverability test and recognized $90 million of impairments of long-lived assets for the quarter ended March 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2020 which were included in impairment charges in the consolidated statements of operations. No triggering events were identified subsequently in 2020 to indicate that the remaining carrying value of long-lived assets were not recoverable.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company performed its annual goodwill impairment test and determined the fair values of the Canada and International reporting units were below their carrying values. As a result, the Company recognized $54 million and $27 million of goodwill impairment for the International and Canada reporting units, respectively, which was included in impairment charges in the consolidated statements of operations. The impairment charges were primarily the result of actual declines in customer
and rig activity and downward revisions to forecasted rig and customer spend activity occurring in the fourth quarter of 2019, which we incorporated into our outlook and forecasted results of operations.
Purchase Price Allocation of Acquisitions
The Company allocates the fair value of the purchase price consideration of an acquired business to its identifiable assets and liabilities based on estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the acquired assets and liabilities, if any, is recorded as goodwill. The Company uses all available information to estimate fair values including quoted market prices, the carrying value of acquired assets, and widely accepted valuation techniques such as discounted cash flows. The Company engages third-party appraisal firms to assist in fair value determination of inventories, identifiable intangible assets and any other significant assets or liabilities when appropriate. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as well as asset lives, could materially impact the Company’s results of operations.
Vendor Consideration
The Company receives funds from vendors in the normal course of business, principally as a result of purchase volumes. Generally, these vendor funds do not represent the reimbursement of specific, incremental and identifiable costs incurred by the Company to sell the vendor’s product. Therefore, the Company treats these funds as a reduction of inventory when purchased and once these goods are sold to third parties the associated amount is credited to cost of sales. The Company develops accrual rates for vendor consideration based on the provisions of the arrangements in place, historical trends, purchases and future expectations. Due to the complexity and diversity of the individual vendor agreements, the Company performs analyses and reviews historical trends throughout the year and confirms actual amounts with select vendors to ensure the amounts earned are appropriately recorded. Amounts accrued throughout the year could be impacted if actual purchase volumes differ from projected annual purchase volumes, especially in the case of programs that provide for increased funding when graduated purchase volumes are met.
Stock-Based Compensation
Compensation expense for the Company’s stock-based compensation plans is measured using the fair value method required by ASC Topic 718 “Compensation-Stock Compensation”. Under this guidance the fair value of the award is measured on the grant date and amortized to expense using the straight-line method over the shorter of the vesting period or the remaining requisite service period. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
Income Taxes
The Company is a U.S. registered company and is subject to income taxes in the U.S. The Company operates through various subsidiaries in a number of countries throughout the world. Income taxes are based upon the tax laws and rates of the countries in which the Company operates and income is earned.
The Company’s annual tax provision is based on taxable income, statutory rates, and the interpretation of the tax laws in the various jurisdictions in which the Company operates. It requires significant judgment and the use of estimates and assumptions regarding significant future events such as the amount, timing and character of income, deductions and tax credits. Changes in tax laws, regulations and treaties, foreign currency exchange restrictions or the Company’s level of operations or profitability in each jurisdiction could impact the tax liability in any given year. The Company also operates in many jurisdictions where the tax laws relating to the pricing of transactions between related parties are open to interpretation, which could potentially result in aggressive tax authorities asserting additional tax liabilities with no offsetting tax recovery in other countries.
The Company determined the provision for income taxes under the asset and liability approach, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. The Company recognizes deferred tax assets to the extent that the Company believes these assets are more-likely-than-not to be realized. If the Company determines that it would be able to realize its deferred tax assets in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, the Company would make an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes. In evaluating the Company’s ability to recover deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, the Company considers all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies and results of operations. In projecting future taxable income, the Company begins with historical results adjusted for the results of discontinued operations and incorporates assumptions about the amount of future state, federal and foreign pretax operating income adjusted for
items that do not have tax consequences. The assumptions about future taxable income require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates the Company is using to manage the underlying businesses.
The Company remains in a three-year cumulative loss position at the end of 2020. As a result, management believes that it is not more-likely-than-not that the Company would be able to realize the benefits of its deferred tax assets in the U.S., Canada and other foreign jurisdictions and accordingly recognized a valuation allowance for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change during the year in the valuation allowance was $58 million in the U.S. and $3 million in other foreign jurisdictions.
The Company records unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities in accordance with ASC 740 and adjusts these liabilities when judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available in jurisdictions of operation. The Company records uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC 740 on the basis of a two-step process whereby (1) the Company determines whether it is more-likely-than-not that the tax positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and (2) for those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, the Company recognizes the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority. The annual tax provision includes the impact of income tax provisions and benefits for changes to liabilities that the Company considers appropriate, as well as related interest.
The Company is subject to audits by federal, state and foreign jurisdictions which may result in proposed assessments. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from the current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit liabilities. The Company reviews these liabilities quarterly and to the extent audits or other events result in an adjustment to the liability accrued for a prior year, the effect will be recognized in the period of the event.
As of December 31, 2020, the amount of undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries was approximately $12 million. With the exception of the Company’s earnings in Canada and the United Kingdom, the Company’s foreign earnings continue to be indefinitely reinvested. The Company makes a determination each period whether to permanently reinvest these earnings. If, as a result of these reassessments, the Company distributes these earnings in the future, additional tax liabilities would result, offset by any available foreign tax credits.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In March 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848), which provides optional expedients and exceptions to contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions that reference LIBOR or another reference rate expected to be discontinued because of reference rate reform. Entities that elect the relief are required to disclose the nature of the optional expedients and exceptions that are adopted and the reasons for the adoptions. The guidance is effective upon issuance and the expedients and exceptions may be applied prospectively through December 31, 2022. The Company is currently assessing the impact of ASU 2020-04 on its consolidated financial statements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (Topic 326), which replaces the incurred loss impairment methodology in current GAAP with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to determine credit loss estimates. On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASC Topic 326 using the modified retrospective basis and began to recognize AFDA based on the estimated lifetime expected credit loss related to trade receivables. The adoption of ASC Topic 326 resulted in a cumulative-effect adjustment of $6 million (net of income taxes) to its opening accumulated deficit and AFDA in the consolidated balance sheets. See Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and Note 4 “Receivables, net” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part IV, Item 15 of this Form 10-K) for additional information.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820), which modified the disclosure requirements on fair value measurements. On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted this standard and expanded its fair value disclosures to address the quantitative and qualitative requirements of this standard. See Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part IV, Item 15 of this Form 10-K) for fair value disclosures relating to the impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That Is a Service Contract (Topic 350-40), which aligns the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred in a cloud computing arrangement service contract with the capitalization requirements of costs to develop or obtain internal-use software licenses. On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted this standard using the prospective transition approach, with no material impact in its consolidated financial statements.