Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Financial Statements and footnotes thereto contained in this report.
Forward Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings. References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to Capitol Investment Corp. V, except where the context requires otherwise. Such forward looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this Annual Report on Form 10-K should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Annual Report. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. All subsequent written or oral forward looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We are not limited to any particular industry or geographic location in selecting a target business with which to engage in a business combination.
We have not selected any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Offering and the Private Placement, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target or a combination of the foregoing.
Results of Operations
We consummated the Offering on December 4, 2020. All activity through December 4, 2020 relates to our formation, the Offering and simultaneous private placement of Private Placement Warrants (each as described below). Since the Offering, our activity has been limited to our search for a target business with which to complete an initial business combination.
We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $144,917, which consists of operating costs of $157,497 and an unrealized loss on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $2,201, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $14,781.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had a net loss of $3,769, which consists of operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of ordinary shares by the Sponsors, and loans and advances from related parties.
On December 4, 2020, we consummated our Offering of 34,500,000 Units. The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds to us of $345,000,000. Simultaneously with the consummation of the Offering on December 4, 2020, we completed the Private Placement of 5,833,333 Private Placement Warrants at a purchase price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, to our Sponsors and our independent directors, generating gross proceeds to us of $8,750,000. Approximately $338.1 million of the net proceeds from the Offering and $6.9 million of the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants have been deposited in a trust account maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee, established for the benefit of our public stockholders. After paying expenses associated with the Offering and the Private Placement, we had approximately $1.0 million of cash held outside the trust account for working capital.
Except for the withdrawal from the trust account of interest earned on the funds held therein necessary to pay taxes, if any, the funds in the trust account will not be released to us until the earlier of the completion of a business combination or our liquidation upon our failure to consummate a business combination within the required time period (which may not occur until December 4, 2022).
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $739,321. Net loss of $144,917 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $14,781, an unrealized loss on marketable securities held in our trust account of $2,201 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $581,824 of cash from operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $1,834. Net loss of $3,769 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $1,935 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $345,012,580. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account not previously released to us (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $632,387 outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsors, officers and directors or their respective affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required on a non-interest basis. In February 2021, the Sponsors and the independent directors collectively committed to provide us an aggregate of $970,000 in loans. These loans, if issued, as well as any future loans that may be made by our officers and directors (or their affiliates), will be evidenced by notes and if we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsors, officers, directors or their respective affiliates as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
Based on the loan commitment provided by the Sponsors and the independent directors, we believe we will have sufficient cash to meet the Company’s working capital needs through the earlier of consummation of a Business Combination or March 1, 2022.
We may need to obtain additional financing to complete our initial business combination, either because the transaction requires more cash than is available from the proceeds held in our trust account or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of the business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay two affiliates of our executive officers an aggregate monthly fee of $20,000 for office space and secretarial support provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on December 4, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering or an aggregate of $12,075,000, which were placed in the trust account.
We entered into a fee arrangement with a service provider pursuant to which certain fees incurred by us will be deferred and become payable only if we consummate a business combination. If a business combination does not occur, we will not be required to pay these contingent fees. As of December 31, 2020, the amount of these contingent fees was approximately $404,000. There can be no assurances that we will complete a business combination.
In December 2020, subsequent to the consummation of our Offering, we entered into three consulting arrangements for services to help identify and introduce us to potential targets and provide assistance with due diligence, deal structuring, documentation and obtaining shareholder approval for an initial business combination. These agreements provide for an aggregate monthly fee of $62,500 and aggregate success fees of $1,100,000 payable upon the consummation of an initial business combination. The accrued amount under these agreements was approximately $38,300 as of December 31, 2020.
Critical accounting policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Loss per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding for the periods. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for and Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss less income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.