Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is based upon accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and discusses the financial condition and results of operations for Masonite International Corporation for the years ended January 3, 2021, and December 29, 2019. For further discussion of our results of operations for the years ended December 29, 2019, and December 30, 2018, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 29, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on February 20, 2020, and which is incorporated herein by reference. In this MD&A, "Masonite," "we," "us," "our" and the "Company" refer to Masonite International Corporation and its subsidiaries.
This discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion should also be read in conjunction with the disclosure under "Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements" and Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors" elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ materially from the forward-looking statements as a result of these risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a leading global designer, manufacturer, marketer and distributor of interior and exterior doors for the new construction and repair, renovation and remodeling sectors of the residential and non-residential building construction markets. Since 1925, we have provided our customers with innovative products and superior service at compelling values. In order to better serve our customers and create sustainable competitive advantages, we focus on developing innovative products, advanced manufacturing capabilities and technology-driven sales and service solutions.
We market and sell our products to remodeling contractors, builders, homeowners, retailers, dealers, lumberyards, commercial and general contractors and architects through well-established wholesale, retail and direct distribution channels as part of our cross-merchandising strategy. Customers are provided a broad product offering of interior and exterior doors and entry systems at various price points. We manufacture a broad line of interior doors, including residential molded, flush, stile and rail, louver and specially-ordered commercial and architectural doors; door components for internal use and sale to other door manufacturers; and exterior residential steel, fiberglass and wood doors and entry systems.
We operate 61 manufacturing and distribution facilities in eight countries in North America, South America, Europe and Asia, which are strategically located to serve our customers through multiple distribution channels. These distribution channels include: (i) direct distribution to retail home center customers; (ii) one-step distribution that sells directly to homebuilders and contractors; and (iii) two-step distribution through wholesale distributors. For retail home center customers, numerous door fabrication facilities provide value-added fabrication and logistical services, including pre-finishing and store delivery of pre-hung interior and exterior doors. We believe our ability to provide: (i) a broad product range; (ii) frequent, rapid, on-time and complete delivery; (iii) consistency in products and merchandising; (iv) national service; and (v) special order programs enables retail customers to increase comparable store sales and helps to differentiate us from our competitors. We believe investments in innovative new product manufacturing and distribution capabilities, coupled with an ongoing commitment to operational excellence, provide a strong platform for future growth.
Our reportable segments are currently organized and managed principally by end market: North American Residential, Europe and Architectural. In the year ended January 3, 2021, we generated net sales of $1,638.1 million or 72.6%, $258.1 million or 11.4% and $340.9 million or 15.1% in our North American Residential, Europe and Architectural segments, respectively. See "Segment Information" below for a description of our reportable segments.
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Key Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
COVID-19
A novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was first identified in Wuhan, China in December 2019, and in March 2020 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. To date, COVID-19 has surfaced in nearly all regions around the world and resulted in business slowdowns or shutdowns in affected areas. As a result, COVID-19 has impacted our business globally. Our first priority with regard to the COVID-19 pandemic is to do everything we can to ensure the safety, health and welfare of our employees, customers, suppliers and others with whom we partner in our business activities. Through the use of appropriate risk mitigation and safety practices at our facilities, we are endeavoring to maintain operations to continue supplying the industry during this uncertain time, recognizing the important role our customers and our products play in construction related to providing residential shelter and health care services.
During 2020, a number of countries, provinces, states and municipalities issued orders temporarily requiring persons who were not engaged in essential activities and businesses to remain at home. Additionally, some jurisdictions without stay-at-home orders required non-essential businesses to close. As a result, some of our facilities were temporarily shut down due to the impact of these government orders. For example, our United Kingdom facilities closed on March 27, 2020, and did not reopen until May 2020. Additionally, local or regional hotspots of the pandemic resulted in other locations being temporarily idled due to the impacts of COVID-19. We estimate that nearly one-half of our base volume decline in the second quarter of 2020 was due to the closure of our manufacturing facilities as a result of COVID-19 in the United Kingdom and Ireland. In addition, during this time we took several actions to reduce our spending and more closely manage cash during this uncertain period, including prioritizing capital spending for critical maintenance, safety and regulatory projects, placing restrictions on travel and temporarily suspending our share repurchase program and discretionary pension contributions. We implemented the deferral of merit and temporary reductions in base pay for all salaried personnel in Canada and the United States not directly involved in plant operations and in cash retainers for our Board of Directors to manage cash flow and reduce spending.
While the direct financial impact of COVID-19 was much lower in the second half of the year than what we experienced in the second quarter and allowed for the reversal of some of the previously instituted cash management actions as well as repayment of all impacted salaried personnel in Canada and the United States and our Board of Directors in the fourth quarter, the pandemic had and continues to have varying impacts on our reportable segments. Production levels began to stabilize at many of our manufacturing facilities, but local or regional hotspots of the pandemic continued to result in pockets of absenteeism resulting in reduced production and certain locations being temporarily idled. Further, the impact of COVID-19 on demand in the Architectural door market in the current year and expected impacts to future periods contributed to an impairment of that reporting unit’s goodwill. Refer to Note 14, Asset Impairment, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. These impacts include, but are not limited to, the duration, spread, severity and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees, operations, customers, suppliers and supply chain, the remedial actions and stimulus measures adopted by federal, state and local governments and the extent to which normal economic and operating conditions can resume.
Product Demand
There are numerous factors that influence overall market demand for our products. Demand for new homes, home improvement products and other building construction products have a direct impact on our financial condition and results of operations. Demand for our products may be impacted by changes in United States, Canadian, European, Asian or other global economic conditions, including inflation, deflation, interest rates, availability of capital, consumer spending rates, energy availability and costs, and the effects of governmental initiatives to manage economic conditions. Additionally, trends in residential new construction, repair, renovation and remodeling and architectural building construction may directly impact our financial performance. Accordingly, the following factors may have a direct impact on our business in the countries and regions in which our products are sold:
•the strength of the economy;
• the amount and type of residential and commercial construction;
• housing sales and home values;
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
• the age of existing home stock, home vacancy rates and foreclosures;
• non-residential building occupancy rates;
• increases in the cost of raw materials or wages or any shortage in supplies or labor;
• the availability and cost of credit;
• employment rates and consumer confidence; and
• demographic factors such as immigration and migration of the population and trends in household formation.
Product Pricing and Mix
The building products industry is highly competitive and we therefore face pressure on sales prices of our products. In addition, our competitors may adopt more aggressive sales policies and devote greater resources to the development, promotion and sale of their products than we do, which could result in a loss of customers. Our business in general is subject to changing consumer and industry trends, demands and preferences. Trends within the industry change often and our failure to anticipate, identify or quickly react to changes in these trends could lead to, among other things, rejection of a new product line and reduced demand and price reductions for our products, which could materially adversely affect us. Changes in consumer preferences may also lead to increased demand for our lower margin products relative to our higher margin products, which could reduce our future profitability.
Business Wins and Losses
Our customers consist mainly of wholesalers and retail home centers. In fiscal year 2020, our top ten customers together accounted for approximately 46% of our net sales and our top customer, The Home Depot, Inc. accounted for approximately 18% of our net sales in fiscal year 2020. Net sales from customers that have accounted for a significant portion of our net sales in past periods, individually or as a group, may not continue in future periods, or if continued, may not reach or exceed historical levels in any period. Certain customers perform periodic product line reviews to assess their product offerings, which have, on past occasions, led to business wins and losses. In addition, as a result of competitive bidding processes, we may not be able to increase or maintain the margins at which we sell our products to our customers.
Organizational Restructuring
Over the past several years, we have engaged in a series of restructuring programs related to exiting certain geographies and non-core businesses, consolidating certain internal support functions and engaging in other actions designed to reduce our cost structure and improve productivity. These initiatives primarily consist of severance actions and lease termination costs. Management continues to evaluate our business; therefore, in future years, there may be additional provisions for new plan initiatives, as well as changes in previously recorded estimates, as payments are made or actions are completed. Asset impairment charges were also incurred in connection with these restructuring actions for those assets sold, abandoned or made obsolete as a result of these programs.
In November 2020, we began implementing a plan to improve overall business performance that includes the reorganization of our manufacturing capacity and a reduction of our overhead and selling, general and administration workforce primarily in our Architectural reportable segment as well as limited actions in the North American Residential reportable segment. The reorganization of our manufacturing capacity involves specific facilities in the Architectural segment and costs associated with the closure of these facilities and related headcount reductions began taking place in the fourth quarter of 2020 (collectively, the "2020 Plan"). Costs associated with the 2020 Plan include severance and closure charges and will continue through 2021. Once fully implemented, the actions taken as part of the 2020 Plan are expected to increase our annual earnings and cash flows by approximately $2 million.
In February 2019, we began implementing a plan to improve overall business performance that includes the reorganization of our manufacturing capacity and a reduction of our overhead and selling, general and administration workforce across all of our reportable segments and in our head offices. The reorganization of our manufacturing capacity involves specific plants in the North American Residential and Architectural segments and costs associated with the closure of these plants and related headcount reductions began taking place in the first quarter of 2019 (collectively, the "2019 Plan"). Costs associated with the 2019 Plan include severance, retention and closure charges and will continue through 2021. Additionally, the plan to divest non-core assets was determined to be a triggering event requiring a test of the carrying value of the definite-lived assets relating to the divestitures, as further described in Note 14. In the fourth
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
quarter of 2019, we initiated additional restructuring actions related to both manufacturing capacity and reduction of our overhead and selling, general and administration workforce. Once fully implemented, the actions taken as part of the 2019 Plan are expected to increase our annual earnings and cash flows by approximately $17 to 21 million.
During the fourth quarter of 2018, we began implementing a plan to reorganize and consolidate certain aspects of our United Kingdom head office function and optimize our portfolio by divesting non-core assets to enable more effective and consistent business processes in the Europe segment. In addition, in the North American Residential segment we announced a new facility that will optimize and expand capacity through increased automation, which resulted in the closure of one existing facility and related headcount reductions beginning in the second quarter of 2019 (collectively, the “2018 Plan”). Costs associated with the 2018 Plan included severance, retention and closure charges and continued throughout 2019. Additionally, the plan to divest non-core assets was determined to be a triggering event requiring a test of the carrying value of the definite-lived assets relating to the divestitures, as further described in Note 14. The actions taken as part of the 2018 Plan are substantially complete and the annual earnings and cash flow savings realized were materially in line with expectations.
Inflation
An increase in inflation could have a significant impact on the cost of our raw material inputs. Wage inflation, increased prices for raw materials or finished goods used in our products, tariffs and/or interruptions in deliveries of raw materials or finished goods could adversely affect our profitability, margins and net sales, particularly if we are not able to pass these incurred costs on to our customers. Additionally, anti-dumping and countervailing duty trade cases, such as the January 8, 2020, Coalition of the American Millwork Producers anti-dumping and countervailing duty petitions against Wood Mouldings and Millwork Products from Brazil and China, is expected to impact our business and results of operations.
Seasonality
Our business is moderately seasonal and our net sales vary from quarter to quarter based upon the timing of the building season in our markets. Severe weather conditions in any quarter, such as unusually prolonged warm or cold conditions, rain, blizzards or hurricanes, could accelerate, delay or halt construction and renovation activity.
Acquisitions and Divestitures
We are pursuing a strategic initiative of optimizing our global business portfolio. As part of this strategy, in the last several years we have pursued strategic acquisitions targeting companies who produce components for our existing operations, manufacture niche products and provide value-added services. Additionally, we target companies with strong brands, complementary technologies, attractive geographic footprints and opportunities for cost and distribution synergies. We also continuously analyze our operations to determine which businesses, market channels and products create the most value for our customers and acceptable returns for our shareholders.
Acquisitions
•On December 4, 2020, we completed the acquisition of a Lowe's Companies, Inc. door fabrication facility in the United States for cash consideration of $3.9 million.
•On August 31, 2020, we acquired intellectual property and other assets related to an interior door technology for cash consideration of $1.9 million.
•On August 29, 2019, we completed the acquisition of TOPDOORS, s.r.o. ("Top Doors") based in the Czech Republic for cash consideration of $1.8 million, net of cash acquired, following a post-closing adjustment.
•On November 1, 2018, we completed the acquisition of the operating assets of Bridgewater Wholesalers Inc. (“BWI”) for cash consideration of $22.3 million, net of cash acquired.
•On June 1, 2018, we completed the acquisition of the operating assets of the wood door companies of AADG, Inc., including the brands Graham Manufacturing Corporation and The Maiman Company (collectively, "Graham & Maiman"). We acquired the operating assets of Graham & Maiman for cash consideration of $39.0 million.
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
•On January 29, 2018, we completed the acquisition of DW3 Products Holdings Limited (“DW3”), a leading United Kingdom provider of high quality premium door solutions and window systems, supplying products under brand names such as Solidor, Residor, Nicedor and Residence. We acquired 100% of the equity interests in DW3 for consideration of $96.3 million, net of cash acquired.
Divestitures
•During the second quarter of 2020, we completed the liquidation of our legal entity in India. As a result, we recognized $2.1 million in loss on disposal of subsidiaries.
•On December 13, 2019, we completed the sale of all of the capital stock of Window Widgets Limited ("WW"), a leading United Kingdom provider of high quality window systems, for consideration of $1.2 million, net of cash disposed.
•On March 21, 2019, we completed the sale of all of the capital stock of Performance Doorset Solutions Limited (“PDS”), a leading supplier of custom doors and millwork in the United Kingdom, for nominal consideration.
Results of Operations
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Year Ended January 3, 2021, Compared with Year Ended December 29, 2019
Net Sales
Net sales in the year ended January 3, 2021, were $2,257.1 million, an increase of $80.4 million or 3.7% from $2,176.7 million in the year ended December 29, 2019. Net sales in 2020 were negatively impacted by $3.6 million as a result of foreign exchange rate fluctuations. Excluding this exchange rate impact, net sales would have increased by $84.0 million or 3.9% due to changes in volume, average unit price and sales of components and other products. Average unit price in 2020 increased net sales by $160.8 million or 7.4% compared to 2019 and net sales of components and other products to external customers were $1.6 million higher in 2020 compared to 2019. Lower volumes excluding the incremental impact of acquisitions ("base volume") decreased net sales by $58.2 million or 2.7% in 2020 compared to 2019. Our 2019 divestitures, net of acquisition, decreased net sales by $20.2 million or 0.9% of net sales in 2020.
Net Sales and Percentage of Net Sales by Reportable Segment
North American Residential
Net sales to external customers from facilities in the North American Residential segment in the year ended January 3, 2021, were $1,638.1 million, an increase of $172.3 million or 11.8% from $1,465.8 million in the year ended December 29, 2019. Net sales in 2020 were negatively impacted by $6.6 million as a result of foreign exchange rate fluctuations. Excluding this exchange rate impact, net sales would have increased by $178.9 million or 12.2% due to changes in volume, average unit price and sales of components and other products. Average unit price increased net sales in 2020 by $139.2 million or 9.5% compared to 2019. Higher base volume increased net sales by $35.8 million or 2.4% in 2020 compared to 2019. Net sales of components and other products to external customers were $3.9 million higher in 2020 compared to 2019.
Europe
Net sales to external customers from facilities in the Europe segment in the year ended January 3, 2021, were $258.1 million, a decrease of $63.5 million or 19.7% from $321.6 million in the year ended December 29, 2019. Net sales in 2020 were positively impacted by $3.3 million as a result of foreign exchange fluctuations. Excluding this exchange rate impact, net sales would have decreased by $66.8 million or 20.8% due to changes in volume, average unit price, acquisitions and divestitures and sales of components and other products. Lower base volume, primarily due to our manufacturing facilities being closed approximately half of the second quarter and other impacts as a result of COVID-19, decreased net sales by $49.6 million or 15.4% compared to 2019. Net sales in 2020 were reduced by $20.2 million or 6.3% due to the net impact of divestitures and an acquisition, including the divestitures of three non-core
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
businesses in 2019, partially offset by incremental sales from the Top Doors acquisition. Average unit price increased net sales in 2020 by $2.8 million or 0.9% compared to 2019. Net sales of components and other products to external customers were $0.2 million higher in 2020 compared to 2019.
Architectural
Net sales to external customers from facilities in the Architectural segment in the year ended January 3, 2021, were $340.9 million, a decrease of $24.4 million or 6.7% from $365.3 million in the year ended December 29, 2019. Net sales in 2020 were negatively impacted by $0.3 million as a result of foreign exchange fluctuations. Excluding this exchange rate impact, net sales would have decreased by $24.1 million or 6.6% due to changes in volume, average unit price and sales of components and other products. Lower base volume decreased net sales in 2020 by $43.0 million or 11.8% compared to 2019 primarily as a result of COVID-19. Average unit price increased net sales in 2020 by $18.8 million or 5.1% compared to 2019. Net sales of components and other products to external customers were $0.1 million higher in 2020 compared to 2019.
Cost of Goods Sold
Our cost of goods sold is comprised of the cost to manufacture products for our customers and includes the cost of materials, direct labor, overhead, distribution and depreciation associated with assets used to manufacture products. Research and development costs are primarily included within cost of goods sold. We incur significant fixed and variable overhead at our global component locations that manufacture interior molded door facings. Our overall average production capacity utilization at these locations was approximately 73% for the years ended January 3, 2021, and December 29, 2019.
Cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales was 74.6% and 78.1% for the years ended January 3, 2021, and December 29, 2019, respectively. Material cost of sales, direct labor costs and depreciation as a percentage of net sales decreased by 2.9%, 0.7% and 0.1%, respectively, in 2020 compared to 2019. Partially offsetting these decreases, overhead as a percentage of sales increased by 0.2% over the 2019 period. Distribution in 2020 was flat as a percentage of sales compared to 2019. The decrease in material cost of sales as a percentage of net sales was driven by higher average unit prices and material cost savings projects that more than offset commodity inflation and increases in tariffs, freight costs and investments in quality. Direct labor as a percentage of net sales decreased due to prior year restructuring actions, partially offset by manufacturing wage inflation. Overhead as a percentage of net sales was negatively impacted by lower volumes, wage inflation and increased plant maintenance, partially offset by higher average unit prices in 2020 compared to 2019.
Selling, General and Administration Expenses
Selling, general and administration ("SG&A") expenses primarily include the costs for our sales organization and support staff at various plants and corporate offices. These costs include personnel costs for payroll, related benefits and stock based compensation expense; professional fees; depreciation and amortization of our non-manufacturing equipment and assets; environmental, health and safety costs; advertising expenses and rent and utilities related to administrative office facilities. In the year ended January 3, 2021, selling, general and administration expenses, as a percentage of net sales, were 16.2% compared to 14.3% in the year ended December 29, 2019, an increase of 190 basis points.
Selling, general and administration expenses in the year ended January 3, 2021, were $366.8 million, an increase of $56.2 million from $310.6 million in the year ended December 29, 2019. The overall increase was driven by a $40.6 million legal reserve related to the settlement of U.S. class action litigation, a $19.8 million increase in personnel costs primarily due to incentive compensation and resource investments to support growth, a $5.3 million increase in professional and other fees including legal costs associated with the U.S. class action litigation, a $1.9 million increase in non-cash items including depreciation and amortization, deferred compensation, loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment and share based compensation and unfavorable foreign exchange impacts of $0.7 million. These increases were partially offset by a $7.9 million reduction in travel expense and a $2.8 million decrease in advertising expense as a result of COVID-19, as well as a $1.4 million of incremental SG&A savings from our 2019 divestitures (net of acquisition).
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Restructuring Costs
Restructuring costs in the year ended January 3, 2021, were $8.2 million, compared to $9.8 million in the year ended December 29, 2019. Restructuring costs in 2020 related to severance, retention and closure charges associated with the 2020, 2019 and 2018 Plans. Restructuring costs in 2019 related to severance, retention and closure charges associated with the 2019 and 2018 Plans.
Asset Impairment
Asset impairment charges in the year ended January 3, 2021, were $51.5 million compared to $13.8 million in the year ended December 29, 2019. Asset impairment charges in 2020 resulted from a goodwill impairment charge recorded in our Architectural reporting unit. Refer to Note 14. Asset Impairment, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information. Asset impairment charges in 2019 resulted from actions associated with the 2019 Plan.
Loss on Disposal of Subsidiaries
Loss on disposal of subsidiaries represents the difference between proceeds received upon disposition and the book value of a subsidiary which has been divested and was excluded from treatment as a discontinued operation. Also included in loss on disposal of subsidiaries is recognition of the cumulative translation adjustment out of accumulated other comprehensive loss. Loss on disposal of subsidiaries was $2.1 million in the year ended January 3, 2021 compared to $14.3 million in the year ended December 29, 2019. The loss in the current year arose as a result of the liquidation of our legal entity in India and is comprised of the recognition of the cumulative translation adjustment out of accumulated other comprehensive loss of $2.3 million and $0.2 million relating to the write-off of net assets and other professional fees. The loss in the prior year was related to the sale of WW and PDS. WW was sold for consideration of $2.2 million, net of cash disposed. PDS was sold for nominal consideration. Charges related to the disposition of WW and PDS consist of $8.3 million and $3.6 million, respectively, relating to the write-off of the net assets sold and other professional fees as well as $1.4 million and $1.0 million, respectively, relating to the recognition of the cumulative translation adjustment out of accumulated other comprehensive loss.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net, in the year ended January 3, 2021, was $46.8 million, compared to $46.5 million in the year ended December 29, 2019, remaining relatively flat as compared to the 2019 period.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt represents the difference between the reacquisition price of debt and the net carrying amount of the extinguished debt. The net carrying amount includes the principal, unamortized premium and unamortized debt issuance costs. There was no loss on extinguishment of debt in the year ended January 3, 2021. Loss on extinguishment of debt was $14.5 million in the year ended December 29, 2019 and related to the redemption of senior unsecured notes. This charge represents the difference between the redemption price of our senior unsecured notes of $514.1 million and the net carrying amount of such notes of $499.6 million. In addition to the $500.0 million of principal, the redemption price included a make-whole premium of $14.1 million and the net carrying amount included unamortized debt issuance costs of $3.5 million, partially offset by unamortized premiums of $3.1 million.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Other (income) expense, net includes profits and losses related to our non-majority owned unconsolidated subsidiaries that we recognize under the equity method of accounting, unrealized gains and losses on foreign currency remeasurements, pension settlement charges and other miscellaneous non-operating expenses. Other (income) expense, net, in the year ended January 3, 2021, was $5.2 million of income, compared to $2.0 million of expense in the year ended December 29, 2019. The change in other (income) expense, net is primarily due to a pre-tax pension settlement charge of $5.7 million recognized in the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease in pension expense and a change in our portion of the net gains and losses related to our non-majority owned unconsolidated subsidiaries that are recognized under the equity method of accounting, partially offset by a change in the fair value of plan assets in the deferred compensation rabbi trust.
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Income Tax Expense
Our income tax expense in the year ended January 3, 2021, was $28.6 million, a change of $11.3 million from $17.3 million of income tax expense in the year ended December 29, 2019. The increase in income tax expense is primarily due to (i) the mix of income or losses within the tax jurisdictions with various tax rates in which we operate, (ii) nondeductible goodwill impairment charges related to prior stock acquisition of the Architectural reporting unit offset by (iii) the decrease in income tax expense attributable to recognition of capital loss carryforward deferred tax assets in Canada.
Segment Information
Our reportable segments are organized and managed principally by end market: North American Residential, Europe and Architectural. The Corporate & Other category includes unallocated corporate costs and the results of immaterial operating segments which were not aggregated into any reportable segment. In addition to similar economic characteristics we also consider the following factors in determining the reportable segments: the nature of business activities, the management structure directly accountable to our chief operating decision maker for operating and administrative activities, availability of discrete financial information and information presented to the Board of Directors and investors.
Our management reviews net sales and Adjusted EBITDA (as defined below) to evaluate segment performance and allocate resources. Net assets are not allocated to the reportable segments. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure which does not have a standardized meaning under GAAP and is unlikely to be comparable to similar measures used by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to either net income or operating cash flows determined in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) attributable to Masonite adjusted to exclude the following items:
• depreciation;
• amortization;
• share based compensation expense;
• loss (gain) on disposal of property, plant and equipment;
• registration and listing fees;
• restructuring costs;
• asset impairment;
• loss (gain) on disposal of subsidiaries;
• interest expense (income), net;
• loss on extinguishment of debt;
• other (income) expense, net;
• income tax expense (benefit);
• other items;
•loss (income) from discontinued operations, net of tax; and
• net income (loss) attributable to non-controlling interest.
The definition of Adjusted EBITDA was updated in the third quarter of 2020 to exclude other items as these charges are not part of our underlying business performance. This change had no impact to Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 29, 2019. This definition of Adjusted EBITDA differs from the definitions of EBITDA contained in the indenture governing the 2028 and 2026 Notes and the credit agreement governing the ABL Facility. Adjusted EBITDA is used to evaluate and compare the performance of the segments and it is one of the primary measures used to determine employee incentive compensation. Intersegment sales are recorded using market prices.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA, from an operations standpoint, provides an appropriate way to measure and assess segment performance. Our management team has established the practice of reviewing the performance of each segment based on the measures of net sales and Adjusted EBITDA. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is useful to users of the consolidated financial statements because it provides the same information that we use internally to evaluate and compare the performance of the segments and it is one of the primary measures used to determine employee incentive compensation.
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
The following reconciles Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss) attributable to Masonite:
____________
(1) Other items not part of our underlying business performance include $40,550 in legal reserves related to the settlement of U.S. class action litigation in the year ended January 3, 2021, and were recorded in selling, general and administration expenses within the consolidated statements of comprehensive income. Refer to Note 10. Commitments and Contingencies for additional information.
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Adjusted EBITDA in our North American Residential segment increased $115.3 million, or 49.6%, to $347.8 million in the year ended January 3, 2021, from $232.5 million in the year ended December 29, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA in the North American Residential segment included corporate allocations of shared costs of $64.7 million and $55.9 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The allocations generally consist of certain costs of human resources, legal, finance, information technology, research and development and share based compensation.
Adjusted EBITDA in our Europe segment decreased $5.7 million, or 12.4%, to $40.5 million in the year ended January 3, 2021, from $46.2 million in the year ended December 29, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA in the Europe segment included corporate allocations of shared costs of $1.0 million in both 2020 and 2019, respectively. The allocations generally consist of certain costs of human resources, legal, finance and information technology.
Adjusted EBITDA in our Architectural segment decreased $6.3 million or 15.5% to $34.2 million in the year ended January 3, 2021, from $40.5 million in the year ended December 29, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA in the Architectural segment also included corporate allocations of shared costs of $10.8 million and $10.6 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The allocations generally consist of certain costs of human resources, legal, finance, information technology and research and development.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs for operations vary throughout the year. Our principal sources of liquidity are cash flows from operating activities, the borrowings under our ABL Facility and an accounts receivable sales program with a third party ("AR Sales Program") and our existing cash balance. Our anticipated uses of cash in the near term include working capital needs, capital expenditures and share repurchases. As of January 3, 2021, we do not have any material commitments for capital expenditures. We anticipate capital expenditures in fiscal year 2021 to be approximately [$80 to $90 million.] On a continual basis, we evaluate and consider strategic acquisitions, divestitures and joint ventures to create shareholder value and enhance financial performance.
We believe that our cash balance on hand, future cash generated from operations, the use of our AR Sales Program, our ABL Facility, and ability to access the capital markets will provide adequate liquidity for the foreseeable future. As of January 3, 2021, we had $364.7 million of cash and cash equivalents, availability under our ABL Facility of $216.5 million and availability under our AR Sales Program of $0.5 million.
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Cash Flows
Year Ended January 3, 2021, Compared with Year Ended December 29, 2019
Cash provided by operating activities was $321.2 million during the year ended January 3, 2021, compared to $221.7 million during the year ended December 29, 2019. This $99.5 million increase in cash provided by operating activities was due to changes in net working capital, a $24.7 million increase in net income attributable to Masonite, adjusted for non-cash and non-operating items and a $22.4 million increase in other assets and liabilities in 2020 compared to 2019.
Cash used in investing activities was $73.9 million during the year ended January 3, 2021, compared to $82.1 million cash used during the year ended December 29, 2019. This $8.2 million decrease in cash used in investing activities was primarily driven by a $9.8 million decrease in cash additions to property, plant and equipment and a $3.7 million increase in proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment, partially offset by a $3.8 million increase in cash paid for acquisitions, a $1.0 million decrease in cash obtained from the sale of subsidiaries in 2020 compared to 2019 and other investing outflows of $0.5 million.
Cash used in financing activities was $54.1 million during the year ended January 3, 2021, compared to $89.4 million of cash used during the year ended December 29, 2019. This $35.3 million decrease in cash used in financing activities was driven by a $20.8 million decrease in cash used for debt-related transactions, a $16.2 million decrease in cash used for repurchases of common shares and a $0.3 million increase in cash used for tax withholding on share based awards, partially offset by a $2.0 million increase in distributions to non-controlling interests in 2020 compared to 2019.
Share Repurchases
We currently have in place a $600.0 million share repurchase authorization, stemming from three separate authorizations by our Board of Directors. The share repurchase programs have no specified end date and the timing and amount of any share repurchases will be determined by management based on our evaluation of market conditions and other factors. Any repurchases under the share repurchase programs may be made in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions or otherwise, subject to market conditions, applicable legal requirements and other relevant factors. The share repurchase programs do not obligate us to acquire any particular amount of common shares, and they may be suspended or terminated at any time at our discretion. Repurchases under the share repurchase programs are permitted to be made under one or more Rule 10b5-1 plans, which would permit shares to be repurchased when we might otherwise be precluded from doing so under applicable insider trading laws. On March 18, 2020 the share repurchase programs were temporarily suspended until the suspension was lifted during the third quarter of 2020. During the year ended January 3, 2021, we repurchased and retired 672,899 of our common shares in the open market at an aggregate cost of $43.7 million as part of the share repurchase programs. During the year ended December 29, 2019, we repurchased 1,170,925 of our common shares in the open market at an aggregate cost of $59.9 million. As of January 3, 2021, $100.3 million was available for repurchase in accordance with the share repurchase programs.
Other Liquidity Matters
Our cash and cash equivalents balance includes cash held in foreign countries in which we operate. Cash held outside Canada, in which we are incorporated, is free from significant restrictions that would prevent the cash from being accessed to meet our liquidity needs including, if necessary, to fund operations and service debt obligations in Canada. However, earnings from certain jurisdictions are indefinitely reinvested in those jurisdictions. Upon the repatriation of any earnings to Canada, in the form of dividends or otherwise, we may be subject to Canadian income taxes and withholding taxes payable to the various foreign countries. As of January 3, 2021, we do not believe adverse tax consequences exist that restrict our use of cash or cash equivalents in a material manner.
We also routinely monitor the changes in the financial condition of our customers and the potential impact on our results of operations. There has not been a change in the financial condition of a customer that has had a material adverse effect on our results of operations. However, in light of COVID-19, it is possible that there could be an impact on our results of operations in a future period and this impact could be material.
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Accounts Receivable Sales Program
Under the AR Sales Program, we can transfer ownership of eligible trade accounts receivable of certain customers. Receivables are sold outright to a third party who assumes the full risk of collection, without recourse to us in the event of a loss. Transfers of receivables under this program are accounted for as sales. Proceeds from the transfers reflect the face value of the accounts receivable less a discount. Receivables sold under the AR Sales Program are excluded from trade accounts receivable in the consolidated balance sheets and are included in cash flows from operating activities in the consolidated statements of cash flows. The discounts on the sales of trade accounts receivable sold under the AR Sales Program were not material for any of the periods presented and were recorded in selling, general and administration expense within the consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
Senior Notes
On July 25, 2019, we issued $500.0 million aggregate principal senior unsecured notes (the "2028 Notes"). The 2028 Notes were issued in a private placement for resale to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "Securities Act"), and to buyers outside of the United States pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act. The 2028 Notes were issued without registration rights and are not listed on any securities exchange. The 2028 Notes bear interest at 5.375% per annum, payable in cash semiannually in arrears on February 1 and August 1 of each year and are due February 1, 2028. The 2028 notes were issued at par. We received net proceeds of $493.3 million after deducting $6.7 million of debt issuance costs. The debt issuance costs were capitalized as a reduction to the carrying value of debt and are being accreted to interest expense over the term of the 2028 Notes using the effective interest method. The net proceeds from issuance of the 2028 Notes, together with available cash balances, were used to redeem the remaining $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of similar senior unsecured notes, resulting in loss on extinguishment of debt of $14.5 million after paying the applicable premium of $14.1 million and writing off the unamortized premium of $3.1 million and unamortized debt issuance costs of $3.5 million
We may redeem the 2028 Notes under certain circumstances specified therein. The indenture governing the 2028 Notes contains restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to: (i) incur additional debt and issue disqualified or preferred stock, (ii) make restricted payments, (iii) sell assets, (iv) create or permit restrictions on the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to pay dividends or make other distributions to the parent company, (v) create or incur certain liens, (vi) enter into sale and leaseback transactions, (vii) merge or consolidate with other entities and (viii) enter into transactions with affiliates. The foregoing limitations are subject to exceptions as set forth in the indenture governing the 2028 Notes. In addition, if in the future the 2028 Notes have an investment grade rating from at least two nationally recognized statistical rating organizations, certain of these covenants will be terminated. The indenture governing the 2028 Notes contains customary events of default (subject in certain cases to customary grace and cure periods). As of January 3, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the indenture governing the 2028 Notes.
On August 27, 2018, we issued $300.0 million aggregate principal senior unsecured notes (the “2026 Notes”). The 2026 Notes were issued in a private placement for resale to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act, and to buyers outside of the United States pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act. The 2026 Notes were issued without registration rights and are not listed on any securities exchange. The 2026 Notes bear interest at 5.75% per annum, payable in cash semiannually in arrears on March 15 and September 15 of each year and are due September 15, 2026. The 2026 Notes were issued at par. We received net proceeds of $295.7 million after deducting $4.3 million of debt issuance costs. The debt issuance costs were capitalized as a reduction to the carrying value of debt and are being accreted to interest expense over the term of the 2026 Notes using the effective interest method. The net proceeds from issuance of the 2026 Notes were used to redeem $125.0 million aggregate principal amount of similar senior unsecured notes, resulting in loss on extinguishment of debt of $5.4 million after paying the applicable premium of $5.3 million and writing off the unamortized premium of $1.0 million and unamortized debt issuance costs of $1.1 million, with the balance of the proceeds available for general corporate purposes.
We may redeem the 2026 Notes under certain circumstances specified therein. The indenture governing the 2026 Notes contains restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to: (i) incur additional debt and issue disqualified or preferred stock, (ii) make restricted payments, (iii) sell assets, (iv) create or permit restrictions on the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to pay dividends or make other distributions to the parent company, (v) create or incur certain liens, (vi) enter into sale and leaseback transactions, (vii) merge or consolidate with other entities and (viii) enter into transactions with affiliates. The foregoing limitations are subject to
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
exceptions as set forth in the indenture governing the 2026 Notes. In addition, if in the future the 2026 Notes have an investment grade rating from at least two nationally recognized statistical rating organizations, certain of these covenants will be terminated. The indenture governing the 2026 Notes contains customary events of default (subject in certain cases to customary grace and cure periods). As of January 3, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the indenture governing the 2026 Notes.
ABL Facility
On January 31, 2019, we and certain of our subsidiaries entered into a $250.0 million asset-based revolving credit facility (the "ABL Facility") maturing on January 31, 2024, which replaced the previous facility. Borrowings under the ABL Facility bear interest at a rate equal to, at our option, (i) the United States, Canadian and United Kingdom Base Rate (each as defined in the credit agreement relating to the ABL Facility, the "Amended and Restated Credit Agreement") plus a margin ranging from 0.25% to 0.50% per annum, or (ii) the Adjusted LIBO Rate or BA Rate (each as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement), plus a margin ranging from 1.25% to 1.50% per annum. In addition to paying interest on any outstanding principal under the ABL Facility, a commitment fee is payable on the undrawn portion of the ABL Facility in an amount equal to 0.25% per annum of the average daily balance of unused commitments during each calendar quarter.
The ABL Facility contains various customary representations, warranties and covenants by us that, among other things, and subject to certain exceptions, restricts our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to: (i) pay dividends on our common shares and make other restricted payments, (ii) make investments and acquisitions, (iii) engage in transactions with our affiliates, (iv) sell assets, (v) merge and (vi) create liens. The ABL Facility, among other things, (i) permits us to incur unlimited unsecured debt as long as such debt does not contain covenants or default provisions that are more restrictive than those contained in the ABL Facility, (ii) permits us to incur debt as long as the pro forma secured leverage ratio is less than 4.5 to 1.0, and (iii) adds certain additional exceptions and exemptions under the restricted payment, investment and indebtedness covenants (including increasing the amount of certain debt permitted to be incurred under existing exceptions). As of January 3, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the credit agreement governing the ABL Facility and there were no amounts outstanding under the ABL Facility.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
Our obligations under the 2028 Notes and 2026 Notes and the ABL Facility are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally, by certain of our directly or indirectly wholly-owned subsidiaries. The following unaudited supplemental financial information for our non-guarantor subsidiaries is presented:
Our non-guarantor subsidiaries generated external net sales of $2.0 billion, $1.9 billion and $1.9 billion in the years ended January 3, 2021, December 29, 2019, and December 30, 2018, respectively. Our non-guarantor subsidiaries generated Adjusted EBITDA of $305.5 million, $241.6 million and $224.1 million for the years ended January 3, 2021, December 29, 2019, and December 30, 2018, respectively. Our non-guarantor subsidiaries had total assets of $2.2 billion and $2.0 billion as of January 3, 2021, and December 29, 2019; and total liabilities of $935.3 million and $834.5 million as of January 3, 2021, and December 29, 2019, respectively.
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our contractual obligations over the periods indicated as of January 3, 2021:
____________
(1) Pension contributions relate to our United Kingdom pension plan.
(2) As of January 3, 2021, we have $8.8 million recorded as a long-term liability for uncertain tax positions. We are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of payments, or the amount by which our liability for these uncertain tax positions will increase or decrease over time, and accordingly, this liability has been excluded from the above table.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are fully disclosed in our annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. We consider the following policies to be most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
Business Acquisition Accounting
We use the acquisition method of accounting for all business acquisitions. We allocate the purchase price of our business acquisitions based on the fair value of identifiable tangible and intangible assets. The difference between the total cost of the acquisitions and the sum of the fair values of the acquired tangible and intangible assets less liabilities is recorded as goodwill.
Goodwill
Goodwill is not amortized but instead is tested annually for impairment on the last day of fiscal November, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable. The test for impairment is performed at the reporting unit level by comparing the reporting unit’s carrying amount to its fair value. Possible impairment in goodwill is first analyzed using qualitative factors such as macroeconomic and market conditions, changing costs and actual and projected performance, amongst others, to determine whether it is more likely than not that the book value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. If it is determined more likely than not that the book value exceeds fair value, a quantitative analysis is performed to test for impairment. When quantitative steps are determined necessary, the fair values of the reporting units are estimated through the use of discounted cash flow analyses and market multiples. If the carrying amount exceeds fair value, then goodwill is impaired. Any impairment in goodwill is measured as the excess of the carrying value of goodwill over the fair value. The inputs utilized to derive projected cash flows are subject to significant judgments and uncertainties. As such, the realized cash flows could differ significantly from those estimated. We performed a quantitative impairment test during the third quarter of 2020 due to the continued decrease in demand in the Architectural door market due to COVID-19 in the current year, along with the uncertainty of the duration and intensity of the pandemic on the Architectural door market for future periods where indicators that goodwill impairment was present in the Architectural reporting unit. The quantitative impairment test was conducted using multiple valuation techniques, including a discounted cash flow analysis and market approach, which utilizes Level 3 fair value inputs, and resulted in a goodwill impairment charge of $51.5 million. The charge represents
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
the amount by which the carrying value of the Architectural reporting unit exceeded its fair value and reduced the goodwill balance in the Architectural reporting unit from $111.0 million to $59.5 million. We performed a qualitative impairment test during the fourth quarter of 2020 and determined that goodwill was not impaired. Uncertainty associated with future forecasts, demand in the Architectural market and the duration of impacts from COVID-19 may result in the need to write down goodwill in the Architectural reporting unit to its fair value in the future. We utilize a combination of methods which are subject to significant judgments and uncertainties including market valuation and discounted cash flows to measure the fair value of our reporting units and to determine if there is any impairment of goodwill.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets with definite lives include customer relationships, non-compete agreements, patents, supply agreements, certain acquired trademarks and system software development. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. Amortizable intangible assets are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be greater than the fair value. An impairment loss is recognized when the estimate of undiscounted future cash flows generated by such assets is less than the carrying amount. Measurement of the impairment loss is based on the fair value of the asset, determined using discounted cash flows when quoted market prices are not readily available. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually on the last day of fiscal November, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicated that the carrying value may exceed the fair value. We performed a qualitative impairment test during the fourth quarter of 2020 and determined that indefinite-lived intangible assets were not impaired.
Long-lived Assets
Long-lived assets other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, which are separately tested for impairment, are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. When evaluating long-lived assets for potential impairment, we first compare the carrying value of the asset to the estimates of asset’s useful lives and undiscounted future cash flows based on market participant assumptions. If the undiscounted expected future cash flows are less than the carrying amount of the asset and the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized.
Income Taxes
As a multinational corporation, we are subject to taxation in many jurisdictions and the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with inherent uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in various taxing jurisdictions. We assess the income tax positions and record tax liabilities for all years subject to examination based upon our evaluation of the facts, circumstances and information available as of the reporting date.
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities at enacted rates. We base our estimate of deferred tax assets and liabilities on current tax laws and rates and, in certain cases, business plans and other expectations about future outcomes. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. While we have considered future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in assessing the need for the valuation allowance, in the event that we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of our net recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be a credit to income in the period such determination was made. The consolidated financial statements include changes to the valuation allowances as a result of uncertainty regarding our ability to realize certain deferred tax assets in the future.
Our accounting for deferred tax consequences represents our best estimate of future events that can be appropriately reflected in the accounting estimates. Changes in existing tax laws, regulations, rates and future operating results may affect the amount of deferred tax liabilities or the valuation of deferred tax assets over time. The application of tax laws and regulations is subject to legal and factual interpretation, judgment and uncertainty. Tax laws and regulations themselves are also subject to change as a result in changes in fiscal policy, changes in legislation, the evolution of regulations and court rulings.
Although we believe the measurement of liabilities for uncertain tax positions is reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final outcomes of these matters will not be different than what is reflected in the historical income tax provisions and accruals. If we ultimately determine that the payment of these liabilities will be unnecessary, the liability
MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
is reversed and a tax benefit is recognized in the period in which such determination is made. Conversely, additional tax charges are recorded in a period in which it is determined that a recorded tax liability is less than the ultimate assessment is expected to be. If additional taxes are assessed as a result of an audit or litigation, there could be a material effect on our income tax provision and net income in the period or periods for which that determination is made.
Inventory
We value inventories at the lower of cost or replacement cost for raw materials, and the lower of cost or net realizable value for finished goods, with expense estimates made for obsolescence or unsaleable inventory. In determining net realizable value, we consider such factors as yield, turnover and aging, expected future demand and market conditions, as well as past experience. A change in the underlying assumptions related to these factors could affect the valuation of inventory and have a corresponding effect on cost of goods sold. Historically, actual results have not significantly deviated from those determined using these estimates.
Share Based Compensation Plan
We have a share based compensation plan, which governs the issuance of common shares to employees as compensation through various grants of share instruments. We apply the fair value method of accounting using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to determine the compensation expense for stock appreciation rights. The compensation expense for the restricted stock units awarded is based on the fair value of the restricted stock units at the date of grant. Additionally, the compensation expense for certain performance based awards was determined using the Monte Carlo simulation method. There were no awards outstanding as of January 3, 2021, valued using this method. Compensation expense is recorded in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income and is recognized over the requisite service period. The determination of obligations and compensation expense requires the use of several mathematical and judgmental factors, including stock price, expected volatility, the anticipated life of the award, estimated risk free rate and the number of shares or share options expected to vest. Any difference in the number of shares or share options that actually vest can affect future compensation expense. Other assumptions are not revised after the original estimate.
Changes in Accounting Standards and Policies
Changes in accounting standards and policies are discussed in Note 1. Business Overview and Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.