ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. The MD&A should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed elsewhere in this Form 10-K, particularly in Item 1A. "Risk Factors" and in the "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" preceding Part I of this Form 10-K.
Throughout this MD&A, we refer to measures used by management to evaluate performance, including a number of financial measures that are not defined under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP"). Please see "Non-GAAP Disclosures" at the end of this Item 7 for further detail on these financial measures. We believe these measures provide investors with important information that is useful in understanding our business results and trends. Reconciliations within this MD&A provide more details on the use and derivation of these measures.
OVERVIEW
Dover Corporation is a diversified global manufacturer and solutions provider delivering innovative equipment and components, consumable supplies, aftermarket parts, software and digital solutions and support services.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, consolidated revenue was $6.7 billion, a decrease of $0.5 billion or 6.3%, as compared to the prior year. This decline included an organic revenue decline of 6.6% driven by COVID-19 and a 0.7% impact from dispositions, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 1.0%. Overall, customer pricing favorably impacted revenue by approximately 0.7% for the year.
Within our Engineered Products segment, revenue decreased $166.3 million, or 9.8%, from the prior year, reflecting a broad-based organic revenue decline of 10.3%, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 0.3% and a favorable foreign currency translation of 0.2%. The organic revenue decline was primarily driven by the global economic downturn precipitated by the COVID-19 pandemic. The impact was broad-based across the segment, with the most significant impacts experienced in our waste handling, industrial winch and hoist, industrial automation and fluid dispensing businesses.
Our Fueling Solutions segment revenue decreased $143.9 million, or 8.9%, from prior year, reflecting an organic decline of 8.8% and an unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 0.3%, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 0.2%. The organic revenue decline was principally driven by the adverse effects of COVID-19 and reduced underground equipment volume in China due to the tapering of government-mandated infrastructure upgrades.
Our Imaging & Identification segment revenue decreased $46.3 million, or 4.3%, from the prior year, comprised of organic decline of 7.2% and an unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 1.0%, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 3.9%. The organic revenue decline was primarily driven by the global economic downturn precipitated by the COVID-19 pandemic, which materially impacted our digital textile printing business, as government-mandated clothing and apparel retail closures and widespread practice of working from home reduced demand worldwide for apparel and textiles.
Our Pumps & Process Solutions segment revenue decreased $14.5 million, or 1.1%, from the prior year, attributable to an organic decline of 2.3% and a 0.5% decrease from a disposition, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 1.1% and a favorable impact from foreign currency translation of 0.6%. The organic revenue decline was principally driven by continued weakness in demand for compression components and aftermarket services, as well as continued slower demand for industrial pumps due to pandemic-related disruptions and weaker activity in the energy industry, which was partially offset by strong performance in the biopharma and plastics & polymers markets.
Our Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment revenue decreased $80.5 million, or 5.8%, from the prior year, reflecting an organic revenue decline of 3.0% and a disposition related decline of 2.9%, partially offset by a favorable impact from foreign currency translation of 0.1%. The organic decline was due to the impact of COVID-19 as government actions to contain the spread of the virus as well as atypically high volume of retail grocery sales during the early staged of the pandemic, resulted
in deferred customer orders and operational inefficiencies across the segment. The decline was partially offset by increased project activity in can-shaping equipment.
From a geographic perspective, organic revenue for the U.S., our largest market, declined 3.1%, while organic revenue in Europe and Asia declined 8.5% and 13.5%, respectively, year over year. Organic revenue in all other geographic markets declined 11.2%. Three out of our five segments experienced declines in U.S. organic sales, while organic sales in the Fueling Solutions and Refrigeration & Food Equipment segments grew 3.8% and 2.3%, respectively. Operational and demand headwinds from the COVID-19 pandemic led to a decline in Europe for four of our five segments, while the Pumps & Process Solutions segment grew 0.7%. The decline in Asia was driven mainly by a reduction in China where our Fueling Solutions segment, our second largest business in China, faced significant headwinds due to the expiration of the government's double-wall upgrade mandate that drove significant activity in prior years, as well as continued slower demand from the local national oil companies.
Gross profit was $2.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $146.9 million, or 5.6%, as compared to the prior year. Gross profit decreased due to lower revenue as productivity initiatives including prior rightsizing programs and cost containment actions were partially offset by increased material costs and inflation and higher restructuring costs. Gross profit margin expanded to 37.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 36.7% for the prior year. For further discussion related to our consolidated and segment results, see "Consolidated Results of Operations" and "Segment Results of Operations," respectively, within MD&A.
Bookings decreased 4.4% over the prior year to $6.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. This included an organic bookings decline of 4.6%, a 0.6% decline due to dispositions, and an unfavorable impact due to foreign exchange rate of 0.2%, partially offset by a 1.0% increase in acquisition-related bookings. Bookings declined organically in four segments primarily as a result of the global impact on customer demand from the COVID-19 pandemic, and increased in our Refrigeration & Food Equipment on the back of positive trends, most significantly in can-shaping, as well as food retail and heat exchanger markets. Overall, our book-to-bill increased from the prior year to 1.04. Backlog as of December 31, 2020 was $1.8 billion, up from $1.5 billion from the prior year. The increase in backlog occurred in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as order rates sequentially improved after a significant second quarter decline due to COVID-19. Backlog as of December 31, 2020 included $0.5 billion, $0.2 billion, $0.2 billion, $0.4 billion and $0.5 billion in the Engineered Products, Fueling Solutions, Imaging & Identification, Pumps & Process Solutions and Refrigeration & Food Equipment segments, respectively. See definition of bookings, organic bookings, book-to-bill and backlog within "Segment Results of Operations".
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we executed rightsizing programs to further optimize operations. Rightsizing charges of $51.5 million included restructuring charges of $44.5 million and other costs of $7.0 million. Restructuring expense was comprised primarily of new actions executed in response to lower demand driven by COVID-19 as well as continuing broad-based selling, general and administrative expense reduction initiatives and broad-based operational efficiency initiatives focusing on footprint consolidation, and operational optimization and IT centralization. These restructuring charges were broad-based across all segments as well as corporate, with costs incurred of $10.3 million in Engineered Products, $6.7 million in Fueling Solutions, $5.9 million in Imaging & Identification, $13.4 million in Pumps & Process Solutions, $4.0 million in Refrigeration & Food Equipment and $4.1 million at Corporate. Other costs were comprised primarily of charges related to the restructuring actions and asset charges, principally due to a $3.6 million write off of assets, partially offset by a $1.7 million gain on sale of assets in our Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment. Additional programs, beyond the scope of the announced programs may be implemented during 2021 with related restructuring charges.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we made a total of six acquisitions totaling $335.8 million, net of cash acquired. We acquired Sys-Tech Solutions, Inc. ("Systech"), a leading provider of product traceability, regulatory compliance and brand-protection software and solutions to pharmaceutical and consumer products manufacturers, for $161.8 million, net of cash acquired, to strengthen the Imaging & Identification segment. We acquired So. Cal. Soft-Pak, Incorporated ("Soft-Pak"), a leading specialized provider of integrated back office, route management and customer relationship management software solutions to the waste and recycling fleet industry for $45.5 million, net of cash acquired, within the Engineered Products segment. We acquired Em-tec GmbH ("Em-tec"), a leading designer and manufacturer of flow measurement devices that serve a wide array of medical and biopharmaceutical applications for $30.4 million, net of cash acquired, to expand the Pumps & Process Solution segment. We acquired Solaris Laser S.A. ("Solaris"), a global manufacturer of product identification and traceability solutions for $18.7 million, net of cash acquired, to strengthen the Imaging & Identification segment. We acquired Innovative Control Systems, Inc. (“ICS”), a leading provider of car wash controllers, payment
terminals, point-of-sale and wash site management software solutions for $77.0 million, net of cash acquired, to enhance the Fueling Solutions segment. See Note 4 - Acquisitions in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further details regarding the businesses acquired during the year.
On March 6, 2020, we completed the sale of the Chino, California branch of The AMS Group ("AMS Chino"), a regional aftermarket refrigeration services and solutions provider based in Southern California. The AMS Group was a wholly owned subsidiary, which was part of our Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment. We sold the business for total consideration of $15.4 million and recorded a pre-tax gain on sale of $5.2 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we purchased approximately 1.0 million shares of our common stock for a total cost of $106.3 million, or $108.54 per share. In November 2020, our Board of Directors approved a new standing share repurchase authorization, whereby we may repurchase up to 20 million shares beginning on January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2023. We also continued our 65 year history of increasing our annual dividend per share and paid a total of $284.3 million in dividends to our shareholders.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted the global economy and adversely impacted our business, including demand for our products across multiple end-markets as well as our supply chain and operations.
Our foremost focus as we respond to the pandemic has been on the health and safety of our employees. We have enhanced health and safety measures across our facilities, including modifying practices to adhere to guidance from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and local health and governmental authorities with respect to social distancing, physical separation, personal protective equipment and sanitization. We also restricted the number of employees permitted in common areas at any given time. We enhanced our operational excellence model by memorializing our approach to sanitized manufacturing which includes procedures for dealing with confirmed COVID-19 cases, compliance auditing, and manufacturing line design. We will continue to closely monitor the risks posed by COVID-19 and adjust our practices accordingly.
We consider our companies to be essential suppliers to our customers and business partners as we provide products and services on which our customers and broader society rely upon daily to support crucial functions. Therefore, most of our U.S. and global facilities have remained substantially operational during the outbreak with enhanced safety protocols to protect the well-being of our employees.
In order to help mitigate the negative financial impact caused by the pandemic beginning late in the first quarter, we executed a number of temporary cost savings measures across the portfolio and at our corporate center, including short-term workforce rightsizing actions, adjustments to variable compensation to reflect current conditions, elimination of non-essential travel and reduction of discretionary spending. We also reduced our capital spending for the year, without deferring strategic ongoing initiatives. In addition, we initiated restructuring actions to drive longer-term cost savings and are proactively managing our working capital.
Over the course of 2020, we experienced sequentially improving activity in most markets and geographies, though demand remains lower than historical averages across markets that we expect will take longer to fully recover, like our food equipment and digital textile businesses. However, given sequential improvements in bookings in a majority of our markets late in 2020 and a higher year over year backlog, we expect continued improvement in our financial results in 2021.
The public health situation, global response measures and corresponding impacts on various markets remain fluid and uncertain and may lead to sudden changes in trajectory and outlook. We will continue to proactively respond to the situation and may take further actions that alter our business activity as may be required by governmental authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and operations.
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
* nm: not meaningful
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue decreased $452.6 million, or 6.3% to $6.7 billion compared with 2019, reflecting an organic decline of 6.6% due to lower sales volumes due to pandemic-related impacts in our markets. Acquisition-related growth increased by 1.0% led by our Imaging and Identification and Pumps & Process Solutions segments, partially offset by a 0.7% decrease from dispositions within our Pumps & Process Solutions and Refrigeration & Food Equipment segments. Foreign currency translation had no significant impact to revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. Customer pricing favorably impacted revenue by approximately 0.7% in 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, revenue increased $144.3 million, or 2.1% to $7.1 billion compared with 2018, reflecting organic growth of 3.8%, led by our Fueling Solutions and Engineered Products segments, partially offset by our Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment. Revenue also increased due to acquisition-related growth of 0.8% from our Pumps & Process Solutions and Fueling Solutions segments, partially offset by an unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 2.0%, particularly in our Fueling Solutions and Imaging and Identification segments and a 0.5% impact from dispositions within our Pumps & Process Solutions and Fueling Solutions segments. Customer pricing favorably impacted revenue by approximately 1.0% in 2019.
Gross Profit
For the year ended December 31, 2020, gross profit decreased $146.9 million, or 5.6%, to $2.5 billion compared with 2019, primarily due to lower revenue as productivity initiatives including prior rightsizing programs and cost containment actions were partially offset by increased material costs and inflation and higher restructuring costs. Gross profit margin expanded 30 basis points to 37.0% as compared to the prior year due to benefits from productivity initiatives and restructuring and cost containment actions. We are managing production at our operating plants aggressively to match demand.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, gross profit increased $61.4 million, or 2.4% to $2.6 billion compared with 2018, primarily due to organic volume growth, pricing actions, and productivity initiatives including the benefits of rightsizing actions and cost reduction initiatives, as well as reduced rightsizing costs, partially offset by increased material costs, due, in part, to U.S. Section 232 and 301 tariff exposure. Gross profit margin increased 10 basis points to 36.7% as compared to the prior year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $58.1 million, or 3.6% to $1.5 billion compared with 2019, due to reduction in discretionary spend and benefits from rightsizing actions partially offset by higher restructuring costs of $7.7 million and a $3.6 million write-off of assets. As a percentage of revenue, selling, general and administrative expenses increased 70 basis points in 2020 to 23.1%, reflecting the decrease in revenue base.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019, decreased $117.3 million, or 6.8% to $1.6 billion compared with 2018 primarily due to benefits from rightsizing actions started in 2018 and a decrease in restructuring costs of $23.7 million. As a percentage of revenue, selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 210 basis points in 2019 to 22.4%, reflecting the leverage of costs on a higher revenue base and the decrease in expenses.
Research and development costs, including qualifying engineering costs, are expensed when incurred and amounted to $142.1 million, $141.0 million and $143.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. These costs as a percent of revenue were 2.1%, 2.0% and 2.0% for the years December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Loss on assets held for sale
On March 29, 2019, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell Finder for total consideration of approximately $23.6 million net of estimated selling costs. As of March 31, 2019, Finder met the criteria to be classified as held for sale and based on the total consideration from the sale, net of selling costs, we recorded a loss on the assets held for sale of $46.9 million. The loss was comprised of an impairment on assets held for sale of $21.6 million and foreign currency translation losses reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive losses to current earnings of $25.3 million. We subsequently sold Finder on April 2, 2019, which generated total cash proceeds of $24.2 million.
Non-Operating Items
Interest Expense, net
For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense, net of interest income, decreased $12.9 million, or 10.7%, to $108.4 million compared with 2019 primarily due to lower interest rates on new debt issued in November 2019 of €500 million of 0.750% notes due 2027 and $300 million of 2.950% notes due 2029. The new notes repaid the old debt of €300 million of 2.125% notes and $450 million of 4.30% notes, which carried higher interest rates.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, interest expense, net of interest income, decreased $0.8 million, or 0.7%, to $121.3 million compared with 2018 due to the $350 million 5.45% 10-year notes that were paid in March 2018 that resulted in lower outstanding long-term debt and lower interest expense compared to 2018, partially offset by lower interest income.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
On December 4, 2019, the Company extinguished the €300 million of 2.125% notes due 2020 and the $450 million of 4.30% notes due 2021. The Company was required to pay a make whole premium to the bondholders for the early extinguishment of debt, resulting in a loss of $23.5 million.
Gain on sale of business
On March 6, 2020, we sold AMS Chino within the Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment for total consideration of $15.4 million which included a working capital adjustment. A gain of $5.2 million was recognized on this sale. The disposal did not represent a strategic shift in operations and, therefore, did not qualify for presentation as discontinued operations.
There were no dispositions in the year 2019 aside from the sale of Finder as described above, and no significant dispositions in 2018 aside from the spin-off of Apergy, whose results are presented as discontinued operations.
Other income, net
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, other income, net was $11.9 million, $13.0 million and $4.4 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, other income decreased compared to 2019 primarily due to decreased earnings from our equity method investments and increased foreign exchange losses resulting from the re-measurement and settlement of foreign currency denominated balances. For the year ended December 31, 2019, other income increased compared to 2018 primarily due to increased earnings from our equity method investments and reduction of non-operating losses from our defined benefit and post-retirement benefit plans.
Income Taxes
Our businesses have a global presence with 45%, 47% and 52% of our pre-tax earnings in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, generated in foreign jurisdictions. Foreign earnings are generally subject to local country tax rates that differ from the 21.0% U.S. statutory tax rate. As a result, for our non-U.S. business locations, our effective foreign tax rate is typically lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate.
Our effective tax rate was 18.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 19.6% and 18.5% for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively. The 2020, 2019 and 2018 rates were impacted by $22.2 million,$26.6 million, and $24.0 million respectively, of favorable net discrete items primarily driven by the tax benefit of share award exercises.
See Note 15 - Income Taxes in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional details.
Earnings from Continuing Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020, earnings from continuing operations increased $5.5 million, or 0.8%, to $683.5 million, or $4.70 per share, compared with earnings from continuing operations of $677.9 million, or $4.61 per share, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Despite a revenue decline of 6.3% due to the impact of COVID-19, earnings increased due to broad-based cost containment actions, benefits from productivity and restructuring actions, a loss due to the after-tax extinguishment of debt of $18.4 million in the prior year and a loss on assets held for sale of $46.9 million in the prior year.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, earnings from continuing operations increased $86.8 million, or 14.7%, to $677.9 million, or $4.61 per share, compared with earnings from continuing operations of $591.1 million, or $3.89 per share, for the year ended December 31, 2018. Earnings increased due to organic volume growth, pricing actions, and productivity initiatives including the benefits of restructuring actions and cost reduction initiatives. Additionally, after-tax rightsizing costs were lower by $32.9 million in 2019 compared to 2018. These benefits more than offset increases in material costs due, in part, to U.S. Section 232 and 301 tariff exposure, as well as a loss due to the after-tax extinguishment of debt of $18.4 million and a loss on assets held for sale of $46.9 million. Diluted earnings per share also improved due to the benefit of the prior and current year share repurchases.
Discontinued Operations
There were no discontinued operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The results of discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 include the historical results of Apergy prior to its distribution on May 9, 2018. The year ended December 31, 2018 included costs incurred by the Company to complete the spin-off of Apergy amounting to $46.4 million reflected in selling, general and administrative expenses in discontinued operations. Due to lump-sum payments made in 2018 for Apergy participants in the Dover U.S. Pension Plan, non-cash settlement costs of approximately $9.2 million were classified within discontinued operations.
Refer to Note 5 - Discontinued and Disposed Operations in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information on disposed and discontinued operations.
Rightsizing Activities, which includes Restructuring and Other Costs
We recorded the following rightsizing costs for the year ended December 31, 2020:
During the year ended December 31, 2020, rightsizing activities included restructuring charges of $44.5 million and other costs of $7.0 million. Restructuring expense was comprised primarily of new actions executed in response to lower demand driven by COVID-19 as well as continuing broad-based selling, general and administrative expense reduction initiatives and broad-based operational efficiency initiatives focusing on footprint consolidation, and operational optimization and IT centralization. Other costs were comprised primarily of charges related to the restructuring actions and asset charges, principally due to a $3.6 million write off of assets, partially offset by a $1.7 million gain on sale of assets in our Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment. These rightsizing charges were recorded in cost of goods and services, selling, general and administrative expenses, interest expense, and other income, net in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Additional programs, beyond the scope of the announced programs may be implemented during 2021 with related restructuring charges.
We recorded the following rightsizing costs for the year ended December 31, 2019:
During the year ended December 31, 2019, rightsizing activities included restructuring charges of $26.8 million and other costs of $5.3 million. Restructuring expense was comprised primarily of broad-based selling, general and administrative expense reduction initiatives and broad-based operational efficiency initiatives focusing on footprint consolidation, operational optimization and IT centralization. Other costs were comprised primarily of other charges related to the restructuring actions. These rightsizing charges were recorded in cost of goods and services and selling, general and administrative expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
We recorded the following rightsizing costs for the year ended December 31, 2018:
During the year ended December 31, 2018, rightsizing activities included restructuring charges of $58.5 million and other costs of $14.3 million. Restructuring expense was comprised primarily of several programs in order to further optimize operations, including 1) alignment of our cost structure in preparation for the Apergy separation, 2) broad-based selling, general and administrative expense reduction initiatives and 3) initiation of footprint consolidation actions. Other costs were comprised primarily of other charges related to the restructuring actions. These rightsizing charges were recorded in cost of goods and services, selling, general and administrative expenses and other income, net in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
See Note 12 - Restructuring Activities in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional details regarding our recent restructuring activities.
SEGMENT RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The summary that follows provides a discussion of the results of operations of each of our five operating and reportable segments (Engineered Products, Fueling Solutions, Imaging & Identification, Pumps & Process Solutions, and Refrigeration & Food Equipment). Each of these segments is comprised of various product and service offerings that serve multiple markets. See Note 20 - Segment Information in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a reconciliation of segment revenue, earnings and margin to our consolidated revenue, earnings from continuing operations and margin. Segment EBITDA and segment EBITDA margin, which are presented in the segment discussion that follows, are non-GAAP measures and do not purport to be alternatives to segment earnings (EBIT) as a measure of operating performance. We believe that these measures are useful to investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating ongoing operating profitability as they exclude the depreciation and amortization expense related primarily to capital expenditures and acquisitions that occurred in prior years, as well as in evaluating operating performance in relation to our competitors. For further information, see "Non-GAAP Disclosures" at the end of this Item 7.
Additionally, we believe the following operational metrics are useful to investors and others users of our financial information in assessing the performance of our segments:
•Bookings represent total orders received from customers in the current reporting period. This metric is an important measure of performance and an indicator of revenue order trends.
•Organic bookings represent total orders received from customers in the current reporting period excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rates and the impact of acquisitions and dispositions. The metric is an important measure of performance and an indicator of revenue order trends.
•Backlog represents an estimate of the total remaining bookings at a point in time for which performance obligations have not yet been satisfied. This metric is useful as it represents the aggregate amount we expect to recognize as revenue in the future.
•Book-to-bill is a ratio of the amount of bookings received from customers during a period divided by the amount of revenue recorded during that same period. This metric is a useful indicator of demand.
Engineered Products
Our Engineered Products segment is a provider of a wide range of products, software and services that have broad customer applications across a number of markets, including aftermarket vehicle service, solid waste handling, industrial automation, aerospace and defense, industrial winch and hoist, and fluid dispensing.
2020 Versus 2019
Engineered Products segment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $166.3 million, or 9.8% compared to the prior year, comprised of a broad-based organic revenue decline of 10.3%, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 0.3% and a favorable foreign currency translation of 0.2%. Acquisition-related growth was driven by the acquisition of Soft-Pak. Customer pricing favorably impacted revenue by approximately 0.3% in 2020.
The organic revenue decline was primarily driven by the global economic downturn precipitated by the COVID-19 pandemic beginning late in the first quarter of 2020. The impact was broad-based across the segment, with the most significant impacts in the year experienced in our waste handling, industrial winch and hoist, industrial automation and fluid dispensing businesses. In waste handling, we experienced headwinds in new order activity as waste haulers and municipalities reduced capital budgets to preserve cash flow, and orders for compaction and recycling solutions remained below prior year levels. Demand for vehicle aftermarket equipment was also subdued due to reduced driving mileage and vehicle service demand. Headwinds from the COVID-19 pandemic were more significant in the first half of the year and persisted, to a lesser extent, into the second half of the year across our businesses. Despite theses headwinds, activity improved sequentially from the second quarter into the second half of the year in a number of businesses, most notably in our vehicle service, industrial automation, and fluid dispensing businesses, as government mandated restrictions eased and customer demand accelerated. Our aerospace & defense business demonstrated resilience despite the challenges of COVID-19, posting year over year revenue growth on the back of stable demand from long-term defense programs.
While market headwinds for capital equipment across some of our businesses persist, we expect that demand for our products will continue to improve sequentially into 2021, as evidenced by strong order rates and a strong backlog in the fourth quarter
of 2020. We also remain confident that the fundamental long-term demand drivers across our end-markets remain constructive, and thus continue to believe in the long-term growth trajectory of the segment.
Engineered Products segment earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $53.7 million, or 18.4%, compared to the prior year. This decrease was primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on customer spending, partially offset by cost containment initiatives we executed in the year. These initiatives include actions to adjust direct and indirect manufacturing costs to current demand levels, the execution of short-term actions to reduce labor costs, the elimination of non-essential travel, third party and other expenses, the recognition of adjustments to variable compensation to reflect current conditions, the execution of selective structural cost actions aimed at streamlining our businesses, and a detailed review and re-prioritization of all planned investments and hiring plans. Segment margin decreased from 17.2% to 15.6% as compared to the prior year.
Bookings for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 8.8% compared to the prior year, reflecting an organic decline of 9.5%, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 0.4% and a favorable impact from foreign currency translation of 0.3%. The organic bookings decline was broad-based and primarily driven by the global impact on customer demand of the COVID-19 pandemic. Segment book-to-bill was 1.02. Backlog increased 2.6% compared to the prior year, with particular strength seen in our vehicle service, industrial automation and aerospace and defense businesses.
2019 Versus 2018
Engineered Products segment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $64.4 million, or 3.9%, compared to the prior year, comprised of broad-based organic growth of 5.4%, partially offset by a 1.5% unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation. Organic revenue growth was driven by strong activity in the refuse truck and digital solutions product lines within our waste handling business, as well as solid revenue growth in our vehicle service business. Customer pricing favorably impacted revenue by approximately 1.9% in 2019.
Engineered Products segment earnings for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $39.5 million, or 15.6%, compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily driven by solid conversion on organic volume growth, pricing actions, and productivity initiatives, including the benefits of rightsizing actions and cost reduction initiatives, as well as a reduction in rightsizing costs. These benefits more than offset increases in material costs driven by U.S. Section 232 tariffs, most notably commodity cost increases impacting steel, and Section 301 tariffs, along with unfavorable foreign currency translation. Segment margin increased from 15.5% to 17.2% as compared to the prior year.
Fueling Solutions
Our Fueling Solutions segment is focused on providing components, equipment, and software and service solutions enabling safe transport of fuels and other hazardous fluids along the supply chain, as well as the safe and efficient operation of retail fueling and vehicle wash establishments.
2020 Versus 2019
Fueling Solutions segment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $143.9 million, or 8.9%, compared to the prior year, attributable to an organic decline of 8.8% and an unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 0.3%, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 0.2%. Customer pricing favorably impacted revenue by approximately 1.0% in 2020.
The organic revenue decline was principally driven by the adverse effects of COVID-19 and the measures taken to reduce its spread globally. The negative impact started during the latter part of the first quarter in 2020 with several mandated manufacturing plant shutdowns temporarily disrupting our global operations and supply chain, followed by a reduction in customer demand, particularly from vertically-integrated oil & gas companies. Further adding to the decline in organic revenue was reduced underground equipment volume in China due to the tapering of government-mandated infrastructure upgrades. Additionally, our businesses serving the transportation and rail markets experienced slow order rates due to volatile oil prices and the resulting reduction in capital budgets of vertically-integrated international oil companies. Activity in the vehicle wash market was subdued due to government-mandated shutdowns in the first half of the year and slower new capital spending activity by independent operators due to general economic uncertainty. Despite the global decrease in sales, North America was favorably impacted by continued strong demand for Europay, Mastercard, and Visa ("EMV")-compliant equipment throughout the year. Headwinds were also partially offset by robust performance in Mexico due to the growing demand in fueling dispenser volume.
While we anticipate the tapering of North America EMV volume in 2021 due to the compliance deadline, recent new product introductions, recovery in global market demand and growth in our software and solutions business is expected to provide
growth within the retail fueling markets. Our vehicle wash business is also supported by a healthy backlog of orders given improving recent order activity. Our rail and transportation market is expected to remain subdued due to the challenging dynamics within the oil and transport industry.
Fueling Solutions segment earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $5.1 million, or 2.2%, compared to the prior year. The increase was driven by favorable pricing initiatives, restructuring benefits, productivity actions, selling, general and administrative cost containment, and favorable impact from foreign currency translation. These benefits were partially offset by weakened organic volume due to COVID-19. Segment margin increased 180 basis points compared to the prior year.
Bookings for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 8.8% compared to the prior year, reflecting an organic decline of 8.0% and an unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 1.0%, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 0.2%. The organic bookings decline was primarily driven by the global impact on customer demand caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, slower demand from vertically-integrated oil companies and prior year bookings reflected increased orders of underground equipment in China due to government-mandated site infrastructure upgrade activity that has since tapered. This was partially offset by high order trends for EMV equipment in North America. Segment book to bill was 1.00. Backlog decreased 2.1% as compared to the prior year primarily as a result of lower second and third quarter bookings.
2019 Versus 2018
Fueling Solutions segment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $154.6 million, or 10.5%, compared to the prior year, attributable to organic growth of 10.5% and acquisition-related growth of 3.4%, partially offset by an unfavorable foreign currency translation impact of 3.0% and a 0.4% decrease from a disposition. The organic growth was principally driven by continued strong demand in the global retail fueling industry, particularly in the United States, Europe and Asia. Growth was also driven by the acquisition of Belanger. Customer pricing favorably impacted revenue by approximately 1.0% in 2019.
Fueling Solutions segment earnings for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $79.6 million, or 52.3%, compared to the prior year. The increase was driven by volume leverage, pricing initiatives, productivity actions, acquisitions, and benefits of selling, general and administrative cost reductions realized, as well as decreased rightsizing costs. This growth was partially offset by increased material costs due, in part, to U.S. Section 232 and 301 tariff exposure. Segment margin increased 390 basis points compared to the prior year.
Imaging & Identification
Our Imaging & Identification segment supplies precision marking and coding, product traceability and digital textile printing equipment, as well as related consumables, software and services.
2020 Versus 2019
Imaging & Identification segment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $46.3 million, or 4.3% compared to the prior year, comprised of organic decline of 7.2% and an unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 1.0%, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 3.9%. Acquisition-related growth was driven by the acquisition of Systech in the first quarter and Solaris, which closed in the third quarter. Customer pricing favorably impacted revenue by approximately 0.7% in 2020.
The organic revenue decline was primarily driven by the global economic downturn precipitated by the COVID-19 pandemic beginning late in the first quarter, which materially impacted our digital textile printing business, as government-mandated mobility restrictions forced clothing and apparel retailers to close locations, and resulted in the decline of overall demand for clothing and apparel, as fewer consumers went to schools, offices, restaurants and other gatherings. Digital textile printing activity has improved since the second quarter of the year especially in sportswear and home decor markets, however demand for capital equipment for apparel printing remains slower compared to the prior year as we exit 2020. This dynamic resulted in improving demand from the second quarter to the second half of the year for inks and consumables that are closely linked to current levels of activity, while we experienced a slower recovery in demand for new equipment purchases, as customers remained focused on cash preservation. Our largest business in this segment, marking and coding, posted a modest revenue decline for the year, as we saw solid demand for consumables throughout the year, particularly inks for food and beverage, cleaning supplies, pharmaceuticals and medical supplies, and strong second half growth in demand for equipment, as customers resumed equipment purchases in the second half of 2020 as COVID-19 restrictions eased and marking and coding activity remained solid.
We expect our marking and coding business to remain resilient and anticipate a favorable long-term growth trend, supported by constructive secular trends in demand for product traceability, identification, differentiation, and brand protection solutions. We expect continued sequential improvement in activity in our digital printing business, as printing activity and overall demand for textiles continues to improve. However, uncertainty remains due to the direct impact that the COVID-19 pandemic has had on demand in the clothing and apparel industry. Despite those near-term challenges, we believe we remain favorably positioned to exploit a longer-term transition from analog to digital printing by our customers, and believe some business model shifts within the industry driven by the COVID-19 pandemic may accelerate our customers’ need to shift from analog to digital printing.
Imaging & Identification segment earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $36.0 million, or 15.7%, compared to the prior year. This decrease was primarily driven by the impact of continued reduced consumer spending due to COVID-19 on clothing, sports apparel, and other textile products that impact our digital printing customers. Partially offsetting this decrease were continued cost containment initiatives during the year. These initiatives included actions to adjust direct and indirect manufacturing cost to current demand levels, the execution of short-term actions to reduce labor costs, the elimination of non-essential travel, third party and other expenses, the recognition of adjustments to variable compensation to reflect current conditions, the execution of selective structural cost actions aimed at streamlining our business, and a detailed review and re-prioritization of all planned investments and hiring plans. These actions have been taken deliberately and strategically, and have allowed us to rationalize current spending to levels appropriate given near-term market conditions, while preserving our ability to capitalize on long-term secular growth trends. As a result, segment margin decreased from 21.2% to 18.6% as compared to the prior year.
Segment bookings for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 2.5% compared to the prior year, reflecting an organic decline of 6.3% and an unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 1.0%, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 4.8%. The organic reduction was primarily the result of a year over year reduction in new orders for equipment and consumables in our digital printing business. Segment book-to-bill was 1.03. Backlog increased 53.3% compared to the prior year driven by the Systech and Solaris acquisitions and strong order intake in marking and coding.
2019 Versus 2018
Imaging & Identification segment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $25.4 million, or 2.3%, compared to the prior year, comprised of organic growth of 1.2% more than offset by an unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 3.5%. The organic revenue growth was driven by increased equipment shipments and expanded service revenue in our marking and coding business, along with increased service revenue and increased printer and ink volumes in our digital printing business. The significant foreign currency impact was due to our broad international customer base, in particular in Asia and Europe. Customer pricing favorably impacted revenue by approximately 1.0% in 2019.
Imaging & Identification segment earnings for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $30.6 million, or 15.4%, compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily driven by productivity initiatives, including the benefits of restructuring actions, favorable pricing, and conversion on revenue growth, as well as reduced rightsizing costs. As a result, segment margin increased from 17.9% to 21.2% as compared to the prior year.
Pumps & Process Solutions
Our Pumps & Process Solutions segment manufactures specialty pumps, fluid handling components, plastics and polymer processing equipment, single use pumps, flow meters and connectors, and highly engineered components for rotating and reciprocating machines.
(1) Segment earnings (EBIT) and segment EBITDA for 2019 include a $46,946 loss on assets held for sale for Finder.
2020 Versus 2019
Pumps & Process Solutions segment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $14.5 million, or 1.1%, compared to the prior year, attributable to organic decline of 2.3% and a 0.5% decrease from a disposition, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 1.1% and a favorable impact from foreign currency translation of 0.6%. Customer pricing favorably impacted revenue by approximately 1.0% in 2020.
The organic revenue decline was principally driven by continued comparable weakness in demand for compression components and aftermarket services due to lower activity in the North American upstream, midstream and downstream energy sector, as well as continued slower demand for industrial pumps due to pandemic-related disruptions. The decline was offset by strong performance in the biopharma and hygienic markets, as well as robust demand in specialty pumps for defense applications and strong shipments against a significant backlog in the plastics & polymer processing business.
The strong bookings growth in the biopharma and hygienic markets during the fourth quarter of 2020 is expected to continue into 2021 as the underlying robust long-term growth in single-use bioproduction technologies is further supported by demand for COVID-19 related therapies and vaccines. We also expect increasing demand outside the U.S. across the segment and expect modest recovery in the energy industry.
Pumps & Process Solutions segment earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $65.2 million, or 27.2%, compared to the prior year. Segment earnings for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a loss on assets held for sale for Finder of $46.9 million. Excluding the loss, segment earnings increased as a result of pricing initiatives, productivity
actions, restructuring benefits, and selling, general and administrative cost reductions. These benefits were partially offset by the global impact of COVID-19 on volume and an unfavorable impact from material and inflation costs. Segment margin increased to 23.1% from 17.9% in the prior year, an increase of 520 basis points.
Bookings for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 4.3% compared to the prior year, reflecting an organic decline of 4.8% and a disposition related decline of 0.5%, partially offset by acquisition-related growth of 0.7% and a favorable impact from foreign currency translation of 0.3%. The organic bookings decline was primarily driven by the continued COVID-19 global impact on customer demand, as well as a high comparable benchmark from the prior year driven by large government orders, partially offset by growth in the biopharma and hygienic markets. Segment book to bill was 1.01. Backlog increased 10.5% compared to the prior year primarily driven by our biopharma and hygienic markets.
2019 Versus 2018
Pumps & Process Solutions segment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $6.6 million, or 0.5%, compared to the prior year, attributable to organic growth of 3.9% and acquisition-related growth of 0.5%. This increase was partially offset by an unfavorable foreign currency translation impact of 1.9% and a 2.0% decrease from a disposition. The organic growth was principally driven by biopharma and thermal management markets, along with strong continued demand from our OEM customers for rotating and reciprocating machinery components. Customer pricing favorably impacted revenue by approximately 1.4% in 2019.
Pumps & Process Solutions segment earnings for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $2.5 million, or 1.1%, compared to the prior year. Segment earnings included a loss on assets held for sale for Finder in the first quarter of 2019 of $46.9 million. Segment earnings increased significantly excluding the loss on sale of Finder driven by volume leverage, pricing initiatives, and productivity actions, as well as reduced rightsizing costs. These benefits were partially offset by increased material costs due, in part, to U.S. Section 232 and 301 tariff exposure, inflation costs, and unfavorable product and regional mix. Segment margin increased to 17.9% from 17.8% in the prior year, an increase of 10 basis points.
Refrigeration & Food Equipment
Our Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment is a provider of innovative and energy-efficient equipment and systems that serve the commercial refrigeration, heating and cooling and food equipment markets.
(1) Segment earnings (EBIT) and segment EBITDA for 2020 include a $5,213 gain on the sale of the Chino, California branch of The AMS Group ("AMS Chino") and a $3,640 write-off of assets.
2020 Versus 2019
Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $80.5 million, or 5.8%, compared to the prior year, reflecting an organic revenue decline of 3.0%, a disposition related decline of 2.9%, partially offset by a favorable impact from foreign currency translation of 0.1%. Customer pricing favorably impacted revenue by approximately 0.3% in 2020.
The organic revenue decline was principally driven by the impact of COVID-19 on a global basis. Government actions to contain the spread of the virus, such as mandated plant shutdowns and restaurant curtailments, resulted in deferred customer orders and operational inefficiencies across the segment. Many key customers in our retail refrigeration business deferred previously planned projects related to new store construction and existing store remodels to focus on maximizing store uptime and meeting the needs of increased customer buying resulting from more at home consumption as well as restaurant closure mandates. These impacts were incurred most significantly in the first and second quarters and, to a lesser extent, in the third and fourth quarters, with the exception of commercial U.S. foodservice where the impacts lingered throughout the year due to ongoing government restrictions on restaurant operations and closure of many school and conference center kitchens. Some of our businesses experienced a solid recovery in the third and fourth quarters, with organic growth for the segment at 2.6% and 13.2% respectively, driven by increased project activity in can-shaping equipment, a resumption of remodel programs with key retail refrigeration customers, and strengthening heat exchanger demand across all regions.
We expect continued strength in the aluminum can-shaping market driven by two key factors: (1) a secular shift with beverage companies switching from plastic to aluminum containers for environmental and other reasons, and (2) an increase in demand for canned food and beverages due to the recent COVID-19 related consumer shift to more at-home consumption. The increased fourth quarter demand for retail refrigeration products is expected to continue, as the recent wear and tear on our customers' existing assets will drive equipment replacement programs. Commercial foodservice markets remain challenged, with improved activity expected pending the successful rollout of the COVID-19 vaccine and the re-opening of restaurant, school and conference center kitchens.
Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $16.0 million, or 13.4%, compared to the prior year. Segment margin decreased to 7.8% from 8.5% in the prior year due to substantially reduced revenues and operational inefficiencies associated with COVID-19, increased restructuring expenses and a $3.6 million write-off of assets. This was partially offset by the $5.2 million gain on sale from the disposition of AMS Chino, a $1.7 million gain on sale of assets, and other broad-based cost reduction activities.
Bookings for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 4.4% compared to the prior year, reflecting organic growth of 6.5% and a favorable impact from foreign currency translation of 0.2%, partially offset by a 2.3% impact from the disposition of AMS Chino. The organic growth was primarily driven by large project awards for aluminum can-shaping equipment, resumption of key customer remodel programs, as well as customer share wins in retail refrigeration, and robust global demand for brazed-plate heat exchangers, partially offset by ongoing softness in foodservice equipment. Segment book to bill for the full year was 1.15. Backlog increased 59.2% over the prior year, principally driven by our aluminum can-shaping equipment business as well as an increase in our retail refrigeration and heat exchanger businesses.
2019 Versus 2018
Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $56.5 million, or 3.9%, compared to the prior year, reflecting an organic revenue decline of 2.7% and an unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 1.2%. The organic revenue decrease for the year ended December 31, 2019 was driven principally by reduced new food retail store construction activity with key U.S. retail refrigeration customers, reduced demand for heat exchanger products in Asia, and softer demand from national restaurant chain customers in our foodservice equipment business. These reductions were partially offset by increased project activity for can-shaping equipment and strong growth in the core door case product line within food retail industry which primarily serves store remodel applications. Customer pricing minimally impacted revenue in 2019.
Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment earnings for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $17.3 million, or 12.7%, compared to the prior year. Segment margin decreased to 8.5% from 9.4% in the prior year due to reduced volumes, unfavorable business mix in retail refrigeration, volume ramp costs for our door case product line, and costs incurred as a result of plant consolidations at our foodservice equipment business. These reductions were partially offset by improved productivity and benefits from prior year rightsizing actions, as well as reduced rightsizing costs.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
We assess our liquidity in terms of our ability to generate cash to fund our operating, investing and financing activities. Significant factors affecting liquidity are: cash flows generated from operating activities, capital expenditures, acquisitions, dispositions, dividends, repurchase of outstanding shares, adequacy of available commercial paper and bank lines of credit and the ability to attract long-term capital with satisfactory terms. We generate substantial cash from the operations of our businesses and remain in a strong financial position, with sufficient liquidity available for reinvestment in existing businesses and strategic acquisitions.
Cash Flow Summary
The following table is derived from our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $159.5 million compared to 2019. This increase was primarily driven by improvements in working capital of $89.4 million, payroll tax deferrals under the U.S. CARES Act of $31.6 million and advanced payments received on contracts, partially offset by lower net earnings, excluding the impact of depreciation, amortization, loss on assets held for sale and gain on sale of a business.
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $156.1 million compared to 2018. This increase was driven primarily by higher continuing earnings of $147.0 million, excluding a loss from discontinued operations, depreciation and amortization, a loss on assets held for sale and a loss on extinguishment of debt.
Pension and Other Post-Retirement Activity: Total cash used in conjunction with pension plans during 2020 was $19.8 million, including contributions to our international pension plans and payments of benefits under our non-qualified supplemental pension plans.
The funded status of our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan is dependent upon many factors, including returns on invested assets, the level of market interest rates and the level of funding. We contribute cash to our plans at our discretion, subject to applicable regulations and minimum contribution requirements. Due to the overfunded status of this plan, the Company did not make contributions in 2020, 2019 or 2018 and does not expect to make contributions in the near term.
Our international pension plans are located in regions where often it is not economically advantageous to pre-fund the plans due to local regulations. Total cash contributions to ongoing international defined benefit pension plans in 2020, 2019 and 2018 totaled $7.3 million, $7.2 million and $6.0 million, respectively. In 2021, we expect to contribute approximately $5.2 million to our non-U.S. plans.
Our non-qualified supplemental pension plans are funded through Company assets as benefits are paid. In 2020, 2019 and 2018 a total of $12.3 million, $13.6 million, and $19.4 million in benefits were paid under these plans, respectively. See Note 18 - Employee Benefit Plans in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion regarding our post-retirement plans.
Adjusted Working Capital: We believe adjusted working capital (a non-GAAP measure calculated as accounts receivable, plus inventory, less accounts payable) provides a meaningful measure of our operational results by showing changes caused solely by revenue.
Adjusted working capital increased from December 31, 2019 by $16.3 million, or 1.5%, to $1.1 billion at December 31, 2020, which reflected a decrease in accounts receivable of $80.0 million, an increase in inventory of $29.7 million and a decrease in accounts payable of $66.7 million. These amounts include the effects of acquisitions, dispositions and foreign currency translation. We continue to focus on improving working capital management. Accounts receivable decreased compared to the prior year as a result of lower revenue as well as improved collections. Inventories were generally higher throughout the year as we worked to reduce levels based on lower orders and ended the year higher as compared to 2019. Accounts payable, however, decreased at December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily as a result of lower spend due to COVID-19.
We facilitate the opportunity for suppliers to participate in voluntary supply chain financing (“SCF”) programs with participating financial institutions. Participating suppliers have the ability to sell receivables due from us to SCF financial institutions at the discretion of both the suppliers and the SCF financial institutions, at no economic impact to the Company. The Company and our suppliers agree on commercial terms, including payment terms, for the goods and services we procure regardless of whether the supplier participates in SCF.  For participating suppliers, our responsibility is limited to making all payments to the SCF financial institutions on the terms originally negotiated with the supplier, irrespective of whether the supplier elects to sell receivables to the SCF financial institution. The SCF financial institution pays the supplier on the invoice due date for any invoices that were not previously sold by the supplier to the SCF financial institution.  Thus, suppliers using SCF have additional potential flexibility in managing their liquidity by accelerating, at their option and cost, collection of receivables due from Dover.
Outstanding payments related to SCF programs are recorded within accounts payable in our consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, amounts due to financial institutions for suppliers using SCF were approximately $139 million and $126 million, respectively.  SCF related payments are classified as a reduction to cash flows from operations. Amounts paid to SCF financial institutions were  approximately $605 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and $552 million for our continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2018.
Investing Activities
Cash flow from investing activities is derived from cash outflows for capital expenditures and acquisitions, partially offset by cash inflows from proceeds from the sale of businesses, and property, plant and equipment. The majority of the activity in investing activities was comprised of the following:
•Acquisitions: In 2020, we deployed $335.8 million to acquire six businesses. In comparison, we acquired three businesses in 2019 for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $215.7 million. Total acquisition spend in 2018 was $68.6 million and was comprised of two businesses. See Note 4 - Acquisitions in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information with respect to recent acquisitions.
•Proceeds from sale of businesses: In 2020, we generated cash proceeds of $15.4 million, due to the sale of AMS Chino within the Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment. Cash proceeds of $24.2 million in 2019 was due to the sale of Finder. In 2018, we generated cash proceeds of $3.9 million primarily due to cash received on a sale in 2017.
•Capital spending: Capital expenditures, primarily to support growth initiatives, productivity and new product launches, were $165.7 million in 2020, $186.8 million in 2019 and $171.0 million in 2018. Our capital expenditures decreased $21.1 million in 2020 compared to 2019 in line with our reduced capital spending plan for the year as a result of COVID-19, without deferring strategic ongoing initiatives. Our capital expenditures increased $15.8 million in 2019 compared to 2018.
We anticipate that capital expenditures and any additional acquisitions we make in 2021 will be funded from available cash and internally generated funds and, if necessary, through the issuance of commercial paper, or by accessing the public debt or equity markets.
Financing Activities
Our cash flow from financing activities generally relates to the use of cash for purchases of our common stock and payment of dividends, offset by net borrowing activity. The majority of financing activity was attributed to the following:
•Long-term debt, commercial paper and notes payable, net: During 2020, we used $84.7 million to pay off commercial paper borrowings. During 2019, we issued €500 million of 0.750% euro-denominated notes due 2027 and $300 million of 2.950% notes due 2029. The proceeds from the sale of euro-denominated notes of €494.7 million, net of discounts and issuance costs, were used in part to redeem the €300 million 2.125% notes due 2020. The proceeds from the sale of notes of $296.9 million, net of discounts and issuance costs, and the remaining funds from the sale of the euro-denominated notes, were used to fund the redemption of the $450 million 4.30% notes due 2021. The early extinguishment of debt resulted in a pre-tax loss of $23.5 million. Net borrowings decreased by $93.3 million due to the issuance of debt, early extinguishment of debt, and decrease in borrowings from commercial paper. During 2018, we repaid the Company's $350.0 million 5.45% notes, which matured on March 15, 2018, and decreased net borrowings from commercial paper by $10.7 million.
•Repurchase of common stock: During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 979,165 shares of common stock at a total cost of $106.3 million. The Company suspended share repurchases in the second quarter due to business uncertainty related to COVID-19. This temporary suspension in share repurchases was lifted during the beginning of the third quarter. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we repurchased 1,343,622 shares of common stock at a total cost of $143.3 million. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we used $45.0 million to repurchase 440,608 shares under our January 2015 authorization, which expired on January 9, 2018. Under a share repurchase authorization adopted by the Board of Directors in February 2018, we also repurchased 1,753,768 shares of common stock at a total cost of $150.0 million and used $700 million to repurchase a total of 8,542,566 shares through an accelerated share repurchase transaction which concluded in December 2018. We funded the accelerated share repurchase primarily with funds received from Apergy in connection with the consummation of the Apergy spin-off.
•Dividend payments: Total dividend payments to common shareholders were $284.3 million in 2020, $282.2 million in 2019 and $283.6 million in 2018. Our dividends paid per common share increased 2% to $1.97 per share in 2020 compared to $1.94 per share in 2019, which represents the 65th consecutive year that our dividend per share has increased. The number of common shares outstanding decreased from 2019 to 2020 due to our share repurchase programs.
•Net Proceeds from the exercise of share-based awards: Payments to settle tax obligations on share exercises were $28.5 million, $37.4 million and $46.3 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decreases each year is primarily due to the decrease in the number of shares exercised partially offset by an increase in the average stock price compared to the prior year period.
•Cash received from Apergy, net of cash distributed: In connection with the separation of Apergy from Dover on May 9, 2018, Apergy incurred borrowings to fund a one-time cash payment of $700.0 million to Dover in connection with Dover's contribution to Apergy of stock and assets relating to the businesses spun off with Apergy. Dover received net cash of $689.6 million upon separation, which reflects $10.4 million of cash held by Apergy at the time of distribution and retained by it in connection with its separation from Dover.
Cash Flows from Discontinued Operations
There were no cash flows from discontinued operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Our cash flows from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 used $14.3 million. These cash flows primarily reflect the operating results of Apergy prior to its separation during the second quarter of 2018. Cash flows used in discontinued
operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily reflects cash payments of spin-off costs of $46.4 million and capital expenditures of $23.7 million, partially offset by cash provided by operations of approximately $55.4 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Free Cash Flow
In addition to measuring our cash flow generation and usage based upon the operating, investing and financing classifications included in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, we also measure free cash flow (a non-GAAP measure) which represents net cash provided by operating activities minus capital expenditures. We believe that free cash flow is an important measure of operating performance because it provides management and investors a measurement of cash generated from operations that may be available for mandatory payment obligations and investment opportunities, such as funding acquisitions, paying dividends, repaying debt and repurchasing our common stock.
The following table reconciles our free cash flow to cash flow provided by operating activities:
For 2020, we generated free cash flow of $939.1 million, representing 14.1% of revenue and 137.4% of earnings from continuing operations. Free cash flow in 2019 was $758.5 million or 10.6% of revenue and 111.9% of earnings from continuing operations. Free cash flow in 2018 was $618.2 million, or 8.8% of revenue and 104.6% of earnings from continuing operations. The full year increase in 2020 free cash flow reflects higher cash flow provided by operations primarily due to improvements in working capital, permitted deferrals of tax payments and advanced payments received on contracts, as previously noted, as well as lower capital expenditures. The 2019 increase in free cash flow compared to 2018 is due to higher operating earnings, partially offset by higher capital expenditures.
Capitalization
We use commercial paper borrowings for general corporate purposes, including the funding of acquisitions and the repurchase of our common stock. As of December 31, 2020, we maintained a $1 billion five-year unsecured revolving credit facility (the “Credit Agreement”) with a syndicate of banks, which will expire on October 4, 2024. This facility is used primarily as liquidity back-up for our commercial paper program.
Beginning in early-to-mid-March 2020, the commercial paper market began to experience very high levels of volatility as a result of COVID-19 related uncertainties. Volatility was most pronounced for "Tier-2" issuers, such as Dover, and impacted both market access and pricing. As a result, on March 16, 2020, the Company borrowed $500 million under the Credit Agreement. Proceeds from the borrowing were used to repay all of the Company's outstanding commercial paper and for general corporate purposes. We subsequently repaid the $500 million in the second quarter using proceeds from commercial paper as volatility in the commercial paper market stabilized and we resumed borrowing commercial paper.
The Company may elect to have loans under the Credit Agreement which bear interest at a base rate plus a specified applicable margin. Under this facility, we are required to pay a facility fee and to maintain an interest coverage ratio of consolidated EBITDA to consolidated net interest expense of not less than 3.0 to 1. We were in compliance with this covenant and our other long-term debt covenants at December 31, 2020 and had a coverage ratio of 11.4 to 1. We are not aware of any potential impairment to our liquidity and expect to remain in compliance with all of our debt covenants.
On May 6, 2020, we entered into a $450.0 million 364-day revolving credit facility (the "Short-term Credit Agreement") with a syndicate of banks to be used primarily for working capital and general corporate purposes. Effective November 12, 2020, we terminated the aggregate commitments under the Short-term Credit Agreement. We did not undertake any borrowings under this facility prior to termination.
On November 4, 2019, we issued €500 million of 0.750% euro-denominated notes due 2027 and $300 million of 2.950% notes due 2029. On December 4, 2019, proceeds from the aforementioned notes were used to redeem the €300 million 2.125% notes due 2020 and the $450 million 4.30% notes due 2021. Such redemption payments were made on December 4, 2019, which required us to pay a make whole premium to the bondholders, resulting in a loss of $23.5 million. The remainder of the proceeds were used for general corporate purposes.
On March 15, 2018, the outstanding 5.45% notes with a principal value of $350,000 matured. The repayment of debt was funded in part by borrowings under our commercial paper program and with existing cash balances.
We also have a current shelf registration statement filed with the SEC that allows for the issuance of additional debt securities that may be utilized in one or more offerings on terms to be determined at the time of the offering. Net proceeds of any offering would be used for general corporate purposes, including repayment of existing indebtedness, capital expenditures and acquisitions.
At December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents totaled $513.1 million, of which approximately $345.9 million was held outside the United States. At December 31, 2019, our cash and cash equivalents totaled $397.3 million, of which $273.1 million was held outside the United States. Cash and cash equivalents are held primarily in bank deposits with highly rated banks. We regularly hold cash in excess of near-term requirements in bank deposits or invest the funds in government money market instruments or short-term investments, which consist of investment grade time deposits with original maturity dates at the time of purchase of no greater than three months.
We utilize the net debt to net capitalization calculation (a non-GAAP measure) to assess our overall financial leverage and capacity and believe the calculation is useful to investors for the same reason. Net debt represents total debt minus cash and cash equivalents. Net capitalization represents net debt plus stockholders' equity. The following table provides a reconciliation of net debt to net capitalization to the most directly comparable GAAP measures:
Our net debt to net capitalization ratio decreased to 43.4% at December 31, 2020 compared to 46.8% at December 31, 2019. The decrease in this ratio was driven primarily by the increase in stockholders' equity of $353.1 million for the period as a result of increase in current earnings of $683.5 million, offset by $284.3 million of dividends paid and $106.3 million in share repurchases. Net debt decreased $77.4 million during the period primarily due to an increase of $115.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and a reduction in commercial paper, partially offset by an increase in long-term debt as a result of foreign currency translation on our euro-denominated notes.
Our net debt to net capitalization ratio decreased to 46.8% at December 31, 2019 compared to 50.0% at December 31, 2018. The decrease in this ratio was driven primarily by the increase in stockholders' equity of $264.0 million for the period as a result of increase in current earnings of $677.9 million, offset by $143.3 million in share repurchases and $282.2 million of
dividends paid. Net debt decreased $94.6 million during the period primarily due to a reduction in commercial paper, partially offset by a net increase in long-term debt after debt issuances and redemptions in 2019.
Our ability to obtain debt financing at comparable risk-based interest rates is partly a function of our existing cash flow-to-debt and debt-to-capitalization levels as well as our current credit standing. Set forth below are our credit ratings, as of December 31, 2020, which were independently developed by the respective credit agencies. The Moody's rating and outlook were issued in December 2018, and the Standard & Poor's rating was issued in December 2017 and the outlook was revised in May 2020.
Operating cash flow and access to capital markets are expected to satisfy our various cash flow requirements, including acquisitions and capital expenditures. Acquisition spending and/or share repurchases could potentially increase our debt.
We believe that existing sources of liquidity are adequate to meet anticipated funding needs at current risk-based interest rates for the foreseeable future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $152.5 million outstanding in letters of credit, surety bonds, and performance and other guarantees with financial institutions, which expire on various dates through 2029. These letters of credit and bonds are primarily issued as security for insurance, warranty and other performance obligations. In general, we would only be liable for the amount of these guarantees in the event of default in the performance of our obligations, the probability of which we believe is remote.
We have also provided typical indemnities in connection with sales of certain businesses and assets, including representations and warranties and related indemnities for environmental, health and safety, tax and employment matters. We do not have any material liabilities recorded for these indemnifications and are not aware of any claims or other information that would give rise to material payments under such indemnities.
A summary of our consolidated contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 and the years when these obligations are expected to be due is as follows:
_________
(1) See Note 13 - Borrowings and Lines of Credit to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Amounts represent principal payments for all long-term debt, including current maturities, net of unamortized discounts and deferred issuance costs.
(2) Amounts represent estimates of future interest payments on long-term debt using the interest rates in effect at December 31, 2020.
(3) Amounts represent estimated benefit payments under our unfunded supplemental benefit plans and our unfunded non-U.S. qualified defined benefit plans. See Note 18 - Employee Benefit Plans to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We also expect to contribute approximately $5.2 million to our non-U.S. qualified defined benefit plans in 2021, which amount is not reflected in the above table.
(4) Amounts represent a tax imposed by the Tax Reform Act for a one-time deemed repatriation of unremitted earnings of foreign subsidiaries.
(5) Due to the uncertainty of the potential settlement of future unrecognized tax benefits, we are unable to estimate the timing of the related payments, if any, that will be made subsequent to 2020. This amount does not include the potential indirect benefits resulting from deductions or credits for payments made to other jurisdictions. This amount includes accrued interest and penalties.
Financial Instruments and Risk Management
The diverse nature of our businesses’ activities necessitates the management of various financial and market risks, including those related to changes in interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates and commodity prices. We periodically use derivative financial instruments to manage some of these risks. We do not hold or issue derivative instruments for trading or speculative purposes. We are exposed to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to our financial instrument contracts; however, nonperformance by these counterparties is considered unlikely as our policy is to contract with highly-rated, diversified counterparties.
Interest Rate Exposure
As of December 31, 2020 and during the three year period then ended, we did not have any open interest rate swap contracts; however, we may in the future enter into interest rate swap agreements to manage our exposure to interest rate changes. We issue commercial paper, which exposes us to changes in variable interest rates; however, maturities are typically three months or less so a change in rates over this period would not have a material impact on our pre-tax earnings.
We consider our current risk related to market fluctuations in interest rates to be minimal since our debt is largely long-term and fixed in nature. Generally, the fair market value of fixed-interest rate debt will increase as interest rates fall and decrease as interest rates rise. A 100 basis point increase in market interest rates would decrease the 2020 year-end fair value of our long-term debt by approximately $280.7 million. However, since we have no plans to repurchase our outstanding fixed-rate instruments before their maturities, the impact of market interest rate fluctuations on our long-term debt does not affect our results of operations or financial position.
Foreign Currency Exposure
We conduct business in various non-U.S. countries, including Canada, substantially all of the European countries, Mexico, Brazil, China, India and other Asian countries. Therefore, we have foreign currency risk relating to receipts from customers, payments to suppliers and intercompany transactions denominated in foreign currencies. We will occasionally use derivative financial instruments to offset such risks, when it is believed that the exposure will not be limited by our normal operating and financing activities. We have formal policies to mitigate risk in this area by using fair value and/or cash flow hedging programs.
Changes in the value of the currencies of the countries in which we operate affect our results of operations, financial position and cash flows when translated into U.S. dollars, our reporting currency. The strengthening of the U.S. dollar could result in unfavorable translation effects as the results of foreign operations are translated into U.S. dollars. We have generally accepted the exposure to exchange rate movements relative to our investment in non-U.S. operations. We may, from time to time, for a specific exposure, enter into fair value hedges.
Additionally, we have designated the €600 million and €500 million of euro-denominated notes issued November 9, 2016 and November 4, 2019, respectively, as a hedge of our net investment in euro-denominated operations. We had also designated the €300 million notes due in 2020 as a net investment hedge prior to our redemption of the notes. Due to the high degree of effectiveness between the hedging instruments and the exposure being hedged, fluctuations in the value of the euro-denominated debt due to exchange rate changes are offset by changes in the net investment. Accordingly, changes in the value of the euro-denominated debt are recognized in the cumulative translation adjustment section of other comprehensive income to offset changes in the value of the net investment in euro-denominated operations. Due to the fluctuations of the euro relative to the U.S. dollar, the U.S. dollar equivalent of this debt increases or decreases, resulting in the recognition of a pre-tax (loss) gain of $(119.3) million, $22.4 million and $45.2 million in other comprehensive income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 respectively.
Commodity Price Exposure
Some of our businesses are exposed to volatility in the prices of certain commodities, such as aluminum, steel, copper and various precious metals, among others. Our primary exposure to commodity pricing volatility relates to the use of these materials in purchased component parts or the purchase of raw materials. When possible, we maintain long-term fixed price contracts on raw materials and component parts; however, we are prone to exposure as these contracts expire.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and related financial information are based on the application of U.S. GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires the use of estimates, assumptions, judgments and interpretations of accounting principles that affect the amount of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses on the consolidated financial statements. These estimates also affect supplemental information contained in our disclosures, including information regarding contingencies, risk and our financial condition. The significant accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are discussed in Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. The accounting assumptions and estimates discussed in the section below are most critical to an understanding of our financial statements because they inherently involve significant judgments and estimates. We believe our use of estimates and underlying accounting assumptions conforms to U.S. GAAP and is consistently applied. We evaluate our critical accounting estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis and update them as necessary. Management has discussed our critical accounting policies and estimates with the audit committee of the Board of Directors.
Revenue Recognition - Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standard Codification ("ASC") Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Under ASC Topic 606, a contract with a customer is an agreement which both parties have approved, that creates enforceable rights and obligations, has commercial substance and where payment terms are identified and collectability is probable. Once we enter a contract, it is evaluated to identify performance obligations. For each performance obligation, revenue is recognized as control of promised goods or services transfers to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. The amount of revenue recognized takes into account variable consideration, such as discounts and volume rebates. The majority of our revenue is generated through the manufacture and sale of a broad range of specialized products and components, with revenue
recognized upon transfer of title and risk of loss, which is generally upon shipment. Service revenue represents less than 5% of our total revenue and is recognized as the services are performed. In limited cases, our revenue arrangements with customers require delivery, installation, testing, certification, or other acceptance provisions to be satisfied before revenue is recognized. We include shipping costs billed to customers in revenue and the related shipping costs in cost of goods and services. See Note 3 - Revenue for further details.
Inventories - Inventories are stated at the lower of cost, determined on the first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis, or net realizable value. An immaterial portion of domestic inventories are stated at cost, determined on the last-in, first-out (LIFO) basis, which is less than market value. Under certain market conditions, estimates and judgments regarding the valuation of inventories are employed by us to properly value inventories.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets - We have significant goodwill and intangible assets on our consolidated balance sheets as a result of current and past acquisitions. The valuation and classification of these assets and the assignment of useful lives involve significant judgments and the use of estimates. In addition, the testing of goodwill and intangibles for impairment requires significant use of judgment and assumptions, particularly as it relates to the determination of fair value. Our indefinite-lived intangible assets and reporting units are tested and reviewed for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth quarter, or more frequently when indicators of impairment exist, when some portion but not all of a reporting unit is disposed of or classified as assets held for sale, or when a change in the composition of reporting units occurs for other reasons, such as a change in segments.
When performing an impairment test, we estimate fair value using the income-based valuation method. Under the income-based valuation method, fair value is determined based on the present value of estimated future cash flows, discounted at an appropriate risk-adjusted rate. We use our internal forecasts to estimate future cash flows and include an estimate of long-term future growth rate based on our most recent views of the long-term outlook for each reporting unit. Actual results may differ from these estimates. The discount rates used in these analyses vary by reporting unit and are based on a capital asset pricing model and published relevant industry rates. We use discount rates commensurate with the risks and uncertainties inherent to each reporting unit and in our internally developed forecasts. Discount rates used in our 2020 reporting unit valuations ranged from 8.0% to 9.0%.
We performed a quantitative goodwill impairment test for each of our 15 reporting units in the fourth quarter of 2020, concluding that the fair values of each reporting unit substantially exceeded its carrying values. As such, no goodwill impairment was recognized. While we believe the assumptions used in the 2020 impairment analysis are reasonable and representative of expected results and reflective of a market participant, actual results may differ from expectations.
Employee Benefit Plans - The valuation of our pension and other post-retirement plans requires the use of assumptions and estimates that are used to develop actuarial valuations of expenses and assets/liabilities. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions, including discount rates, investment returns, projected salary increases and benefits and mortality rates. Annually, we review the actuarial assumptions used in our pension reporting and compare them with external benchmarks to ensure that they accurately account for our future pension obligations. Changes in assumptions and future investment returns could potentially have a material impact on our pension expense and related funding requirements. Our expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is reviewed annually based on actual and forecasted returns, economic trends and and portfolio allocation. Our discount rate assumption is determined by developing a yield curve based on high quality corporate bonds with maturities matching the plans’ expected benefit payment streams. The plans’ expected cash flows are then discounted by the resulting year-by-year spot rates. As disclosed in Note 18 - Employee Benefit Plans to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the 2020 weighted-average discount rate used to measure our qualified defined benefit obligations ranged from 0.79% to 2.65%, a general decrease from the 2019 rates, which ranged from 1.18% to 3.40%. The lower 2020 discount rates in the U.S. are reflective of decreased market interest rates over this period. A 25 basis point decrease in the discount rates used for these plans would have increased the post-retirement benefit obligations by approximately $35.5 million from the amount recorded in the consolidated financial statements at December 31, 2020. Our pension expense is also sensitive to changes in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. A decrease of 25 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on assets would have increased our defined benefit pension expense by approximately $1.7 million.
Income Taxes - We have significant amounts of deferred tax assets that are reviewed for recoverability and valued accordingly. These assets are evaluated by using estimates of future taxable income streams and the impact of tax planning strategies. Reserves are also estimated, using more likely than not criteria, for federal, state and non-U.S. tax issues. We routinely monitor the potential impact of these situations and believe that we have established the proper reserves. Reserves
related to tax accruals and valuations related to deferred tax assets can be impacted by changes in tax codes and rulings (as further described below with respect to U.S. tax law), changes in statutory tax rates and our future taxable income levels. The provision for uncertain tax positions provides a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for financial statement tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in a tax return and disclosure requirements regarding uncertainties in income tax positions. The tax position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We record interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of our provision for income taxes.
Risk, Retention, Insurance - We have significant accruals and reserves related to the self-retained portion of our risk management program. These accruals require the use of estimates and judgment with regard to risk exposure and ultimate liability. We estimate losses under these programs using actuarial assumptions, our experience and relevant industry data. We review these factors quarterly and consider the current level of accruals and reserves adequate relative to current market conditions and experience.
Contingencies - We have established liabilities for environmental and legal contingencies at both the business and corporate levels. A significant amount of judgment and the use of estimates are required to quantify our ultimate exposure in these matters. The valuation of liabilities for these contingencies is reviewed on a quarterly basis to ensure that we have accrued the proper level of expense. The liability balances are adjusted to account for changes in circumstances for ongoing issues and the establishment of additional liabilities for emerging issues. While we believe that the amount accrued to-date is adequate, future changes in circumstances could impact these determinations.
Restructuring - We establish liabilities for restructuring activities at an operation when management has committed to an exit or reorganization plan and when termination benefits are probable and can be reasonably estimated based on circumstances at the time the restructuring plan is approved by management or when termination benefits are communicated. Exit costs may include contractual terminations and asset impairments as a result of an approved restructuring plan. The accrual of both severance and exit costs requires the use of estimates. Though we believe that these estimates accurately reflect the anticipated costs, actual results may be different than the estimated amounts.
Disposed and Discontinued Operations - From time to time we sell or discontinue or dispose of certain operations for various reasons. Estimates are used to adjust, if necessary, the assets and liabilities of discontinued operations to their estimated fair value. These estimates include assumptions relating to the proceeds anticipated as a result of the sale. Fair value is established using internal valuation calculations along with market analysis of similar-type entities. The adjustments to fair value of these operations provide the basis for the gain or loss when sold. Changes in business conditions or the inability to sell an operation could potentially require future adjustments to these estimates. As noted previously, in 2019, we recorded an impairment on assets held for sale due to the sale of Finder. In 2020 and 2018, no impairment charges were recorded due to operations sold, discontinued, or disposed.
Stock-Based Compensation - We are required to recognize in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings the expense associated with all share-based payment awards made to employees and directors, including stock appreciation rights ("SARs"), restricted stock units and performance share awards. We use the Black-Scholes valuation model to estimate the fair value of SARs granted to employees. The performance share awards granted in 2020 are market condition awards and we determined the fair value using the Monte Carlo simulation model (a binomial lattice-based valuation model). For information related to the assumptions used, see Note 16 - Equity and Cash Incentive Program to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Recent Accounting Standards
See Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and recently adopted accounting standards.
Non-GAAP Disclosures
In an effort to provide investors with additional information regarding our results as determined by GAAP, we also disclose non-GAAP information which we believe provides useful information to investors. Segment EBITDA, segment EBITDA margin, free cash flow, free cash flow as a percentage of revenue, free cash flow as a percentage of earnings from continuing operations, net debt, net capitalization, net debt to net capitalization ratio, adjusted working capital, organic revenue growth and rightsizing costs are not financial measures under GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for earnings, cash flows from operating activities, debt or equity, working capital, revenue or restructuring costs as determined in accordance with GAAP, and they may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
We believe that segment EBITDA and segment EBITDA margin are useful to investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating ongoing operating profitability as they exclude the depreciation and amortization expense related primarily to capital expenditures and acquisitions that occurred in prior years, as well as in evaluating operating performance in relation to our competitors. Segment EBITDA is calculated by adding back depreciation and amortization expense to segment earnings, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure. We do not present segment net income because corporate expenses are not allocated at a segment level. Segment EBITDA margin is calculated as segment EBITDA divided by segment revenue.
We believe the net debt to net capitalization ratio, free cash flow and free cash flow ratios are important measures of liquidity. Net debt to net capitalization ratio is helpful in evaluating our capital structure and the amount of leverage we employ. Free cash flow and free cash flow ratios provide both management and investors a measurement of cash generated from operations that is available to fund acquisitions, pay dividends, repay debt and repurchase our common stock. Free cash flow as a percentage of revenue equals free cash flow divided by revenue. Free cash flow as a percentage of earnings from continuing operations equals free cash flow divided by earnings from continuing operations. We believe that reporting adjusted working capital, which is calculated as accounts receivable, plus inventory, less accounts payable, provides a meaningful measure of our operational results by showing the changes caused solely by revenue. We believe that reporting organic revenue growth, which exclude the impact of foreign currency exchange rates and the impact of acquisitions and divestitures, provides a useful comparison of our revenue performance and trends between periods. We believe that reporting rightsizing costs, which include restructuring and other charges, is important as it enables management and investors to better understand the financial impact of our broad-based cost reduction, footprint consolidation, IT centralization and operational improvement initiatives.
Reconciliations of non-GAAP measures can be found above in this Item 7, MD&A.