ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
On April 1, 2019, DowDuPont Inc. (“DowDuPont” and effective June 3, 2019, n/k/a DuPont de Nemours, Inc. or "DuPont") completed the separation of its materials science business and Dow Inc. became the direct parent company of The Dow Chemical Company and its consolidated subsidiaries (“TDCC” and together with Dow Inc., “Dow” or the “Company”), owning all of the outstanding common shares of TDCC. For filings related to the period commencing April 1, 2019 and thereafter, TDCC was deemed the predecessor to Dow Inc., and the historical results of TDCC are deemed the historical results of Dow Inc. for periods prior to and including March 31, 2019. As a result of the parent/subsidiary relationship between Dow Inc. and TDCC, and considering that the financial statements and disclosures of each company are substantially similar, the companies are filing a combined report for this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The information reflected in the report is equally applicable to both Dow Inc. and TDCC, except where otherwise noted.
The separation was contemplated by the merger of equals transaction effective August 31, 2017, under the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of December 11, 2015, as amended on March 31, 2017. TDCC and E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company and its consolidated subsidiaries (“Historical DuPont”) each merged with subsidiaries of DowDuPont and, as a result, TDCC and Historical DuPont became subsidiaries of DowDuPont (the “Merger”). Subsequent to the Merger, TDCC and Historical DuPont engaged in a series of internal reorganization and realignment steps to realign their businesses into three subgroups: agriculture, materials science and specialty products. Dow Inc. was formed as a wholly owned subsidiary of DowDuPont to serve as the holding company for the materials science business.
As of the effective date and time of the distribution, DowDuPont did not beneficially own any equity interest in Dow and no longer consolidated Dow and its consolidated subsidiaries into its financial results. The consolidated financial results of Dow for all periods presented reflect the distribution of TDCC’s agricultural sciences business (“AgCo”) and specialty products business (“SpecCo”) as discontinued operations, as well as reflect the receipt of Historical DuPont’s ethylene and ethylene copolymers businesses (other than its ethylene acrylic elastomers business) (“ECP”) as a common control transaction from the closing of the Merger on August 31, 2017 ("Merger Date"). See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements and Dow Inc.'s Amendment No. 4 to the Registration Statement on Form 10 filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") on March 8, 2019 for additional information.
Throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K, unless otherwise indicated, amounts and activity are presented on a continuing operations basis.
Except as otherwise indicated by the context, the terms "Union Carbide" means Union Carbide Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, and "Dow Silicones" means Dow Silicones Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.
Items Affecting Comparability of Financial Results
As a result of the separation from DowDuPont, pro forma net sales and pro forma Operating EBIT for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 are provided in this section and based on the consolidated financial statements of TDCC, adjusted to give effect to the separation from DowDuPont as if it had been consummated on January 1, 2017. Pro forma adjustments include (1) the margin impact of various manufacturing, supply and service related agreements entered into with DuPont and Corteva, Inc. ("Corteva") in connection with the separation which provide for different pricing than the historical intercompany and intracompany pricing practices of TDCC and Historical DuPont, and (2) the elimination of the impact of events directly attributable to the Merger, internal reorganization and business realignment, separation, distribution and other related transactions (e.g., one-time transaction costs). These adjustments impacted the consolidated results as well as the reportable segments. See Note 26 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of the pro forma adjustments impacting segment measures for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
STATEMENT ON COVID-19 AND OIL PRICE VOLATILITY
Overview of Dow’s Response to COVID-19
The pandemic caused by coronavirus disease 2019 ("COVID-19") has impacted all geographic regions where Dow products are produced and sold. Financial markets were volatile towards the end of the first quarter and early in the second quarter of 2020, primarily due to uncertainty with respect to the severity and duration of the pandemic, coupled with fluctuations in crude oil prices due in part to the global spread of COVID-19. As the second quarter progressed, crude oil prices increased, driven by improved supply and demand fundamentals, which continued into the second half of 2020. Financial markets also continued a gradual and uneven recovery in the second half of 2020.
The global, regional and local spread of COVID-19 resulted in significant global mitigation measures, including government-directed quarantines, social distancing and shelter-in-place mandates, travel restrictions and/or bans, and restricted access to certain corporate facilities and manufacturing sites. Most of the Company’s manufacturing facilities have been designated essential operations by local governments. As a result, nearly all of the Company’s manufacturing sites and facilities continue to operate and are doing so safely, having implemented social distancing and enhanced health, safety and sanitization measures as directed by Dow's regional Crisis Management Teams (“CMTs”). The CMTs continue to work closely with site leadership and are adjusting alert levels as warranted on a site by site basis.
In the second quarter of 2020, the CMTs initiated implementation of the Company’s comprehensive Return to Workplace ("RTW") plan that is tailored for each site and includes several health and safety measures to be followed in a gradual and phased approach. Employees in Europe, Middle East, Africa, and India ("EMEAI") and Asia Pacific returned to the workplace throughout the third quarter of 2020. In the fourth quarter of 2020, many EMEAI sites once again reduced on-site workforce in accordance with governmental regulations. A significant number of employees in the U.S. & Canada and Latin America continue to work remotely as the Company monitors the pandemic evolution, awaiting acceptable and safe levels to implement its RTW phases. If ongoing mitigation efforts are successful, sites in the U.S. & Canada expect to implement additional RTW phases in the first and second quarters of 2021 and Latin America anticipates RTW during the second quarter of 2021. At the time of this filing, approximately half of Dow’s global workforce is working remotely. The Company continues to encourage its workforce to practice safe behaviors in the workplace and while away from work to help prevent community spread of COVID-19.
Dow’s materials science expertise and production capabilities are used to develop some of the most vital hygiene and medical products and technologies to fight the COVID-19 pandemic, such as disinfectants, sanitizers, cleansers, plastics used in the production of disposable personal protective equipment for medical professionals, and memory foam for hospital beds. The Company has continued to look for ways to contribute time, talent and materials science expertise to help fight and combat the pandemic while creating some new opportunities for innovation and business. Dow’s contributions to fight the COVID-19 pandemic included the following:
•The Company collaborated with nine key partners across a myriad of industries to develop and donate 100,000 isolation gowns to help equip frontline workers in Texas, Louisiana and Mexico.
•Dow, Whirlpool Corporation and Reynolds Consumer Products jointly developed a powered, air-purifying respirator which takes the place of a traditional medical face mask and face shield.
•Dow developed and shared an open source design for a simplified face shield and donated 100,000 face shields to hospitals in Michigan.
•Five Dow sites in the United States, Europe and Latin America produced more than 200 metric tons of hand sanitizer, equivalent to more than 880,000 eight-ounce bottles, which were primarily donated to local health systems and government agencies.
•The Company and The Dow Company Foundation committed $4 million to aid COVID-19 relief efforts, with donations going towards global relief organizations, as well as non-profits in communities where Dow operates.
During this public health crisis, the Company is focused on the health and safety of its employees, contractors, customers and suppliers around the world and maintaining the safe and reliable operations of its manufacturing sites. Although supply disruptions and related logistical issues have posed challenges across all modes of transportation, the Company’s manufacturing sites have continued to operate during the COVID-19 pandemic, with no significant impact to manufacturing whether through shutdowns or shortages in labor, raw materials or personal protective equipment. Supply chain and logistical challenges are expected to stabilize in 2021. Contingency plans remain in place in the event of significant impacts from COVID-19 infection resurgences.
The Company continues to maintain a strong financial position and build further liquidity in the midst of the economic recession triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company started 2020 with significant committed liquidity facilities. As markets became more volatile and uncertain during the first quarter of 2020, the Company took proactive measures to further bolster liquidity by drawing down certain uncommitted credit facilities, which were subsequently repaid in the second quarter of 2020, and partially monetizing investments in company-owned life insurance policies, which were fully repaid in the fourth quarter of 2020. At December 31, 2020, the Company had cash and committed and available forms of liquidity of $14.6 billion. The Company also has no substantive long-term debt maturities until the second half of 2024.
The Company took proactive actions to electively focus on cash and maintain financial strength with a continued emphasis on safe, reliable operations and disciplined capital allocation. These actions included:
•Further reduced the 2020 capital expenditures to $1.25 billion.
•Decreased operating expenses by $500 million through structural cost improvements.
•Unlocked nearly $500 million in structural improvements in working capital.
•Temporarily suspended share repurchases.
•Delayed planned maintenance turnaround spending, where appropriate, without compromising safety or the ability to serve customer needs.
•Temporarily idled select manufacturing facilities to balance production to demand across markets more severely affected by restrained economic activity. This included the idling of three polyethylene production units and two elastomers units; running Dow's polyurethanes assets, including propylene oxide and methylene diphenyl diisocyanate, at reduced operating rates; reducing siloxanes operating rates globally and extending a planned maintenance turnaround at a silicones production unit in Zhangjiagang, China. All of these assets returned to more normalized operating rates in the third quarter of 2020.
•Implementing a restructuring program ("2020 Restructuring Program"), which was approved by the Board of Directors ("Board") of Dow Inc. on September 29, 2020, targeting more than $300 million in annualized Operating EBITDA1 benefit by the end of 2021. This program includes a 6 percent reduction in Dow’s global workforce costs as well as actions to rationalize the Company's manufacturing assets, including asset write-down and write-off charges, related contract termination fees and environmental remediation costs. See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Review of 2020 Financial Impacts from COVID-19
Net sales were $38.5 billion in 2020, down 10 percent from net sales of $43.0 billion in 2019, as the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted the global economy and supply and demand fundamentals. The most significant impacts from the pandemic occurred in the first half of the year, with a gradual yet uneven recovery taking hold as the second half of the year progressed.
In the first six months of 2020, the Company's sales declined 18 percent compared with the same period last year, with the most significant impact on demand in the second quarter of 2020. Strong demand in food packaging, health and hygiene, home care and pharma end-markets was more than offset by volume declines for products used in consumer durable good end-markets, including construction, furniture and bedding and automotive, with the most notable impacts in the Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure and Performance Materials & Coatings operating segments. Demand for products used in consumer durable goods remained lower through the second quarter largely due to the delayed restart in these industries from May to June.
1.Operating EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure. Dow defines Operating EBITDA as earnings (i.e., "Income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes") before interest, depreciation and amortization, excluding the impact of significant items.
Local price declined in the first and second quarters of 2020, largely impacted by lower global energy prices. In March and April 2020, crude oil prices declined significantly, due in part to the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with increased supply from oil producers. Crude oil prices increased in the latter half of the second quarter as supply and demand fundamentals improved, driving higher feedstock costs, which proved beneficial to product prices and margins in the third and fourth quarters of 2020.
In the third quarter of 2020, net sales increased 16 percent compared with the second quarter of 2020, due to increasing demand and higher local prices. Sales increased sequentially in all operating segments and geographic regions, reflecting improved demand trends in furniture and bedding, appliances, packaging, construction and automotive end-markets. Local price also increased sequentially, reflecting higher global energy prices and improved supply and demand fundamentals, with increases in all geographic regions. Local price increases were reported in Packaging & Specialty Plastics and Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure, which more than offset declines in Performance Materials & Coatings. Operating rates increased from second quarter lows, as the Company raised rates to match demand trends as the global economic recovery gained traction. The Company's deliberate focus on structural cost reductions and prudent cash management resulted in sequentially higher margins and cash flow in the third quarter of 2020.
Net sales in the fourth quarter of 2020 increased 10 percent sequentially, with continued demand recovery as the global economy continued to strengthen. Sales increased sequentially in all operating segments and geographic regions, reflecting strong supply and demand fundamentals which drove both price and volume gains. Local price increased in all segments and all geographic regions. Volume increased in all geographic regions and in Packaging & Specialty Plastics and Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure, reflecting consumer-driven demand and industrial market recovery. Volume declined in Performance Materials & Coatings, primarily due to seasonal demand declines for coating applications. Operating rates continued to increase in the fourth quarter of 2020 and margins expanded.
Notably, net sales in the fourth quarter of 2020 increased 5 percent compared with the fourth quarter of 2019, with increases in local price and volume. Local price increased 2 percent compared with the same quarter last year, primarily driven by improved pricing in polyethylene and polyurethane applications. Volume returned to pre-pandemic levels in all operating segments and was led by demand growth in Packaging & Specialty Plastics and Performance Materials & Coatings.
The Company enters 2021 with sequential momentum and is well-positioned for continued profitable growth in the ongoing economic recovery and improving industry cycle. The Company will maintain its disciplined focus on capital allocation priorities as it benefits from an improving cost structure, financial flexibility and a low-cost operating model. As the market recovery broadens, Dow anticipates increasing margins as differentiated parts of the portfolio see improving demand. Longer-term, the Company expects to deliver ongoing significant value through increased innovation, operational efficiencies and a leading environmental, social, and governance profile that will further distinguish Dow from its peers.
At the time of this filing, the ultimate severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic cannot be reasonably estimated. The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and could continue to have, a substantial negative impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the additional risks associated with these conditions are more fully discussed in this report in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors. The Company is actively monitoring for potential financial impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and oil price volatility, including, but not limited to: gauging the financial health of its customers; assessing liquidity; evaluating the recoverability of its assets; enhancing cyber security monitoring; and evaluating ongoing appropriateness of its estimates.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted on March 27, 2020 in the United States. While there have been no significant impacts to the Company's provision for income taxes on continuing operations in 2020 as a result of the CARES Act legislation, the Company filed a tax loss carryback claim for $291 million in accordance with the provisions of the CARES Act.
Table of Contents Page
About Dow
Overview
Results of Operations
Segment Results
Packaging & Specialty Plastics
Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure
Performance Materials & Coatings
Corporate
Outlook
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Other Matters
Critical Accounting Estimates
Environmental Matters
Asbestos-Related Matters of Union Carbide Corporation
ABOUT DOW
Dow combines global breadth, asset integration and scale, focused innovation and leading business positions to achieve profitable growth. The Company’s ambition is to become the most innovative, customer centric, inclusive and sustainable materials science company, with a purpose to deliver a sustainable future for the world through our materials science expertise and collaboration with our partners. Dow’s portfolio of plastics, industrial intermediates, coatings and silicones businesses delivers a broad range of differentiated science-based products and solutions for its customers in high-growth market segments, such as packaging, infrastructure, mobility and consumer care. Dow operates 106 manufacturing sites in 31 countries and employs approximately 35,700 people.
In 2020, the Company had annual sales of $38.5 billion, of which 35 percent of the Company’s sales were to customers in the U.S. & Canada; 34 percent were in EMEAI; while the remaining 31 percent were to customers in Asia Pacific and Latin America.
In 2020, the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries did not operate in countries subject to U.S. economic sanctions and export controls as imposed by the U.S. State Department or in countries designated by the U.S. State Department as state sponsors of terrorism, including Iran, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea), Sudan and Syria. The Company has policies and procedures in place designed to ensure that it and its consolidated subsidiaries remain in compliance with applicable U.S. laws and regulations.
OVERVIEW
The following is a summary of the results from continuing operations for the Company for the year ended December 31, 2020:
The Company reported net sales in 2020 of $38.5 billion, down 10 percent from $43.0 billion in 2019, with declines across all geographic regions and operating segments, reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on economies and supply and demand fundamentals, most notably in the first half of the year. These declines were due to a decrease in local price of 7 percent and a volume decline of 3 percent. Currency was flat.
Local price decreased 7 percent compared with the same period last year, with decreases in all operating segments, including a double-digit decline in Packaging & Specialty Plastics (down 11 percent). Local price decreased in all geographic regions, including a double-digit decline in EMEAI (down 12 percent).
Volume decreased 3 percent compared with 2019. Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure and Performance Materials & Coatings reported volume declines (both down 6 percent) while Packaging & Specialty Plastics volume increased 1 percent. Volume decreased in the U.S. & Canada (down 8 percent), partially offset by an increase in EMEAI (up 1 percent). Volume was flat in Asia Pacific and Latin America.
Restructuring and asset related charges - net were $708 million in 2020, primarily reflecting actions taken under the 2020 Restructuring Program.
Integration and separation costs for Dow Inc. and TDCC were $239 million in 2020, down from $1,063 million and $1,039 million, respectively, in 2019, reflecting the wind-down of post-Merger integration and business separation activities. Integration and separation activities were completed as of December 31, 2020.
Equity in earnings (losses) of nonconsolidated affiliates was a loss of $18 million in 2020, compared with a loss of $94 million in 2019. Equity in earnings (losses) of nonconsolidated affiliates improved primarily due to lower equity losses from Sadara Chemical Company ("Sadara") which were partially offset by lower equity earnings from the Kuwait joint ventures.
Sundry income (expense) - net for Dow Inc. and TDCC was income of $1,269 million and income of $1,274 million, respectively, in 2020 compared with income of $461 million and income of $573 million, respectively, in 2019. Sundry income (expense) - net increased primarily due to gains on the sale of certain rail and marine and terminal operations and assets and gains related to a legal matter, which were partially offset by losses on the early extinguishment of debt.
Net income (loss) available for Dow Inc. and TDCC common stockholder(s) was income of $1,225 million and $1,235 million, respectively, in 2020, compared with a loss of $1,359 million and $1,237 million, respectively, in 2019. Earnings (loss) per share for Dow Inc. was earnings of $1.64 per share in 2020, compared with a loss of $1.84 per share in 2019.
In 2020, Dow Inc. declared and paid dividends to common stockholders of $2.80 per share ($2,071 million).
In 2020, Dow Inc. repurchased $125 million of the Company's common stock.
Other notable events and highlights from the year ended December 31, 2020 include:
•Dow was named by the Human Rights Campaign ("HRC") Foundation to its 2020 list of “Best Places to Work” for LGBTQ+ equality. This marks the Company’s 15th consecutive year receiving a perfect score on HRC’s Corporate Equality Index, a national benchmarking tool on corporate policies and practices pertinent to LGBTQ+ employees.
•Dow received two 2020 BIG Innovation Awards from the Business Intelligence Group for DOWSIL™ TC-3015 Reworkable Thermal Gel and ECOFAST™ Pure Sustainable Textile Treatment.
•In February 2020, TDCC announced the completion of a public offering of €2.25 billion aggregate principal amount of its notes.
•In the first quarter of 2020, TDCC redeemed $1.25 billion of its 3.0 percent notes due November 15, 2022.
•In March 2020, Dow announced a commitment of $3 million to aid COVID-19 relief efforts worldwide. This included $2 million for immediate support of impacts caused by COVID-19, including donations to the COVID-19 Solidarity Fund, Direct Relief, and local and regional nonprofit organizations in Dow communities around the globe and $1 million to build community resilience in the recovery phase.
•In response to global needs related to COVID-19, in March 2020, the Company announced plans to produce hand sanitizer at five of its manufacturing sites around the world: Auburn, Michigan; South Charleston, West Virginia; Seneffe, Belgium; Hortolandia, Brazil and Stade, Germany. A majority of the hand sanitizer produced was donated to health systems and government agencies for distribution.
•In April 2020, Dow announced the Company had developed a simplified face shield design and shared the design through an open-source file to help accelerate production rates of the critically-needed personal protective equipment.
•Effective April 9, 2020, following the Company's Annual Meeting of Stockholders ("2020 Meeting") Dow Inc.'s Board elected Jim Fitterling, Dow’s Chief Executive Officer, as Chairman. In connection with that election, the Board elected Jeff M. Fettig to serve as Lead Director until the 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders or until a successor is duly elected and qualified. The Company also announced that Jill S. Wyant, currently Executive Vice President of Innovation and Transformation at Ecolab, Inc., was elected to the Board at the 2020 Meeting and Ruth G. Shaw retired from the Board following the 2020 Meeting after 15 years of exemplary leadership, in accordance with director tenure requirements of the Company's Corporate Governance Guidelines.
•Effective April 9, 2020, following the 2020 Meeting, Dow Inc.'s Board designated Dow's business presidents Jack Broodo, Diego Donoso, Mauro Gregorio and Jane Palmieri, as Executive Officers of the Company.
•On April 30, 2020, the Company announced the temporary idling or operating rate reductions of select manufacturing assets to balance production with demand across markets more severely affected by restrained economic activity. These assets returned to more normalized operating rates in the third quarter of 2020.
•Dow published its 2019 Shine Inclusion Report, providing progress on the Company's inclusion and diversity strategy, goals and performance.
•Dow was named to the 2020 DiversityInc Top 50 Companies for Diversity list for the third consecutive year. Dow was also included on four of DiversityInc's Specialty Lists including: Top Companies for Employee Resource Groups, Top Companies for Supplier Diversity, Top Companies for People with Disabilities, and Top Companies for LGBT Employees.
•In May 2020, the Company’s global headquarters community of Midland, Michigan, experienced widespread devastation caused by heavy rain and two dam failures, which led to extensive flooding and damage to homes and businesses in the area. The Company’s manufacturing facilities were not significantly impacted by the flooding. In response to this natural disaster, Dow pledged $1 million in financial support for immediate relief and long-term recovery efforts associated with the impact of the flooding and its aftermath.
•In June 2020, the Company launched Dow ACTs (Advocacy, Community and Talent), a strategic framework that outlined a new set of actions Dow is taking to address systemic racism and racial injustice. In addition, Dow pledged $5 million over the next five years to help advance racial equality and social justice.
•In June 2020, Dow published its annual Sustainability Report and announced new sustainability targets, which align to and build upon its 2025 Sustainability Goals, including targets to Protect the Climate, Stop the Waste and Close the Loop. By 2030, Dow expects to reduce its net annual carbon emissions by five million metric tons, or 15 percent from its 2020 baseline. Additionally, Dow intends to be carbon neutral by 2050, in alignment with the Paris Agreement. By 2030, Dow plans to help stop the waste by enabling one million metric tons of plastic to be collected, reused or recycled through its direct actions and partnerships. By 2035, Dow will help close the loop with a target to have 100 percent of its products sold into packaging applications be reusable or recyclable.
•Dow was named to the 2020 Disability Equality Index® "Best Places to Work," by receiving the top score for the fourth year in a row.
•In July 2020, Dow launched its MobilityScience™ platform, designed to enhance the customer experience by tailoring technologies, products, and services from across Dow businesses to the transportation industry. The platform is pursuing accelerated growth by addressing mobility mega-trends with materials science innovation, and enabling a seamless experience for Dow’s customers and partners.
•On August 13, 2020, Gaurdie Banister Jr., former President and CEO of Aera Energy LLC, an oil and gas exploration and production company jointly owned by Shell Oil Company and ExxonMobil Corporation, was elected to Dow Inc.'s Board.
•In August 2020, TDCC announced the completion of a public offering of $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of its notes.
•Dow Silicones voluntarily repaid the full $2.0 billion outstanding principal balance under a certain third party credit agreement.
•In September 2020, TDCC and Union Carbide completed cash tender offers for certain debt securities. A total of $493 million aggregate principal amount was tendered and retired.
•Dow was named as one of the 2020 PEOPLE's "50 Companies that Care" by Great Place to Work® and PEOPLE.
•Dow received four 2020 Sustainability Awards from the Business Intelligence Group, including the Sustainability Initiative of the Year Award for Dow's Carbon Partnership with International Olympic Committee as well as the Sustainability Products of the Year Award for ECOFAST™ Pure Sustainable Textile Treatment and SunSpheres™ BIO SPF Booster.
•On September 15, 2020, the Company announced that John Sampson will rejoin Dow as Senior Vice President, Operations, Manufacturing and Engineering, succeeding Peter Holicki, who will retire in 2021 after more than 34 years of service with Dow.
•On September 30, 2020, TDCC completed the sale of rail infrastructure operations and assets at six sites in the U.S. & Canada for gross cash proceeds in excess of $310 million.
•Dow was named to the Forbes JUST 100 list, recognizing the Company's commitment to serve all stakeholders. Dow was the top scoring chemical company in the workers category.
•In October 2020, Dow launched its first digital waste management platform, Rethink+. Rethink+ is a plastics take-back program that aims to prevent post-consumer plastic waste from going to landfills by digitally connecting waste generators, waste aggregators, waste processors and recyclers.
•Dow received five R&D 100 Awards from R&D Magazine for innovative technologies including: DOWSIL™ EC-6601 Electrically Conductive Adhesive, DOWSIL™ EI-2888 Primerless Silicone Encapsulant, ENGAGE™ 11000 Polyolefin Elastomers, NEOSEED® NE-8800 Emulsion, and RHOBARR™ 320 Polyolefin Dispersion for Paper and Board.
•Dow received the 2020 National Safety Council Green Cross for Safety® Innovation Award for its Aerial Lift Safety Project.
•Dow was named to the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index - marking the 21st time the Company has been named to this global benchmark.
•On December 1, 2020, TDCC completed the sale of certain U.S. Gulf Coast marine and terminal operations and assets for gross cash proceeds of $620 million.
•In December 2020, Dow Inc.’s Board designated John Sampson as an Executive Officer of the Company, effective January 1, 2021.
In addition to the highlights above, the following events occurred subsequent to December 31, 2020:
•On January 28, 2021, Dow announced plans to further advance and expand its digitalization efforts to deliver long-term value creation, by accelerating investment in three key areas (“Digital Acceleration”): expanding digital tools to accelerate materials science innovation; further enhancing the e-commerce buying and fulfillment experience for Dow's customers; and adopting real-time digital manufacturing insights, operational data intelligence and demand sensing to enhance the productivity and reliability of Dow’s operations. The Company expects more than $300 million in incremental annual run rate Operating EBITDA generation by the end of 2025 related to Digital Acceleration, with an additional one-time $100 million in structural working capital efficiency gains, driven in part by enhanced planning from digital tools. The activities related to Digital Acceleration are expected to result in additional cash expenditures of approximately $400 million, primarily through the end of 2022.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Sales
The following tables summarize net sales, pro forma net sales and sales variance by operating segment and geographic region from the prior year:
1.Portfolio & Other includes the sales impact of various manufacturing, supply and service related agreements entered into with DuPont and Corteva in connection with the separation, which provide for different pricing than the historical intercompany and intracompany pricing practices of TDCC and Historical DuPont.
1.Portfolio & Other includes the sales impact of various manufacturing, supply and service related agreements entered into with DuPont and Corteva in connection with the separation, which provide for different pricing than the historical intercompany and intracompany pricing practices of TDCC and Historical DuPont.
2020 Versus 2019
The Company reported net sales of $38.5 billion in 2020, down 10 percent from $43.0 billion in 2019, with local price down 7 percent and volume down 3 percent. Net sales decreased in all geographic regions and operating segments, reflecting impacts from the global COVID-19 pandemic on economies and supply and demand fundamentals, most notably in the first half of the year. Local price decreased in all operating segments and in all geographic regions, primarily in response to lower global energy prices. Local price decreased in Packaging & Specialty Plastics (down 11 percent), Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure (down 5 percent) and Performance Materials & Coatings (down 6 percent). Volume declined 3 percent, driven by the U.S. & Canada (down 8 percent), which was partially offset by demand growth in EMEAI (up 1 percent). Volume was flat in Asia Pacific and Latin America. Volume increased in Packaging & Specialty Plastics (up 1 percent) and decreased in Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure and Performance Materials & Coatings (both down 6 percent). Excluding the Hydrocarbons & Energy business, sales declined 9 percent.
2019 Versus 2018
The Company reported net sales of $43.0 billion in 2019, down 13 percent from $49.6 billion in 2018, driven by a decrease in local price, decreased volume and the unfavorable impact of currency. Sales declines were broad-based and occurred in all segments and geographic regions. Local price decreased 11 percent, primarily in response to lower feedstock and raw material costs and pricing pressures. Local price decreased in Packaging & Specialty Plastics and Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure (both down 12 percent) and in Performance Materials & Coatings (down 6 percent). Local price decreased in all geographic regions. Volume decreased 2 percent with declines in all geographic regions except Asia Pacific (up 5 percent). Volume declines were primarily driven by lower hydrocarbon co-product sales. Volume decreased in Packaging & Specialty Plastics and Performance Materials & Coatings (both down 3 percent), while Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure volume was flat. Currency unfavorably impacted net sales by 1 percent compared with the prior year, driven primarily by EMEAI (down 3 percent). Portfolio & Other improved sales by 1 percent. Excluding the Hydrocarbons & Energy business, sales declined 11 percent.
1.As reported net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with pro forma net sales for the year ended December 31, 2019.
1.Portfolio & Other includes the sales impact of various manufacturing, supply and service related agreements entered into with DuPont and Corteva in connection with the separation, which provide for different pricing than the historical intercompany and intracompany pricing practices of TDCC and Historical DuPont.
2020 Versus 2019 - Pro Forma
The Company reported net sales of $38.5 billion for 2020, down 10 percent from pro forma net sales of $43.0 billion in 2019, with local price down 7 percent and volume down 3 percent. Net sales decreased in all geographic regions and operating segments, reflecting impacts from the global COVID-19 pandemic on economies and supply and demand fundamentals, most notably in the first half of the year. Local price decreased in all operating segments and in all geographic regions, primarily in response to lower global energy prices. Local price decreased in Packaging & Specialty Plastics (down 11 percent), Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure (down 5 percent) and Performance Materials & Coatings (down 6 percent). Volume declined 3 percent, driven by the U.S. & Canada (down 8 percent), which was partially offset by an increase in EMEAI (up 1 percent). Volume was flat in Asia Pacific and Latin America. Volume increased in Packaging & Specialty Plastics (up 1 percent) and decreased in Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure (down 6 percent) and Performance Materials & Coatings (down 5 percent). Excluding the Hydrocarbons & Energy business, sales declined 9 percent.
2019 Versus 2018 - Pro Forma
The Company reported pro forma net sales for 2019 of $43.0 billion, down 14 percent from $49.9 billion for 2018, primarily driven by a decrease in local price, decreased volume and the unfavorable impact of currency. Sales declines were broad-based and occurred in all segments and geographic regions. Local price decreased 11 percent, primarily in response to lower feedstock and raw material costs and pricing pressures. Local price decreased in Packaging & Specialty Plastics and Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure (both down 12 percent) and in Performance Materials & Coatings (down 6 percent). Local price decreased in all geographic regions. Volume decreased 2 percent with declines in all geographic regions, except Asia Pacific (up 5 percent). Volume decreased in Packaging & Specialty Plastics (down 3 percent) and Performance Materials & Coatings (down 1 percent) and increased in Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure (up 1 percent). Currency unfavorably impacted net sales by 1 percent compared with the prior year, driven primarily by EMEAI (down 3 percent). Excluding the Hydrocarbons & Energy business, sales declined 11 percent.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales ("COS") was $33.3 billion in 2020, down $3.4 billion compared with $36.7 billion in 2019. COS decreased in 2020 primarily due to lower feedstock and other raw material costs, decreased sales volume and lower planned maintenance turnaround costs, which were partially offset by higher performance-based compensation costs. Operating rates declined significantly in the second quarter of 2020, as the Company temporarily idled certain manufacturing facilities and selectively adjusted operating rates at other facilities to balance production to demand in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. These facilities returned to more normalized operating rates in the third quarter of 2020. Overall, operating rates increased in the third and fourth quarters of 2020. In 2019, COS also included $75 million of transaction-related costs resulting from the separation from DowDuPont (related to Corporate) and $399 million of environmental charges related to Packaging & Specialty Plastics ($5 million), Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure ($8 million), Performance Materials & Coatings ($50 million) and Corporate ($336 million). COS as a percentage of sales was 86.5 percent in 2020 compared with 85.3 percent in 2019.
COS was $36.7 billion in 2019, down $4.4 billion from $41.1 billion in 2018. COS decreased in 2019 primarily due to lower feedstock and other raw material costs, decreased sales volume, cost synergies, stranded cost removal and a favorable adjustment to the warranty accrual of an exited business, which were partially offset by $75 million of transaction-related costs resulting from the separation from DowDuPont (related to Corporate) and $399 million of environmental charges related to Packaging & Specialty Plastics ($5 million), Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure ($8 million), Performance Materials & Coatings ($50 million) and Corporate ($336 million). COS as a percentage of sales was 85.3 percent in 2019 compared with 82.8 percent in 2018.
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses were $768 million in 2020, compared with $765 million in 2019 and $800 million in 2018. R&D expenses in 2020 increased compared with 2019 primarily due to higher performance-based compensation costs which were partially offset by cost reductions. R&D expenses in 2019 decreased compared with 2018 primarily due to cost reductions and lower performance-based compensation costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses were $1,471 million in 2020, compared with $1,590 million and $1,585 million for Dow Inc. and TDCC, respectively, in 2019 and $1,782 million in 2018. SG&A expenses in 2020 decreased primarily due to cost reductions which were partially offset by higher performance-based compensation costs. SG&A was also favorably impacted by the recovery of legal costs related to the Nova
Chemicals Corporation ("Nova") ethylene asset matter and the reversal of a bad debt reserve related to an arbitration judgment. SG&A expenses in 2019 decreased compared with 2018 primarily due to cost reductions, cost synergies, stranded cost removal and lower performance-based compensation costs. SG&A expenses were favorably impacted by a recovery of a portion of legal costs related to the Nova litigation matter in the third quarter of 2019. See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the Nova litigation matters.
Amortization of Intangibles
Amortization of intangibles was $401 million in 2020, compared with $419 million in 2019 and $469 million in 2018. Amortization of intangibles decreased primarily due to certain intangible assets becoming fully amortized. See Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on intangible assets.
Restructuring, Goodwill Impairment and Asset Related Charges - Net
Restructuring, goodwill impairment and asset related charges - net were $708 million in 2020, $3,219 million in 2019 and $221 million in 2018.
2020 Restructuring Program
On September 29, 2020, Dow Inc.'s Board approved restructuring actions to achieve the Company's structural cost improvement initiatives in response to the continued economic impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. The restructuring program is designed to reduce structural costs and enable the Company to further enhance competitiveness while the COVID-19 economic recovery gains traction. These actions are expected to be substantially complete by the end of 2021.
As a result of these actions, in 2020 the Company recorded pretax restructuring charges of $573 million, consisting of severance and related benefit costs of $297 million, asset write-downs and write-offs of $196 million and costs associated with exit and disposal activities of $80 million. The restructuring charges by segment were as follows: $11 million in Packaging & Specialty Plastics, $22 million in Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure, $177 million in Performance Materials & Coatings and $363 million in Corporate.
DowDuPont Cost Synergy Program
In September and November 2017, DowDuPont approved post-Merger restructuring actions under the DowDuPont Cost Synergy Program (the "Synergy Program") which was designed to integrate and optimize the organization following the Merger and in preparation for the business separations. The restructuring charges below reflect charges from continuing operations.
As a result of the Synergy Program, the Company recorded pretax restructuring charges of $184 million in 2018, consisting of severance and related benefit costs of $137 million, asset write-downs and write-offs of $33 million and costs associated with exit and disposal activities of $14 million. The restructuring charges by segment were as follows: $13 million in Packaging & Specialty Plastics, $11 million in Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure, $7 million in Performance Materials & Coatings and $153 million in Corporate.
In 2019, the Company recorded pretax restructuring charges of $292 million, consisting of severance and related benefit costs of $123 million, asset write-downs and write-offs of $143 million and costs associated with exit and disposal activities of $26 million. The restructuring charges by segment were as follows: $1 million in Packaging & Specialty Plastics, $7 million in Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure, $28 million in Performance Materials & Coatings and $256 million in Corporate.
In 2020, the Company recorded pretax restructuring charges of $86 million for severance and related benefit costs, related to Corporate. Cash expenditures related to the Synergy Program were substantially completed at the end of 2020.
2019 Goodwill Impairment
Upon completion of the goodwill impairment testing in the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company determined the fair value of the Coatings & Performance Monomers reporting unit was lower than its carrying amount. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $1,039 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 related to Performance Materials & Coatings.
Asset Related Charges
2020 Charges
In 2020, the Company recognized pretax impairment charges of $49 million, including additional pretax impairment charges for capital additions made to a bio-ethanol manufacturing facility in Santa Vitoria, Minas Gerais, Brazil ("Santa Vitoria"), which was impaired in 2017 and divested in 2020, as well as charges for miscellaneous write-offs and write-downs of non-manufacturing assets and the write-down of certain corporate leased equipment. The impairment charges were included in “Restructuring, goodwill impairment and asset related charges - net” in the consolidated statements of income and related to Packaging & Specialty Plastics ($19 million), Performance Materials & Coatings ($15 million) and Corporate ($15 million). See Note 23 for additional information.
2019 Charges
On August 13, 2019, the Company entered into a definitive agreement to sell its acetone derivatives business to ALTIVIA Ketones & Additives, LLC. The transaction closed on November 1, 2019 and included the Company's acetone derivatives related inventory and production assets, located in Institute, West Virginia, in addition to the site infrastructure, land, utilities and certain railcars. The Company remains at the Institute site as a tenant. As a result of the divestiture, the Company recognized a pretax impairment charge of $75 million in the third quarter of 2019. The impairment charge by segment was as follows: $24 million in Packaging & Specialty Plastics and $51 million in Corporate.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company concluded that its equity method investment in Sadara was other-than-temporarily impaired. The Company also reserved certain accounts and notes receivable and accrued interest balances due to uncertainty on the timing of collection. As a result, the Company recorded a $1,755 million pretax charge related to Sadara. The charge by segment was as follows: $370 million in Packaging & Specialty Plastics, $1,168 million in Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure and $217 million in Corporate.
In 2019, the Company recognized additional pretax impairment charges of $58 million related primarily to capital additions at its Santa Vitoria manufacturing facility, which was impaired in 2017. The impairment charges by segment were as follows: $44 million in Packaging & Specialty Plastics, $9 million in Performance Materials & Coatings and $5 million in Corporate.
2018 Charges
In 2018, the Company recognized additional pretax impairment charges of $34 million related primarily to capital additions at its Santa Vitoria manufacturing facility. The impairment charge was related to Packaging & Specialty Plastics.
See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on restructuring, goodwill impairment and asset related charges.
Integration and Separation Costs
Integration and separation costs, which reflect costs related to post-Merger integration and business separation activities (through December 31, 2020) and the ownership restructure of Dow Silicones (through May 31, 2018), were $239 million in 2020, $1,063 million and $1,039 million for Dow Inc. and TDCC, respectively, in 2019 and $1,179 million in 2018. In 2018 and 2019, integration and separation costs were higher as a result of post-Merger integration and business separation activities. Integration and business separation activities were completed as of December 31, 2020. Integration and separation costs are related to Corporate.
Equity in Earnings (Losses) of Nonconsolidated Affiliates
The Company’s share of equity in earnings (losses) of nonconsolidated affiliates in 2020 was a loss of $18 million, compared with a loss of $94 million in 2019 and earnings of $555 million in 2018. In 2020, equity losses decreased primarily due to lower equity losses from Sadara, driven by improved industry supply and demand fundamentals in the third and fourth quarters of 2020, which were partially offset by lower equity earnings from the Kuwait joint ventures due to lower monoethylene glycol prices. The Company had equity losses in 2019 compared with equity earnings in 2018 primarily due to lower equity earnings from the Kuwait joint ventures due to lower monoethylene glycol and polyethylene prices and the Thai joint ventures and increased equity losses from Sadara. See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the Company’s evaluation of its equity method investment in Sadara for other-than-temporary impairment in 2019.
Sundry Income (Expense) - Net
Sundry income (expense) - net includes a variety of income and expense items such as foreign currency exchange gains and losses, dividends from investments, gains and losses on sales of investments and assets, non-operating pension and other postretirement benefit plan credits or costs, and certain litigation matters.
TDCC
Sundry income (expense) - net for 2020 was income of $1,274 million, compared with income of $573 million in 2019 and $96 million in 2018.
In 2020, sundry income (expense) - net included a $544 million gain related to the Nova ethylene asset matter (related to Packaging & Specialty Plastics), a $499 million gain related to the sale of certain U.S. Gulf Coast marine and terminal operations and assets ($17 million related to Packaging & Specialty Plastics, $61 million related to Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure and $421 million related to Corporate), a $233 million gain related to the sale of rail infrastructure operations and assets in the U.S. & Canada ($48 million related to Packaging & Specialty Plastics and $185 million related to Corporate), and non-operating pension and postretirement benefit plan credits. These were partially offset by a $149 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt (related to Corporate), foreign currency exchange losses, $11 million in charges associated with agreements entered into with DuPont and Corteva as part of the separation and distribution, which provides for cross-indemnities and allocations of obligations and liabilities for periods prior to, at and after completion of the separation (related to Corporate), a $13 million loss related to the divestiture of a bio-ethanol manufacturing facility in Brazil (related to Packaging & Specialty Plastics) and a $2 million loss on an asset sale (related to Corporate). See Notes 5, 7, 15, 16, 20 and 26 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
In 2019, sundry income (expense) - net included foreign currency exchange gains, non-operating pension and postretirement benefit plan credits and gains on sales of assets and investments, as well as a net gain of $205 million related to litigation matters, which included a $170 million gain related to a legal matter with Nova (related to Packaging & Specialty Plastics), and an $85 million gain related to an adjustment of the Dow Silicones breast implant liability (related to Corporate), which were partially offset by a $50 million charge (net of indemnifications of $37 million), related to the settlement of the Dow Silicones commercial creditor matters (related to Corporate). In 2019, sundry income (expense) - net also included a $102 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt and a gain of $2 million on post-closing adjustments related to previous divestitures (both related to Corporate). See Notes 7, 15, 16, 20 and 26 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
In 2018, sundry income (expense) - net included non-operating pension and other postretirement benefit plan credits, a $20 million gain related to the Company's sale of its equity interest in MEGlobal (related to Corporate) and gains on sales of assets and investments, which more than offset foreign currency exchange losses, a loss of $54 million on the early extinguishment of debt (related to Corporate) and a loss of $20 million for post-closing adjustments related to the Dow Silicones ownership restructure (related to Performance Materials & Coatings). See Notes 7, 15, 20, and 26 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Dow Inc.
Sundry income (expense) - net for 2020 was income of $1,269 million, compared with income of $461 million in 2019 and $96 million in 2018.
In 2020, in addition to the amounts previously discussed above for TDCC, sundry income (expense) - net included $10 million in charges associated with the agreements entered into with DuPont and Corteva as part of the separation and distribution (related to Corporate).
In 2019, in addition to the amounts previously discussed above for TDCC, sundry income (expense) - net included a $51 million loss on post-closing adjustments related to a previous divestiture and $69 million in charges associated with the agreements entered into with DuPont and Corteva as part of the separation and distribution (both related to Corporate). See Notes 3, 7, 15, 16, 20 and 26 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Interest Expense and Amortization of Debt Discount
Dow Inc.
Interest expense and amortization of debt discount was $827 million in 2020, down from $933 million in 2019, primarily due to TDCC's redemption of long-term debt in 2019 and debt issuances at lower coupon rates in 2020. Interest expense and amortization of debt discount in 2019 was down from $1,063 million in 2018, primarily due to debt reductions and lower interest bearing notes issued in the fourth quarter of 2018, which replaced higher interest bearing notes redeemed in the fourth quarter of 2018. See Liquidity and Capital Resources in Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and Notes 11 and 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to debt financing activity.
TDCC
Interest expense and amortization of debt discount was $827 million in 2020, down from $952 million in 2019 and $1,063 million in 2018. In addition to the amounts previously discussed above for Dow Inc., TDCC had interest expense related to an intercompany loan with Dow Inc. in 2019. See Note 25 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Provision for Income Taxes on Continuing Operations
The Company's effective tax rate fluctuates based on, among other factors, where income is earned, the level of income relative to tax attributes and the level of equity earnings, since most earnings from the Company's equity method investments are taxed at the joint venture level. The underlying factors affecting the Company's overall tax rate are summarized in Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The CARES Act was enacted on March 27, 2020 in the United States. There were no significant impacts to the Company's provision for income taxes on continuing operations in 2020 as a result of the CARES Act legislation.
The provision for income taxes on continuing operations was $777 million in 2020, compared with $470 million in 2019 and $809 million in 2018. The tax rate for 2020 was unfavorably impacted by valuation allowances of $260 million related to foreign tax credits and other attributes that are more likely than not to remain unutilized prior to their expiration. The tax rate for 2020 was favorably impacted by a capital loss resulting from the divestiture of the Santa Vitoria manufacturing facility. This resulted in an effective tax rate of 37.5 percent for Dow Inc. in 2020.
The tax rate for 2019 was unfavorably impacted by non-deductible goodwill and investment impairments, geographic mix of earnings and reduced equity earnings. These factors resulted in a negative effective tax rate of 37.7 percent for Dow Inc. in 2019.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company recorded the impacts of tax law changes enacted in Switzerland. As a result, deferred tax assets increased by $92 million.
The tax rate for 2018 was favorably impacted by the reduced U.S. federal corporate income tax rate as a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which was enacted on December 22, 2017, and benefits related to the issuance of stock-based compensation and unfavorably impacted by non-deductible restructuring costs and increases in statutory income in Latin America and Canada due to local currency devaluations. These factors resulted in an effective tax rate of 21.6 percent in 2018.
Income from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax
Income from discontinued operations, net of tax was $445 million in 2019 and $1,835 million in 2018, related to the distribution of AgCo and SpecCo to DowDuPont as a result of the separation. See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Net Income Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests was $69 million in 2020, $87 million in 2019 and $134 million in 2018. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests decreased in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily due to the Company's acquisition of full ownership in a propylene oxide manufacturing joint venture on October 1, 2019. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests from discontinued operations of $13 million in 2019 and $32 million in 2018 related to the distribution of AgCo and SpecCo to DowDuPont as a result of the separation are included in the amounts above. See Notes 19 and 24 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Net Income (Loss) Available for the Common Stockholder(s)
Dow Inc.
Net income (loss) available for Dow Inc. common stockholders was income of $1,225 million in 2020, compared with a loss of $1,359 million in 2019 and income of $4,641 million in 2018. Earnings (loss) per share of Dow Inc. was earnings of $1.64 per share in 2020, compared with a loss of $1.84 per share in 2019 and earnings of $6.21 per share in 2018. See Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for details on Dow Inc.'s earnings per share calculations.
TDCC
Net income (loss) available for TDCC common stockholder was income of $1,235 million in 2020, compared with loss of $1,237 million in 2019 and income of $4,641 million in 2018. Following the separation from DowDuPont, TDCC's common shares are owned solely by Dow Inc.
SEGMENT RESULTS
The Company conducts its worldwide operations through six global businesses which are organized into the following operating segments: Packaging & Specialty Plastics, Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure and Performance Materials & Coatings. Corporate contains the reconciliation between the totals for the operating segments and the Company's totals. The Company did not aggregate any operating segments when determining its reportable segments. The Company reports geographic information for the following regions: U.S. & Canada, Asia Pacific, Latin America and EMEAI. The Company transfers ethylene to its downstream derivative businesses at market prices. The Company also allocated costs previously assigned to AgCo and SpecCo ("stranded costs") to the operating segments.
The Company’s measure of profit/loss for segment reporting purposes is Operating EBIT (for the year ended December 31, 2020) and pro forma Operating EBIT (for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018) as this is the manner in which the Company's chief operating decision maker ("CODM") assesses performance and allocates resources. The Company defines Operating EBIT as earnings (i.e., "Income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes") before interest, excluding the impact of significant items. The Company defines pro forma Operating EBIT as earnings (i.e., "Income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes") before interest, plus pro forma adjustments, excluding the impact of significant items. Operating EBIT by segment and pro forma Operating EBIT by segment include all operating items relating to the businesses; items that principally apply to Dow as a whole are assigned to Corporate. The Company also presents pro forma net sales for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, as it is included in management’s measure of segment performance and is regularly reviewed by the CODM. Pro forma net sales includes the impact of various manufacturing, supply and service related agreements entered into with DuPont and Corteva in connection with the separation which provide for different pricing than the historical intercompany and intracompany pricing practices of TDCC and Historical DuPont. See Note 26 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for reconciliations of these measures and a summary of the pro forma adjustments impacting segment measures, which are consistent with the pro forma adjustments included in the Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 3, 2019, with the SEC.
PACKAGING & SPECIALTY PLASTICS
Packaging & Specialty Plastics consists of two highly integrated global businesses: Hydrocarbons & Energy and Packaging and Specialty Plastics. The segment employs the industry’s broadest polyolefin product portfolio, supported by the Company’s proprietary catalyst and manufacturing process technologies, to work at the customer’s design table throughout the value chain to deliver more reliable and durable, higher performing, and more sustainable plastics to customers in food and specialty packaging; industrial and consumer packaging; health and hygiene; caps, closures and pipe applications; consumer durables; mobility and transportation; and infrastructure. Ethylene is transferred to downstream derivative businesses at market-based prices, which are generally equivalent to prevailing market prices for large volume purchases. This segment also includes the results of The Kuwait Styrene Company K.S.C.C. and The SCG-Dow Group, as well as a portion of the results of EQUATE Petrochemical Company K.S.C.C. ("EQUATE"), The Kuwait Olefins Company K.S.C.C. ("TKOC"), Map Ta Phut Olefins Company Limited ("Map Ta Phut") and Sadara, all joint ventures of the Company.
The Company is responsible for marketing a majority of Sadara products outside of the Middle East zone through the Company's established sales channels. As part of this arrangement, the Company purchases and sells Sadara products for a marketing fee.
2020 Versus 2019
Packaging & Specialty Plastics net sales were $18,301 million in 2020, down 10 percent from net sales and pro forma net sales of $20,245 million in 2019, with local price down 11 percent and volume up 1 percent. Net sales declined in the first half of the year, reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, while strong supply and demand fundamentals took hold in the second half of the year. Local price decreased in both businesses and across all geographic regions, driven by reduced polyethylene prices and lower global energy prices. Local price declined in Hydrocarbons & Energy as prices for co-products are generally correlated to Brent crude oil prices, which declined 33 percent compared with 2019. Volume increased in Hydrocarbons & Energy as increases in EMEAI were partially offset by declines in the U.S. & Canada, Asia Pacific and Latin America. Packaging and Specialty Plastics volume was flat as increases in flexible food and specialty packaging, industrial and consumer packaging and health and hygiene applications in Asia Pacific, Latin America and EMEAI were offset by reduced demand for functional polymers, primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and lower catalyst licensing activity in the U.S. & Canada.
Operating EBIT was $2,325 million in 2020, down 20 percent from pro forma Operating EBIT of $2,904 million in 2019. Operating EBIT decreased primarily due to integrated margin compression in both businesses. These declines more than offset cost reductions, decreased planned maintenance turnaround costs and increased equity earnings.
2019 Versus 2018
Packaging & Specialty Plastics net sales were $20,245 million in 2019, down 16 percent from net sales of $24,195 million in 2018. Pro forma net sales were $20,245 million in 2019, a decrease of 16 percent compared with pro forma net sales of $24,237 million in 2018, with local price down 12 percent, volume down 3 percent, and an unfavorable currency impact of 1 percent, primarily in EMEAI. Local price decreased in both businesses and across all geographic regions driven by reduced polyethylene prices and lower prices for Hydrocarbons & Energy co-products. Volume declined for the segment in all geographic regions, except Asia Pacific. Hydrocarbons & Energy volume declines more than offset volume gains in Packaging and Specialty Plastics. Volume decreased in Hydrocarbons & Energy primarily due to planned maintenance turnaround activity in Europe, increased internal consumption of ethylene on the U.S. Gulf Coast and lighter feedslate usage in Europe, leading to lower co-product production. Volume increased in Packaging and Specialty Plastics in Asia Pacific and EMEAI. Packaging and Specialty Plastics volume growth was driven by strong end-market growth in flexible food and specialty packaging, industrial and consumer packaging, and health and hygiene applications.
Pro forma Operating EBIT was $2,904 million in 2019, down 19 percent from pro forma Operating EBIT of $3,593 million in 2018. Pro forma Operating EBIT decreased primarily due to lower selling prices, reduced equity earnings at the Kuwait joint ventures due to lower polyethylene margins, lower sales volume in the Hydrocarbons & Energy business and the impact of an outage in Argentina, which more than offset lower feedstock and other raw material costs, volume gains in the Packaging and Specialty Plastics business and cost synergies.
INDUSTRIAL INTERMEDIATES & INFRASTRUCTURE
Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure consists of two customer-centric global businesses - Industrial Solutions and Polyurethanes & Construction Chemicals - that develop important intermediate chemicals that are essential to manufacturing processes, as well as downstream, customized materials and formulations that use advanced development technologies. These businesses primarily produce and market ethylene oxide and propylene oxide derivatives that are aligned to market segments as diverse as appliances, coatings, electronics, surfactants for cleaning and sanitization, infrastructure and oil and gas. The global scale and reach of these businesses, world-class technology and R&D capabilities and materials science expertise enable the Company to be a premier solutions provider offering customers value-add sustainable solutions to enhance comfort, energy efficiency, product effectiveness and durability across a wide range of home comfort and appliances, building and construction, adhesives and lubricant applications, among others. This segment also includes a portion of the results of EQUATE, TKOC, Map Ta Phut and Sadara, all joint ventures of the Company.
The Company is responsible for marketing a majority of Sadara products outside of the Middle East zone through the Company's established sales channels. As part of this arrangement, the Company purchases and sells Sadara products for a marketing fee.
2020 Versus 2019
Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure net sales were $12,021 million in 2020, down 11 percent from $13,440 million in 2019. Net sales decreased 11 percent from pro forma net sales of $13,449 million in 2019, with volume down 6 percent and local price down 5 percent. Weak demand for products used in consumer durable good end-markets, including construction, furniture and bedding, appliances and automotive, drove volume declines in Polyurethanes & Construction Chemicals in all geographic regions, reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on consumer activities and buying patterns, most notably in the first half of the year. Volume in Industrial Solutions was also impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, with decreases in the U.S. & Canada and Latin America which were partially offset by increases in Asia Pacific and EMEAI. The volume decline in Industrial Solutions was due to weakened demand in industrial, energy and automotive end-markets partially offset by stronger demand for products used in electronics, agriculture and pharma applications. Local price decreased in both businesses and in all geographic regions, primarily due to lower global energy prices and raw material costs.
Operating EBIT was $355 million in 2020, down 58 percent from pro forma Operating EBIT of $845 million in 2019. Operating EBIT decreased due to lower demand and margin compression, which were partially offset by cost reductions, decreased equity losses and lower planned maintenance turnaround costs. The overall decrease in equity losses was driven by lower equity losses from Sadara partially offset by decreased equity earnings from EQUATE.
2019 Versus 2018
Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure net sales were $13,440 million in 2019, down 13 percent from $15,447 million in 2018. Pro forma net sales were $13,449 million in 2019, down from pro forma net sales of $15,465 million in 2018. Pro forma net sales decreased 13 percent in 2019, with local price down 12 percent and an unfavorable currency impact of 2 percent, primarily in EMEAI, which were partially offset by a 1 percent increase in volume. Price decreased in both businesses and all geographic regions, driven by lower feedstock and other raw material costs and unfavorable supply and demand fundamentals. Polyurethanes & Construction Chemicals reported volume increases in all geographic regions, primarily reflecting increased supply from Sadara and growth in polyurethanes systems applications, which were partially offset by a decline of caustic soda volume due to planned maintenance turnaround activities. Industrial Solutions volume decreased in EMEAI and the U.S & Canada and was flat in Latin America and Asia Pacific, primarily driven by reduced availability of glycol ethers, performance solvents and monoethylene glycol due to planned and unplanned events that more than offset higher demand for industrial specialties.
Pro forma Operating EBIT was $845 million in 2019, down 52 percent from pro forma Operating EBIT of $1,767 million in 2018. Pro forma Operating EBIT decreased as a result of margin compression across both businesses as well as lower equity earnings from the Kuwait joint ventures and increased equity losses from Sadara, which more than offset cost reductions.
PERFORMANCE MATERIALS & COATINGS
Performance Materials & Coatings includes industry-leading franchises that deliver a wide array of solutions into consumer and infrastructure end-markets. The segment consists of two global businesses: Coatings & Performance Monomers and Consumer Solutions. These businesses primarily utilize the Company's acrylics-, cellulosics- and silicone-based technology platforms to serve the needs of the architectural and industrial coatings; home care and personal care; consumer and electronics; mobility and transportation; industrial and chemical processing; and building and infrastructure end-markets. Both businesses employ materials science capabilities, global reach and unique products and technology to combine chemistry platforms to deliver differentiated offerings to customers.
1.As reported net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with pro forma net sales for the year ended December 31, 2019.
2020 Versus 2019
Performance Materials & Coatings net sales were $7,951 million in 2020, down 11 percent from net sales of $8,923 million in 2019. Net sales decreased 11 percent from pro forma net sales of $8,961 million in 2019, with local price down 6 percent and volume down 5 percent. Local price decreased in both businesses and all geographic regions. Consumer Solutions local price declined in all regions, primarily in upstream siloxanes due to weak supply and demand fundamentals. Local price decreased in Coatings & Performance Monomers in response to lower feedstock and other raw material costs. Volume declined in all geographic regions except Latin America, reflecting the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. Consumer Solutions volume decreased as growth in home care applications was more than offset by lower demand for products used in automotive, industrial, construction and personal care end-markets as consumer activities and buying patterns were limited by the COVID-19 pandemic. Coatings & Performance Monomers volume increased in all geographic regions, except EMEAI. Volume gains were driven by higher demand for methacrylates used in protective applications, for architectural coatings as consumers continued do-it-yourself projects at home, and higher demand for vinyl acetate monomers.
Operating EBIT was $314 million in 2020, down 66 percent from pro forma Operating EBIT of $918 million in 2019. Operating EBIT decreased primarily due to margin compression, lower demand in siloxanes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and higher manufacturing and planned maintenance turnaround costs that more than offset volume gains in Coatings & Performance Monomers and lower SG&A costs.
2019 Versus 2018
Performance Materials & Coatings net sales were $8,923 million in 2019, down 8 percent from net sales of $9,677 million in 2018. Pro forma net sales were $8,961 million in 2019, down 9 percent from pro forma net sales of $9,865 million in 2018 with local price down 6 percent, an unfavorable currency impact of 2 percent and volume down 1 percent. Local price decreased in both businesses and all geographic regions. Local price decreased in Consumer Solutions due to lower siloxanes prices, primarily in Asia Pacific and EMEAI. Coatings & Performance Monomers local price declined in all geographic regions in response to lower feedstock and other raw material costs. Volume for the segment declined in all geographic regions, except Asia Pacific. Consumer Solutions volume was flat, with volume growth in Asia Pacific, offset by volume declines in Latin America and EMEAI. Consumer Solutions volume was flat in the U.S. & Canada. Coatings & Performance Monomers volume declined in all geographic regions. The decline in volume was driven by increased captive use of coatings products which drove soft demand in coating applications, primarily architectural binders, and lower demand for acrylates and methacrylates due to supply and demand balances.
Pro forma Operating EBIT was $918 million in 2019, down 26 percent from pro forma Operating EBIT of $1,246 million in 2018. Pro forma Operating EBIT decreased primarily due to margin compression in both businesses, which more than offset lower planned maintenance turnaround spending and cost synergies.
CORPORATE
Corporate includes certain enterprise and governance activities (including insurance operations, environmental operations, etc.); non-business aligned joint ventures; non-business aligned litigation expenses; and discontinued or non-aligned businesses.
2020 Versus 2019
Net sales for Corporate, which primarily relate to the Company's insurance operations, were $269 million in 2020, down from net sales and pro forma net sales of $343 million in 2019.
Operating EBIT was a loss of $279 million in 2020, compared with a pro forma Operating EBIT loss of $315 million in 2019. Compared with 2019, Operating EBIT improved primarily due to cost reductions and stranded cost removal throughout 2019.
2019 Versus 2018
Net sales and pro forma net sales for Corporate, which primarily relate to the Company's insurance operations, were $343 million in 2019, up from net sales and pro forma net sales of $285 million in 2018.
Pro forma Operating EBIT was a loss of $315 million in 2019, compared with a pro forma Operating EBIT loss of $370 million in 2018. Compared with 2018, pro forma Operating EBIT improved primarily due to cost reductions and stranded cost removal.
OUTLOOK
Operating Segments & End-Market Expectations
In 2021, the Company expects continued volatility across crude oil, natural gas and feedstocks, driven by external macroeconomic and geopolitical factors, including the continuation of an uneven recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. Overall, the Company expects crude oil prices to be, on average, higher than 2020 with an expectation of firming prices in the second half of the year. Crude oil fundamentals suggest global supply will meet or slightly lag demand; however, the uneven pandemic recovery could slow demand, leading to further volatility in prices.
The Company expects natural gas prices to remain competitive. The Company expects the U.S. & Canada gas supply to continue to recover through 2021. Robust supplies of natural gas are expected to keep domestic prices globally competitive. U.S. exports of liquefied natural gas ("LNG") are expected to remain strong. In Europe, the supply of natural gas is expected to continue to be plentiful, both from pipeline supply and from growing LNG imports.
In Packaging & Specialty Plastics, the global economic recovery is expected to drive demand growth, notably for flexible food and specialty packaging, industrial and consumer packaging and functional polymers. Integrated margins are expected to improve, supported by strong supply and demand fundamentals expected in the first half of the year and the Company’s regional feedstock cost advantages. Profitability could vary materially, particularly in the latter part of the year, depending on supply and demand dynamics, global gross domestic product ("GDP") growth rates, industry operating rates, timing of new industry capacity startups and fluctuations in global crude oil, natural gas and feedstock prices. The Hydrocarbons & Energy business expects to bring online approximately 130,000 metric tons of additional ethylene capacity in Canada as part of its suite of incremental growth investments. The new capacity is expected to come online in the first half of 2021.
In Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure, above GDP top line growth is expected, driven by strong demand for products used in furniture and bedding, appliances, automotive, construction, electronics and pharma applications. Prices are expected to increase for most products, including continued recovery in monoethylene glycol pricing.
Supply and demand fundamentals for methylene diphenyl diisocyanate and propylene oxide are expected to remain consistent with what was experienced in 2020, with additional industry capacity anticipated to come online in 2021. Margins are also expected to improve, driven by demand growth.
In Performance Materials & Coatings, prices for siloxanes are expected to improve compared with 2020, but remain below peak pricing that was seen in 2018. Downstream silicones volume is expected to grow in excess of GDP, particularly for products used in mobility and transportation, high performance building and construction, industrial and consumer and electronics applications. The Company will continue to pursue incremental downstream silicones capacity debottleneck and growth projects to meet expected demand in consumer driven end-markets. Global architectural coatings and industrial coatings demand is anticipated to see continued recovery as the do-it-yourself and retail end-markets remain strong and contractor demand improves. Highly competitive environments in both architectural and industrial coatings are expected to continue, but the Company looks to capture opportunities from customers’ shift to sustainable chemistries where Dow has unique technologies and solutions to compete.
Other factors impacting operating segment profitability include:
•Planned maintenance turnaround spending is expected to be approximately $400 million higher, including joint ventures. Spending will be higher in the second and third quarters, as the COVID-19 pandemic delayed certain planned maintenance turnaround activities in 2020.
•Equity in earnings (losses) of nonconsolidated affiliates is expected to be flat compared with 2020 as projected margin improvements are expected to be partially offset by increased planned maintenance turnaround spending at joint ventures.
Projected Uses of Cash
Items that may impact the consolidated statements of cash flows in 2021 include:
•Required cash contributions to global pension plans are expected to be approximately $300 million.
•Capital expenditures are expected to be approximately $1.6 billion. The Company will adjust its spending through the year as economic conditions develop.
•Cash expenditures related to the Digital Acceleration program announced on January 28, 2021 are expected to be approximately $150 million in 2021.
•Cash outflows related to the Company's 2020 Restructuring Program, including restructuring implementation costs, are expected to be approximately $350 million.
•Cash dividends from equity companies are expected to be approximately $200 million lower than 2020.
•Cash outflows to drive further deleveraging are expected to be $1 billion.
Sadara debt re-profile
In January 2021, Sadara reached an agreement in principle with its lenders to re-profile Sadara’s outstanding project financing debt. Key features of the Sadara debt re-profile are expected to include:
•An extension of the contractual debt maturity from 2029 to 2038.
•A modified repayment schedule aligned with Sadara’s projected cash generation profile, including a grace period until June 2026 during which interest-only payments are required, and an excess cash sweep mechanism to prepay debt.
•No change to the notional debt amount and no other early repayment requirements.
As a result, Sadara is expected to have significantly improved cash flow self-sufficiency. The re-profiling agreements have not been finalized and remain subject to modification until the transaction formally closes, which is expected to occur in the first quarter of 2021. The impacts to Dow’s commitments are expected to include the following, which are in proportion to Dow’s 35 percent ownership interest in Sadara:
•Dow will provide guarantees for $1.3 billion of Sadara’s debt, effectively replacing approximately $4.0 billion of prior guarantees.
•Additionally, Dow will provide guarantees for its portion of all Sadara interest payments due during the grace period. Dow's pro-rata share of any potential shortfall will be funded by a new $500 million revolving credit facility guaranteed by Dow, which is expected to be established by Sadara in the first quarter of 2021.
•Dow’s existing $220 million letter of credit related to the guarantee of one future Sadara debt service schedule payment will be cancelled.
As a result of these actions, the Company does not expect to provide any shareholder loans or equity contributions to Sadara in 2021. The impact of the debt re-profiling efforts and related actions taken by the Company are not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company had cash and cash equivalents of $5,104 million at December 31, 2020 and $2,367 million at December 31, 2019, of which $862 million at December 31, 2020 and $986 million at December 31, 2019, was held by subsidiaries in foreign countries, including United States territories. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents held by subsidiaries in foreign countries is due to repatriation activities. For each of its foreign subsidiaries, the Company makes an assertion regarding the amount of earnings intended for permanent reinvestment, with the balance available to be repatriated to the United States.
The cash held by foreign subsidiaries for permanent reinvestment is generally used to finance the subsidiaries' operational activities and future foreign investments. Dow has the ability to repatriate additional funds to the U.S., which could result in an adjustment to the tax liability for foreign withholding taxes, foreign and/or U.S. state income taxes and the impact of foreign currency movements. At December 31, 2020, management believed that sufficient liquidity was available in the United States. The Company has and expects to continue repatriating certain funds from its non-U.S. subsidiaries that are not needed to finance local operations; however, these particular repatriation activities have not and are not expected to result in a significant incremental tax liability to the Company.
The Company’s cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in the consolidated statements of cash flows, are summarized in the following table:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations increased in 2020 compared with 2019. The improvement was primarily due to a decrease in integration and separation costs. Also contributing to the improvement from the prior year was a decrease in performance-based compensation payments, a cash receipt for the refund of withholding tax related to the Nova ethylene asset matter and an increase in advance payments from customers, which were partially offset by a decrease in dividends received from nonconsolidated affiliates, a reduction in cash generated from working capital and a cash receipt in 2019 related to the Nova ethylene asset matter. Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations increased in 2019 compared with 2018. The increase was primarily due to improvements in working capital, a cash receipt related to the Nova ethylene asset matter, advance payments from customers for product supply agreements, lower pension contributions and higher dividends received from nonconsolidated affiliates, which were partially offset by a decrease in cash earnings.
1.Due to the impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic, quarterly working capital metrics are presented for 2020.
Cash provided by (used for) operating activities from discontinued operations in 2020 and 2019 primarily related to cash payments and receipts the Company had with DuPont and Corteva that related to certain agreements and matters related to the separation from DowDuPont. Cash provided by operating activities from discontinued operations decreased in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily due to the separation of AgCo and SpecCo on April 1, 2019. See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used for investing activities from continuing operations in 2020 was primarily for capital expenditures, purchases of investments, investments in and loans to nonconsolidated affiliates (related to Sadara) and acquisitions of property and businesses, which were partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of investments and proceeds from sales of property and businesses. Cash used for investing activities from continuing operations in 2019 was primarily for capital expenditures, purchases of investments and investments in and loans to nonconsolidated affiliates, which were partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of investments. Cash used for investing activities from continuing operations in 2018 was primarily for capital expenditures and purchases of investments, which were partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of investments and proceeds from interests in trade accounts receivable conduits.
The Company loaned Sadara $333 million in 2020 ($473 million in 2019 and zero in 2018). As a result of Sadara's debt re-profiling, the Company does not expect to provide any shareholder loans or equity contributions to Sadara in 2021. See Notes 12 and 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The Company's capital expenditures related to continuing operations, including capital expenditures of consolidated variable interest entities, were $1,252 million in 2020, $1,961 million in 2019 and $2,091 million in 2018. Capital spending was lower in 2020 as the Company proactively reduced its capital expenditures to focus on cash and maintaining financial strength during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company expects capital spending in 2021 to be approximately $1.6 billion. The Company will adjust its spending through the year as economic conditions develop.
Capital spending in 2018, 2019 and 2020, included spending related to certain U.S. Gulf Coast investment projects including: a NORDEL™ Metallocene EPDM production facility, a Low Density Polyethylene ("LDPE") production facility, a High Melt Index ("HMI") AFFINITY™ polymer production facility and debottlenecking of an existing bi-modal gas phase polyethylene production facility, all of which commenced operations in 2018; an expansion of the Company's new ethylene production facility in Freeport, Texas, which commenced operations in 2020, bringing the facility's total ethylene capacity to 2,000 kilotonnes per annum and making it the largest ethylene cracker in the world; the addition of a furnace to the Company's ethylene production facility in Alberta, Canada, which is expected to commence operations in the first half of 2021; and the retrofit of one of the Company's Louisiana steam crackers with Dow's proprietary fluidized catalytic dehydrogenation ("FCDh") technology to produce on-purpose propylene, which is expected by the end of 2021.
Cash used for investing activities from discontinued operations in 2019 was primarily for capital expenditures, partially offset by proceeds from the sales of property, businesses and ownership interests in nonconsolidated affiliates. Cash used for investing activities from discontinued operations in 2018 was primarily for capital expenditures, partially offset by proceeds from the sales of property and businesses.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash used for financing activities from continuing operations in 2020 included payments on long-term debt, changes in short-term notes payable and transaction financing, debt issuance and other costs, which were partially offset by proceeds from issuance of long-term debt. In addition, Dow Inc. included cash outflows for dividends paid to stockholders and purchases of treasury stock and TDCC included cash outflows for dividends paid to Dow Inc. Cash used for financing activities from continuing operations in 2019 included payments on long-term debt and dividends paid to DowDuPont, which were partially offset by proceeds from issuance of long-term debt. In addition, Dow Inc. received cash as part of the separation from DowDuPont, which was more than offset by dividends paid to stockholders and purchases of treasury stock. Cash used for financing activities in continuing operations in 2018 included dividends paid to DowDuPont and payments of long-term debt, which were partially offset by proceeds from issuance of long-term debt. See Notes 15 and 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to the issuance and retirement of debt and the Company's share repurchases and dividends.
Cash used for financing activities from discontinued operations in 2019 and 2018 primarily related to distributions to noncontrolling interests and employee taxes paid for share-based payment arrangements.
Non-GAAP Cash Flow Measures
Cash Flows from Operating Activities - Continuing Operations - Excluding Impact of ASU 2016-15
Cash flows from operating activities - continuing operations, excluding the impact of Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2016-15, is defined as cash provided by operating activities - continuing operations, excluding the impact of ASU 2016-15 and related interpretive guidance. Management believes this non-GAAP financial measure is relevant and meaningful as it presents cash flows from operating activities inclusive of all trade accounts receivable collection activity, which Dow utilizes in support of its operating activities. This measure is only applicable for the year ended December 31, 2018 as there were no sales of trade accounts receivable under the applicable programs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Free Cash Flow
Dow defines free cash flow as cash flows from operating activities - continuing operations, excluding the impact of ASU 2016-15, less capital expenditures. Under this definition, free cash flow represents the cash generated by Dow from operations after investing in its asset base. Free cash flow, combined with cash balances and other sources of liquidity, represents the cash available to fund obligations and provide returns to shareholders. Free cash flow is an integral financial measure used in Dow's financial planning process.
Operating EBITDA and Pro Forma Operating EBITDA
Dow defines Operating EBITDA (for the year ended December 31, 2020) as earnings (i.e., "Income from continuing operations before income taxes") before interest, depreciation and amortization, excluding the impact of significant items. Pro forma Operating EBITDA (for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018) is defined as earnings (i.e. "Income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes") before interest, depreciation and amortization, plus pro forma adjustments, excluding the impact of significant items.
Cash Flow Conversion
Dow defines cash flow conversion (Operating EBITDA or pro forma Operating EBITDA to cash flow from operations) as cash flows from operating activities - continuing operations, excluding the impact of ASU 2016-15, divided by Operating EBITDA or pro forma Operating EBITDA. Management believes cash flow conversion is an important financial metric as it helps the Company determine how efficiently it is converting its earnings into cash flow.
These financial measures are not recognized in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("U.S. GAAP") and should not be viewed as alternatives to U.S. GAAP financial measures of performance. All companies do not calculate non-GAAP financial measures in the same manner and, accordingly, Dow's definitions may not be consistent with the methodologies used by other companies.
1.Operating EBIT, depreciation and amortization and Operating EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 are presented on a pro forma basis.
2.Pro forma adjustments for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 include: (1) the margin impact of various manufacturing, supply and service related agreements entered into with DuPont and Corteva in connection with the separation which provide for different pricing than the historical intercompany and intracompany pricing practices of TDCC and Historical DuPont and (2) the elimination of the impact of events directly attributable to the Merger, internal reorganization and business realignment, separation, distribution and other related transactions (e.g., one-time transaction costs).
3.The year ended December 31, 2020 includes integration and separation costs, restructuring and asset related charges - net, a gain on a warranty accrual adjustment of an exited business, restructuring implementation costs, a net gain on divestitures and asset sale, a gain related to a legal matter with Nova, a loss on early extinguishment of debt and a loss associated with agreements entered into with DuPont and Corteva as part of the separation and distribution. The year ended December 31, 2019 includes integration and separation costs, restructuring, goodwill impairment and asset related charges - net, a gain on a warranty accrual adjustment of an exited business, environmental charges, a loss related to previous divestitures, a loss on early extinguishment of debt, a net gain related to litigation matters and a loss associated with agreements entered into with DuPont and Corteva as part of the separation and distribution. The year ended December 31, 2018 includes a post-closing adjustment related to the Dow Silicones ownership restructure, integration and separation costs, restructuring and asset related charges - net, a gain on divestiture and a loss on early extinguishment of debt. See Note 26 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Liquidity & Financial Flexibility
The Company’s primary source of incremental liquidity is cash flows from operating activities. The generation of cash from operations and the Company's ability to access capital markets is expected to meet the Company’s cash requirements for working capital, capital expenditures, debt maturities, contributions to pension plans, dividend distributions to stockholders, share repurchases and other needs. In addition to cash from operating activities, the Company’s current liquidity sources also include TDCC's U.S. and Euromarket commercial paper programs, committed and uncommitted credit facilities, committed accounts receivable facilities, a U.S. retail note program (“InterNotes®”) and other debt markets.
The Company continues to maintain a strong financial position with all of its committed credit facilities undrawn and fully available at December 31, 2020. Cash and committed and available forms of liquidity were $14.6 billion at December 31, 2020. The Company also has no substantive long-term debt maturities until the second half of 2024. Additional details on sources of liquidity are as follows:
Commercial Paper
TDCC issues promissory notes under its U.S. and Euromarket commercial paper programs. TDCC had no commercial paper outstanding at December 31, 2020 ($151 million at December 31, 2019). TDCC maintains access to the commercial paper market at competitive rates. Amounts outstanding under TDCC's commercial paper programs during the period may be greater or less than the amount reported at the end of the period. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, TDCC issued approximately $1.3 billion of commercial paper.
Committed Credit Facilities
The Company also has the ability to access liquidity through TDCC's committed and available credit facilities. At December 31, 2020, TDCC had total committed and available credit facilities of $8.1 billion. In 2020, Dow Silicones voluntarily repaid $2.0 billion of principal under a certain third party credit agreement. See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on committed and available credit facilities.
Committed Accounts Receivable Facilities
In addition to the above committed credit facilities, the Company maintains a committed accounts receivable facility in the U.S. where eligible trade accounts receivable, up to $900 million, may be sold at any point in time. The Company also maintains a committed accounts receivable facility in Europe where eligible trade accounts receivable, up to €400 million, may be sold at any point in time. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Company-Owned Life Insurance
The Company has investments in company-owned life insurance ("COLI") policies, which are recorded at their cash surrender value as of each balance sheet date. The Company has the ability to monetize its investment in its COLI policies as an additional source of liquidity. At December 31, 2019, the Company had monetized $85 million of its existing COLI policies' value. In the first nine months of 2020, the Company monetized an additional $211 million as a proactive measure to bolster liquidity at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company repaid all existing drawdowns against the cash surrender value, which resulted in no monetization of its existing COLI policies' value at December 31, 2020. See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Uncommitted Credit Facilities
Dow has entered into various uncommitted bilateral credit arrangements as a potential source of excess liquidity. These lines can be used to support short-term liquidity needs and for general purposes, including letters of credit. In the first quarter of 2020, the Company took proactive measures to further bolster liquidity by drawing down certain uncommitted credit facilities, which were subsequently repaid in the second quarter of 2020.
Letters of Credit
TDCC utilizes letters of credit to support commitments made in the ordinary course of business. While the terms and amounts of letters of credit change, TDCC generally has approximately $400 million of outstanding letters of credit at any given time. In addition, at December 31, 2020, the Company had a $220 million outstanding letter of credit related to the Company’s share of one future debt service schedule payment of Sadara. See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to guarantees.
Shelf Registration - U.S.
On July 26, 2019, Dow Inc. and TDCC filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC. The shelf indicates that Dow Inc. may offer common stock; preferred stock; depositary shares; debt securities; guarantees; warrants to purchase common stock, preferred stock and debt securities; and stock purchase contracts and stock purchase units, with pricing and availability of any such offerings depending on market conditions. The shelf also indicates that TDCC may offer debt securities, guarantees and warrants to purchase debt securities, with pricing and availability of any such offerings depending on market conditions. Also on July 26, 2019, TDCC filed a new prospectus supplement under this shelf registration to register an unlimited amount of securities for issuance under InterNotes®.
Debt
As the Company continues to maintain its strong balance sheet and financial flexibility, management is focused on net debt (a non-GAAP financial measure), as the Company believes this is the best representation of its financial leverage at this point in time. As shown in the following table, net debt is equal to total gross debt minus "Cash and cash equivalents" and "Marketable securities." At December 31, 2020, net debt as a percent of total capitalization for Dow Inc. and TDCC decreased to 47.9 percent and 46.8 percent, respectively, compared with 50.9 percent and 49.6 percent, respectively, at December 31, 2019.
1.Included in "Other current assets" in the consolidated balance sheets.
In February 2020, the Company issued €2.25 billion aggregate principal amount of notes (“Euro Notes”). The Euro Notes included €1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 0.50 percent notes due 2027, €750 million aggregate principal amount of 1.125 percent notes due 2032 and €500 million aggregate principal amount of 1.875 percent notes due 2040. The Euro Notes have a weighted average coupon rate of approximately 1.0 percent. In addition, the Company redeemed $1.25 billion of 3.0 percent notes issued by the Company with maturity in 2022.
In August 2020, the Company issued $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of notes. The notes included $850 million aggregate principal amount of 2.1 percent notes due 2030 and $1.15 billion aggregate principal amount of 3.6 percent notes due 2050 (together, the "Notes"). In September 2020, TDCC also used $556 million of aggregate proceeds from the Notes to fund cash tender offers for certain of its debt securities and certain debt securities of Union Carbide, of which $493 million aggregate principal amount was tendered and retired.
The Company may at any time repurchase certain debt securities in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions subject to: the applicable terms under which any such debt securities were issued, certain internal approvals of the Company, and applicable laws and regulations of the relevant jurisdiction in which any such potential transactions might take place. This in no way obligates the Company to make any such repurchases nor should it be considered an offer to do so.
TDCC’s public debt instruments and primary, private credit agreements contain, among other provisions, certain customary restrictive covenant and default provisions. TDCC’s most significant debt covenant with regard to its financial position is the obligation to maintain the ratio of its consolidated indebtedness to consolidated capitalization at no greater than 0.65 to 1.00 at any time the aggregate outstanding amount of loans under the Five Year Competitive Advance and Revolving Credit Facility Agreement ("Revolving Credit Agreement") equals or exceeds $500 million. The ratio of TDCC’s consolidated indebtedness as defined in the Revolving Credit Agreement was 0.53 to 1.00 at December 31, 2020. Management believes TDCC was in compliance with all of its covenants and default provisions at December 31, 2020.
On April 1, 2019, DowDuPont completed the separation of its materials science business and Dow Inc. became the direct parent company of TDCC. In conjunction with the separation, Dow Inc. is obligated, substantially concurrently with the issuance of any guarantee in respect of outstanding or committed indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Agreement, to enter into a supplemental indenture with TDCC and the trustee under TDCC’s existing 2008 base indenture governing certain notes issued by TDCC. Under such supplemental indenture, Dow Inc. will guarantee all outstanding debt securities and all amounts due under such existing base indenture and will become subject to certain covenants and events of default under the existing base indenture.
In addition, the Revolving Credit Agreement includes an event of default which would be triggered in the event Dow Inc. incurs or guarantees third party indebtedness for borrowed money in excess of $250 million or engages in any material activity or directly owns any material assets, in each case, subject to certain conditions and exceptions. Dow Inc. may, at its option, cure the event of default by delivering an unconditional and irrevocable guarantee to the administrative agent within thirty days of the event or events giving rise to such event of default.
No such events have occurred or have been triggered at the time of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to TDCC’s notes payable and long-term debt activity and information on TDCC’s debt covenants and default provisions.
While taking into consideration the current economic environment, management expects that the Company will continue to have sufficient liquidity and financial flexibility to meet all of its business obligations.
Credit Ratings
TDCC's credit ratings at January 31, 2021 were as follows:
On April 9, 2020, Standard & Poor's ("S&P") announced a credit rating change for TDCC from BBB and A-2 to BBB- and A-3, maintaining stable outlook. The decision was made as part of S&P’s broader review of the chemicals sector, in light of the global impact of COVID-19 and lower oil prices. On April 13, 2020, Fitch Ratings ("Fitch") re-affirmed TDCC’s BBB+ and rating, and revised its outlook to negative from stable. The decision was made as part of Fitch’s annual review process.
Downgrades in TDCC’s credit ratings will increase borrowing costs on certain indentures and could impact its ability to access debt capital markets.
Dividends
Dow Inc.
The following table provides dividends paid to common stockholders for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
1.Reflects Dow Inc. activity subsequent to the separation from DowDuPont.
2.In 2018, the common stock of Dow Inc. and TDCC was owned solely by DowDuPont and therefore the Company did not have publicly traded stock.
TDCC
Effective with the Merger, TDCC no longer has publicly traded common stock. From the Merger Date through March 31, 2019, TDCC's common shares were owned solely by DowDuPont. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, TDCC committed to fund a portion of DowDuPont's dividends paid to common stockholders and certain governance expenses. In addition, share repurchases by DowDuPont were partially funded by TDCC through 2018. Funding was accomplished through intercompany loans. On a quarterly basis, TDCC's Board reviewed and determined a
dividend distribution to DowDuPont to settle the intercompany loans. The dividend distribution considered the level of TDCC’s earnings and cash flows and the outstanding intercompany loan balances. TDCC declared and paid dividends to DowDuPont of $535 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and $3,711 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. See Note 25 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Effective with the separation from DowDuPont on April 1, 2019, TDCC became a wholly owned subsidiary of Dow Inc. TDCC has committed to fund Dow Inc.'s dividends paid to common stockholders, share repurchases and certain governance expenses. Funding is accomplished through intercompany loans. TDCC's Board reviews and determines a dividend distribution to Dow Inc. to settle the intercompany loans. For the year ended December 31, 2020, TDCC declared and paid dividends to Dow Inc. of $2,233 million ($201 million for the year ended December 31, 2019). At December 31, 2020, TDCC's intercompany loan balance with Dow Inc. was insignificant. See Note 25 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Share Repurchase Program
Dow Inc.
On April 1, 2019, Dow Inc.'s Board ratified the share repurchase program originally approved on March 15, 2019, authorizing up to $3.0 billion to be spent on the repurchase of the Company's common stock, with no expiration date. In 2020, Dow Inc. repurchased $125 million of the Company's common stock. At December 31, 2020, approximately $2.4 billion of the share repurchase program authorization remained available for repurchases. The Company will continue to evaluate the repurchase of additional shares to cover dilution as economic conditions develop.
Pension Plans
The Company has both funded and unfunded defined benefit pension plans that cover employees in the United States and a number of other countries. As a result of the Company’s separation from DowDuPont, the number of significant defined benefit pension plans administered by the Company decreased from 45 plans to 35 plans, with approximately $270 million of net unfunded pension liabilities transferred to DowDuPont. Plans administered by other subsidiaries of DowDuPont that were transferred to the Company were not significant. There were no changes in the number of significant other postretirement benefit plans administered by the Company as a result of the separation. Existing Company plans that were significantly impacted by the transfer of active plan participants to DowDuPont were remeasured, resulting in curtailment gains and losses and recognition of special termination benefits.
In 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company contributed $299 million, $261 million and $1,651 million to its continuing operations pension plans respectively, including contributions to fund benefit payments for its non-qualified pension plans ($299 million, $266 million and $1,656 million, including contributions to plans of discontinued operations). In the third quarter of 2018, the Company made a $1,100 million discretionary contribution to its principal U.S. pension plan, which is included in the 2018 contribution amount above. The discretionary contribution was primarily based on the Company's funding policy, which permits contributions to defined benefit pension plans when economics encourage funding, and reflected considerations relating to tax deductibility and capital structure.
The Company expects to contribute approximately $300 million to its pension plans in 2021. See Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information concerning the Company’s pension plans.
Restructuring Programs
The actions related to the 2020 Restructuring Program are expected to result in additional cash expenditures of approximately $365 million, primarily through the first quarter of 2022, consisting of severance and related benefit costs and costs associated with exit and disposal activities, including contract cancellation penalties and environmental remediation. Restructuring implementation costs, primarily decommissioning and demolition activities related to asset actions, are expected to result in additional cash expenditures of approximately $150 million, primarily through the third quarter of 2022.
The activities related to the Synergy Program are expected to result in additional cash payments of approximately $35 million, primarily through the second quarter of 2021, consisting of severance and related benefit costs and costs associated with exit and disposal activities, including environmental remediation.
The Company expects to incur additional costs in the future related to its restructuring activities, which will be recognized as incurred. The Company also expects to incur additional employee-related costs, including involuntary termination benefits related to its other optimization activities. These costs cannot be reasonably estimated at this
time. See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the Company's restructuring activities.
Digital Acceleration
On January 28, 2021, Dow announced plans for Digital Acceleration: expanding digital tools to accelerate materials science innovation; further enhancing the e-commerce buying and fulfillment experience for Dow's customers; and adopting real-time digital manufacturing insights, operational data intelligence and demand sensing to enhance the productivity and reliability of Dow’s operations. The activities related to Digital Acceleration are expected to result in additional cash expenditures of approximately $400 million, primarily through the end of 2022.
Integration and Separation Costs
Integration and separation costs, which reflect costs related to post-Merger integration and business separation activities and costs related to the ownership restructure of Dow Silicones, were $239 million in 2020, $1,063 million and $1,039 million for Dow Inc. and TDCC, respectively, in 2019 and $1,179 million in 2018. Integration and separation costs related to post-Merger integration and business separation activities were completed as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the Company’s contractual obligations, commercial commitments and expected cash requirements for interest at December 31, 2020. Additional information related to these obligations can be found in Notes 15, 16, 17 and 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
1.Excludes unamortized debt discount and issuance costs of $365 million. Includes finance lease obligations of $518 million.
2.Cash requirements for interest on long-term debt was calculated using current interest rates at December 31, 2020, and includes $235 million of various floating rate notes.
3.Includes imputed interest of $348 million.
4.Includes outstanding purchase orders and other commitments greater than $1 million obtained through a survey conducted within the Company.
5.Includes liabilities related to asbestos litigation, environmental remediation, legal matters and other noncurrent liabilities. In addition to these items, Dow Inc. includes liabilities related to noncurrent obligations with DuPont and Corteva. The table excludes uncertain tax positions due to uncertainties in the timing of the effective settlement of tax positions with the respective taxing authorities and deferred tax liabilities as it is impractical to determine whether there will be a cash impact related to these liabilities. The table also excludes deferred revenue and negative investment balances related to equity method investments as these items do not represent future cash requirements arising from contractual payment obligations.
The Company expects to meet its contractual obligations through its normal sources of liquidity and believes it has the financial resources to satisfy these contractual obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Off-balance sheet arrangements are obligations the Company has with nonconsolidated entities related to transactions, agreements or other contractual arrangements. The Company holds variable interests in joint ventures accounted for under the equity method of accounting. The Company is not the primary beneficiary of these joint ventures and therefore is not required to consolidate these entities (see Note 24 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). In addition, see Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding the transfer of financial assets.
Guarantees arise during the ordinary course of business from relationships with customers, committed accounts receivable facilities and nonconsolidated affiliates when the Company undertakes an obligation to guarantee the performance of others if specific triggering events occur. The Company had outstanding guarantees at December 31, 2020 of $251 million, compared with $3,952 million at December 31, 2019. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the remaining project completion conditions related to the Sadara project finance guarantees were fulfilled. Additional information related to guarantees can be found in the “Guarantees” section of Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Fair Value Measurements
See Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to fair value measurements of pension and other postretirement benefit plan assets; see Note 22 for information related to other-than-temporary impairments; and, see Note 23 for additional information concerning fair value measurements.
OTHER MATTERS
Recent Accounting Guidance
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of recent accounting guidance.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. Following are the Company’s accounting policies impacted by judgments, assumptions and estimates:
Litigation
The Company is subject to legal proceedings and claims arising out of the normal course of business including product liability, patent infringement, employment matters, governmental tax and regulation disputes, contract and commercial litigation and other actions. The Company routinely assesses the legal and factual circumstances of each matter, the likelihood of any adverse outcomes to these matters, as well as ranges of probable losses. A determination of the amount of the reserves required, if any, for these contingencies is made after thoughtful analysis of each known claim. The Company has an active risk management program consisting of numerous insurance policies secured from many carriers covering various timeframes. These policies may provide coverage that could be utilized to minimize the financial impact, if any, of certain contingencies. The required reserves may change in the future due to new developments in each matter. For further discussion, see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Asbestos-Related Matters of Union Carbide Corporation
Union Carbide is and has been involved in a large number of asbestos-related suits filed primarily in state courts during the past four decades. These suits principally allege personal injury resulting from exposure to asbestos-containing products and frequently seek both actual and punitive damages. The alleged claims primarily relate to products that Union Carbide sold in the past, alleged exposure to asbestos-containing products located on Union Carbide’s premises, and Union Carbide’s responsibility for asbestos suits filed against a former Union Carbide subsidiary, Amchem Products, Inc. ("Amchem"). Each year, Ankura Consulting Group, LLC ("Ankura") performs a review for Union Carbide based upon historical asbestos claims, resolution and asbestos-related defense and processing costs, through the terminal year of 2049. Union Carbide compares current asbestos claim and resolution activity, including asbestos-related defense and processing costs, to the results of the most recent Ankura study at each balance sheet date to determine whether the asbestos-related liability continues to be appropriate.
For additional information, see Part I, Item 3. Legal Proceedings; Asbestos-Related Matters of Union Carbide Corporation in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations; and Notes 1 and 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Environmental Matters
The Company determines the costs of environmental remediation of its facilities and formerly owned facilities based on evaluations of current law and existing technologies. Inherent uncertainties exist in such evaluations primarily due to unknown environmental conditions, changing governmental regulations and legal standards regarding liability, and emerging remediation technologies. The recorded liabilities are adjusted periodically as remediation efforts progress, or as additional technical or legal information becomes available. At December 31, 2020, the Company had accrued obligations of $1,244 million for probable environmental remediation and restoration costs, including $248 million for the remediation of Superfund sites. This is management’s best estimate of the costs for remediation and restoration with respect to environmental matters for which the Company has accrued liabilities, although it is reasonably possible that the ultimate cost with respect to these particular matters could range up to approximately one and a half times that amount. For further discussion, see Environmental Matters in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and Notes 1 and 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill
The Company performs goodwill impairment testing at the reporting unit level. Reporting units are the level at which discrete financial information is available and reviewed by business management on a regular basis. The Company tests goodwill for impairment annually (in the fourth quarter), or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit has declined below its carrying value. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment using qualitative and/or quantitative testing procedures. The separation from DowDuPont on April 1, 2019, did not impact the composition of the Company's six reporting units: Coatings & Performance Monomers, Consumer Solutions, Hydrocarbons & Energy, Industrial Solutions, Packaging and Specialty Plastics and Polyurethanes & Construction Chemicals. The ECP businesses received as part of the separation from DowDuPont are included in the Hydrocarbons & Energy and Packaging and Specialty Plastics reporting units. At December 31, 2020, goodwill was carried by five out of six of the Company's reporting units.
The Company has the option to first perform qualitative testing to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Qualitative factors assessed at the Company level include, but are not limited to, GDP growth rates, long-term hydrocarbon and energy prices, equity and credit market activity, discount rates, foreign exchange rates and overall financial performance. Qualitative factors assessed at the reporting unit level include, but are not limited to, changes in industry and market structure, competitive environments, planned capacity and new product launches, cost factors such as raw material prices, and financial performance of the reporting unit. If the Company chooses not to complete a qualitative assessment for a given reporting unit or if the initial assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, additional quantitative testing is required.
Quantitative testing requires the fair value of the reporting unit to be compared with its carrying value. If the reporting unit's carrying value exceeds its fair value, an impairment charge is recognized for the difference. The Company utilizes a discounted cash flow methodology to calculate the fair value of its reporting units. This valuation technique has been selected by management as the most meaningful valuation method due to the limited number of market comparables for the Company's reporting units. However, where market comparables are available, the Company includes EBIT/EBITDA multiples as part of the reporting unit valuation analysis. The discounted cash flow valuations are completed using the following key assumptions: projected revenue growth rates or compounded annual growth rates, discount rates, tax rates, terminal values, currency exchange rates, and forecasted long-term hydrocarbon and energy prices, by geographic region and by year, which include the Company's key feedstocks as well as natural gas and crude oil (due to its correlation to naphtha). Currency exchange rates and long-term hydrocarbon and energy prices are established for the Company as a whole and applied consistently to all reporting units, while revenue growth rates, discount rates and tax rates are established by reporting unit to account for differences in business fundamentals and industry risk. These key assumptions drive projected EBIT/EBITDA and EBIT/EBITDA margins, which are key elements of management’s internal control over the reporting unit valuation analysis.
2020 Goodwill Impairment Testing
In 2020, there were no events or changes in circumstances that warranted interim goodwill impairment testing. In the fourth quarter of 2020, qualitative testing was performed for all reporting units carrying goodwill. Based on the results of the qualitative testing, quantitative testing was performed on one reporting unit. For the qualitative assessments, management considered factors at both the Company level and the reporting unit level. Based on the qualitative assessments for the reporting units, management concluded it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value of the reporting unit. For the quantitative testing, the fair value exceeded the carrying value of the reporting unit.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits
The amounts recognized in the consolidated financial statements related to pension and other postretirement benefits are determined from actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are assumptions including expected return on plan assets, discount rates at which the liabilities could have been settled at December 31, 2020, rate of increase in future compensation levels, mortality rates and health care cost trend rates. These assumptions are updated annually and are disclosed in Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, actual results that differ from the assumptions are accumulated and amortized over future periods and, therefore, affect expense recognized and obligations recorded in future periods. The U.S. pension plans represent 68 percent of the Company’s pension plan assets and 69 percent of the pension obligations.
The Company uses the spot rate approach to determine the discount rate utilized to measure the service cost and interest cost components of net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit costs for the U.S. and other selected countries. Under the spot rate approach, the Company calculates service cost and interest cost by applying individual spot rates from the Willis Towers Watson RATE:Link yield curve (based on high-quality corporate bond yields) for each selected country to the separate expected cash flow components of service cost and interest cost; service cost and interest cost for all other plans (including all plans prior to adoption) are determined on the basis of the single equivalent discount rates derived in determining those plan obligations.
The following information relates to the U.S. plans only; a similar approach is used for the Company’s non-U.S. plans.
The Company determines the expected long-term rate of return on assets by performing a detailed analysis of historical and expected returns based on the strategic asset allocation approved by the Company's Investment Committee and the underlying return fundamentals of each asset class. The Company’s historical experience with the pension fund asset performance is also considered. The expected return of each asset class is derived from a forecasted future return confirmed by historical experience. The expected long-term rate of return is an assumption and not what is expected to be earned in any one particular year. The weighted-average long-term rate of return assumption used for determining net periodic pension expense for 2020 was 7.95 percent. The weighted-average assumption to be used for determining 2021 net periodic pension expense is 7.96 percent. Future actual pension expense will depend on future investment performance, changes in future discount rates and various other factors related to the population of participants in the Company’s pension plans.
The discount rates utilized to measure the pension and other postretirement obligations of the U.S. qualified plans are based on the yield on high-quality corporate fixed income investments at the measurement date. Future expected actuarially determined cash flows for the Company’s U.S. plans are individually discounted at the spot rates under the Willis Towers Watson U.S. RATE:Link 60-90 corporate yield curve (based on 60th to 90th percentile high-quality corporate bond yields) to arrive at the plan’s obligations as of the measurement date. The weighted average discount rate utilized to measure pension obligations decreased to 2.71 percent at December 31, 2020, from 3.41 percent at December 31, 2019.
At December 31, 2020, the U.S. qualified plans were underfunded on a projected benefit obligation basis by $5,873 million. The underfunded amount increased $1,105 million compared with December 31, 2019. The increase in the underfunded amount in 2020 was primarily due to the impact of lower discount rates, which was partially offset by overall favorable asset returns. The Company did not make contributions to the U.S. qualified plans in 2020.
The assumption for the long-term rate for the compensation levels for the U.S. qualified plans was unchanged. The Company uses a generational mortality table to determine the duration of its pension and other postretirement obligations.
The following discussion relates to the Company’s significant pension plans.
The Company bases the determination of pension expense on a market-related valuation of plan assets that reduces year-to-year volatility. This market-related valuation recognizes investment gains or losses over a five-year period from the year in which they occur. Investment gains or losses for this purpose represent the difference between the expected return calculated using the market-related value of plan assets and the actual return based on the market value of plan assets. Since the market-related value of plan assets recognizes gains or losses over a five-year period, the future value will be impacted when previously deferred gains or losses are recorded. Over the life of the plans, both gains and losses have been recognized and amortized. At December 31, 2020, net gains of $1,396 million remain to be recognized in the calculation of the market-related value of plan assets. These net gains will result in decreases in future pension expense as they are recognized in the market-related value of assets.
The net increase in the market-related value of assets due to the recognition of prior gains is presented in the following table:
At December 31, 2020, the Company expects pension expense to decrease in 2021 by approximately $25 million. The decrease in pension expense is primarily due to the lower interest cost component.
A 25 basis point increase or decrease in the long-term return on assets assumption would change the Company’s total pension expense for 2021 by $61 million. A 25 basis point increase in the discount rate assumption would lower the Company's total pension expense for 2021 by $55 million. A 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate assumption would increase the Company's total pension expense for 2021 by $60 million. A 25 basis point change in the long-term return and discount rate assumptions would have an immaterial impact on the other postretirement benefit expense for 2021.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, applying enacted tax rates expected to be in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Based on the evaluation of available evidence, both positive and negative, the Company recognizes future tax benefits, such as net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards, to the extent that realizing these benefits is considered to be more likely than not.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had a net deferred tax asset balance of $1,810 million, after valuation allowances of $1,302 million.
In evaluating the ability to realize the deferred tax assets, the Company relies on, in order of increasing subjectivity, taxable income in prior carryback years, the future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, tax planning strategies and forecasted taxable income using historical and projected future operating results.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had deferred tax assets for tax loss and tax credit carryforwards of $2,004 million, $708 million of which is subject to expiration in the years 2021 through 2025. In order to realize these deferred tax assets for tax loss and tax credit carryforwards, the Company needs taxable income of approximately $27,331 million across multiple jurisdictions. The taxable income needed to realize the deferred tax assets for tax loss and tax credit carryforwards that are subject to expiration from 2021 through 2025 is approximately $6,405 million.
The Company recognizes the financial statement effects of an uncertain income tax position when it is more likely than not, based on technical merits, that the position will be sustained upon examination. At December 31, 2020, the Company had uncertain tax positions for both domestic and foreign issues of $373 million.
The Company accrues for non-income tax contingencies when it is probable that a liability to a taxing authority has been incurred and the amount of the contingency can be reasonably estimated. At December 31, 2020, the Company had a non-income tax contingency reserve for both domestic and foreign issues of $33 million.
Indemnification Assets and Liabilities
In connection with the 2019 separation from DowDuPont and the 2016 ownership restructure of Dow Silicones, Dow entered into agreements that established each party’s indemnification obligations for certain tax, environmental, litigation and other matters, subject to certain conditions and limits. The Company records indemnification assets when collection is deemed probable and engages with indemnifying parties and assesses publicly available information to evaluate collectability. The underlying tax, environmental, litigation and other liabilities for which the Company claims indemnification are subject to significant judgment and potential disputes could adversely impact collectability. The Company assesses the collectability of indemnification assets when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying values may not be recoverable. At December 31, 2020, indemnification assets were $225 million and $115 million for Dow Inc. and TDCC, respectively ($210 million and $100 million for Dow Inc. and TDCC respectively at December 31, 2019).
The Company records indemnification liabilities when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. At December 31, 2020, indemnification liabilities related to the agreements were $657 million for Dow Inc. and zero for TDCC ($848 million for Dow Inc. and zero for TDCC at December 31, 2019). This represents management’s best estimate of the Company’s obligations under the agreements, although it is reasonably possible that future events could cause the actual values to be higher or lower than those projected or those recorded. For further discussion, see Notes 3 and 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Environmental Matters
Environmental Policies
Dow is committed to world-class environmental, health and safety (“EH&S”) performance, as demonstrated by industry-leading performance, a long-standing commitment to Responsible Care®, and a strong commitment to achieve the Company's 2025 Sustainability Goals - goals that set the standard for sustainability in the chemical industry by focusing on improvements in the Company’s local corporate citizenship and product stewardship, and by actively pursuing methods to reduce its environmental impact.
To meet the Company’s public commitments, as well as the stringent laws and government regulations related to environmental protection and remediation to which its global operations are subject, the Company has well-defined policies, requirements and management systems. The Company's EH&S Management System (“EMS”) defines the “who, what, when and how” needed for the businesses to achieve the Company’s policies, requirements, performance objectives, leadership expectations and public commitments. To ensure effective utilization, the EMS is integrated into a company-wide management system for EH&S, Operations, Quality and Human Resources.
It is the Company's policy to adhere to a waste management hierarchy that minimizes the impact of wastes and emissions on the environment. First, work to eliminate or minimize the generation of waste and emissions at the source through research, process design, plant operations and maintenance. Second, find ways to reuse and recycle materials. Finally, unusable or non-recyclable hazardous waste is treated before disposal to eliminate or reduce the hazardous nature and volume of the waste. Treatment may include destruction by chemical, physical, biological or thermal means. Disposal of waste materials in landfills is considered only after all other options have been thoroughly evaluated. The Company has specific requirements for waste that is transferred to non-Dow facilities, including the periodic auditing of these facilities.
The Company believes third-party verification and transparent public reporting are cornerstones of world-class EH&S performance and building public trust. Numerous Dow sites in Europe, Latin America, Asia Pacific and the U.S. & Canada have received third-party verification of the Company’s compliance with Responsible Care® and with outside specifications such as ISO-14001. The Company continues to be a global champion of Responsible Care® and has worked to broaden the application and impact of Responsible Care® around the world through engagement with suppliers, customers and joint venture partners.
The Company’s EH&S policies helped to achieve health and safety performance targets in 2020. The Company’s safety continued to improve in 2020 based on process and personal safety project implementations. Improvement in these areas, as well as environmental compliance, remains a top management priority, with initiatives underway to further improve performance and compliance in 2021 as the Company continues to implement the 2025 Sustainability Goals and new, progressive, multi-decade sustainability targets around advancing a circular economy and climate protection.
Detailed information on Dow’s performance regarding environmental matters and goals is accessible through the Company's Science & Sustainability webpage at www.dow.com/sustainability. The website and its content are not deemed incorporated by reference into this report.
Chemical Security
Public and political attention continues to be placed on the protection of critical infrastructure, including the chemical industry, from security threats. Terrorist attacks, natural disasters and cyber incidents have increased global concerns about the security and safety of chemical production and distribution. Many, including the Company and the American Chemistry Council, have called for uniform risk-based and performance-based national standards for securing the U.S. chemical industry. U.S. regulations set forth risk-based and performance-based standards that must be met at U.S. Coast Guard-regulated facilities. The Company is subject to U.S. Chemical Plant Security regulations and Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards which were implemented by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The Company is also subject to the requirements of the Rail Transportation Security Rule issued by the U.S. Transportation Security Administration. The Company continues to support uniform risk-based national standards for securing the chemical industry.
Since 1988, the Company has maintained a comprehensive, multi-level security plan that focuses on security, emergency planning, preparedness and response. This plan, which has been activated in response to significant world and national events, is reviewed on an annual basis. The Company continues to improve its security plans, placing emphasis on the safety of Dow communities and people by being prepared to meet risks at any level and to address both internal and external identifiable risks. The security plan includes regular vulnerability assessments, security audits, mitigation efforts and physical security upgrades designed to reduce vulnerability. The Company’s security plans are also designed to avert interruptions of normal business operations that could materially and adversely affect the Company’s results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
The Company played a key role in the development and implementation of the American Chemistry Council’s Responsible Care® Security Code ("Security Code"), which requires that all aspects of security - including facility, transportation and cyberspace - be assessed and gaps addressed. Through the global implementation of the Security Code, the Company has permanently heightened the level of security - not just in the United States, but worldwide. The Company employs several hundred employees and contractors in its Emergency Services and Security department worldwide. In 2019, the Company established its Global Security Operations Center ("GSOC") to provide 24-hour/day, 365-day/year real-time monitoring of global risks to Dow assets and people. The GSOC employs state-of-the-art social media monitoring, threat reporting and geo-fencing capabilities to analyze global risks and report those risks, facilitating decision-making and actions to prevent Dow crises.
Through the implementation of the Security Code, including voluntary security enhancements and upgrades, the Company is well-positioned to comply with U.S. chemical facility regulations and other regulatory security frameworks. The Company participates with the American Chemistry Council to periodically review and update the Security Code.
The Company continues to work collaboratively across the supply chain on Responsible Care®, supply chain design, emergency preparedness, shipment visibility and transportation of hazardous materials. The Company cooperated with public and private entities to lead the implementation of advanced tank car design, and track and trace technologies. Further, the Company’s Distribution Risk Review process addresses potential threats in all modes of transportation across the Company’s supply chain. To reduce vulnerabilities, the Company maintains security measures that meet or exceed regulatory and industry security standards in all areas in which they operate.
The Company's initiatives relative to chemical security, emergency preparedness and response, Community Awareness and Emergency Responses and crisis management are implemented consistently at all Dow sites on a global basis. The Company participates with chemical associations globally and participates as an active member of the U.S. delegation to the G7 Global Partnership Sub-Working Group on Chemical Security.
Climate Change
Climate change matters for the Company are likely to be driven by several categories of risks related to the transition to a lower-carbon economy (“Transition Risks”) and risks related to the physical impacts of climate change (“Physical Risks”).
Transition Risks
Transition Risks include carbon pricing mechanisms, transition to lower emissions technology, increased cost of raw materials, and mandates on and regulation of existing products and services. Carbon pricing is a market-based strategy for lowering global warming emissions by putting a monetary value on carbon emissions, allowing for the costs of climate impacts and opportunities for low-carbon energy options to be reflected in production and consumption choices. Approximately 35 percent of Dow’s carbon emissions are generated from operations in Canada and the European Union (“EU”) where carbon pricing is already in place. As part of the European Green Deal, the European Commission proposed a 2030 greenhouse gas (“GHG”) emissions reduction target of at least 55 percent below 1990 levels, with a goal for the EU to be carbon neutral by 2050. In China, an emissions trading system, initially proposed to cover the power sector only, is expected to gradually expand to cover a total of eight sectors, including the petrochemical and chemical industries, though no specific timeline for implementation and expansion has been outlined.
These carbon pricing mechanisms will not only increase Dow’s direct costs to operate but will also result in increased energy costs. Dow mitigates the direct cost impact of existing regulation through research and development projects designed to increase energy efficiency, and capital investment projects that will reduce the Company’s energy usage and carbon footprint. The Company is also exploring options for carbon capture, utilization and storage (“CCUS”) and electrification of Dow’s processes. Dow sees CCUS as a mechanism to help bridge the time period between the onset of increased carbon regulation and the technology available to economically reduce Dow’s GHG emissions. Dow also incorporates a theoretical internal carbon price into its business planning and risk management strategies. This theoretical price of carbon is also included in internal calculations used for prioritizing capital projects. Ultimately the goal of utilizing an internal carbon price is to mitigate the risk of Dow’s carbon exposure to help ensure future resiliency.
Physical Risks
Operationally, climate change may result in more frequent severe weather events, potential changes in precipitation patterns and extreme variability in weather patterns, which can disrupt operations. Several of Dow’s production facilities are located in water-scarce areas and water shortages could impact normal production. Changes in average precipitation could have an impact on the availability and price of water. The Company has engineered susceptible facilities, particularly on the U.S. Gulf Coast, to better withstand severe weather and rising sea levels, and continues to study the long-term implications of changing climate parameters on water availability, plant siting issues and other impacts. Preparedness plans are developed that detail actions needed in the event of severe weather. These measures have historically been in place and these activities and associated costs are driven by normal operational preparedness.
In 2019, the most recent period for which data is available, the Company’s greenhouse gas intensity was down approximately 3 percent from 2018 and by a total of approximately 13 percent since the baseline year of 2006. In addition, the Company is on track to meet its target of purchasing 750 megawatts of renewable power by 2025.
The Company continues progress toward its defined 2025 Sustainability Goals and is taking further action to lessen its carbon impact moving forward. In June 2020, the Company announced a new, multi-decade carbon target to reduce its net annual carbon emission by 5 million metric tons compared with its 2020 baseline, a reduction of approximately 15 percent, and an intention to be carbon neutral (Scopes 1+2+3, as defined by the Greenhouse Gas Protocol, plus product benefits) by 2050.
Dow’s action plan to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 includes:
•Optimizing energy efficiency of facilities and processes
•Increasing renewables in purchased power mix
•Investments in CCUS
•Developing low-carbon technologies for emission reductions
•Deploying materials to enable emissions reductions for customers and industries
The Company intends to meet its commitment to implement the recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures ("TCFD") over the next two years. Disclosures aligned with TCFD recommendations will be included in the Company’s annual Sustainability Report.
Environmental Remediation
The Company accrues the costs of remediation of its facilities and formerly owned facilities based on current law and regulatory requirements. The nature of such remediation can include management of soil and groundwater contamination. The accounting policies adopted to properly reflect the monetary impacts of environmental matters are discussed in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. To assess the impact on the financial statements, environmental experts review currently available facts to evaluate the probability and scope of potential liabilities. Inherent uncertainties exist in such evaluations primarily due to unknown environmental conditions, changing governmental regulations and legal standards regarding liability, and the ability to apply remediation technologies. These liabilities are adjusted periodically as remediation efforts progress or as additional technical or legal information becomes available. The Company had an accrued liability of $996 million at December 31, 2020, related to the remediation of current or former Dow-owned sites. At December 31, 2019, the liability related to remediation was $948 million.
In addition to current and former Dow-owned sites, under the federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act ("CERCLA") and equivalent state laws (hereafter referred to collectively as "Superfund Law"), the Company is liable for remediation of other hazardous waste sites where the Company allegedly disposed of, or arranged for the treatment or disposal of, hazardous substances. Because Superfund Law imposes joint and several liability upon each party at a site, the Company has evaluated its potential liability in light of the number of other companies that have also been named potentially responsible parties (“PRPs”) at each site, the estimated apportionment of costs among all PRPs, and the financial ability and commitment of each to pay its expected share. The Company’s remaining liability for the remediation of Superfund sites was $248 million at December 31, 2020 ($207 million at December 31, 2019). The Company has not recorded any third-party recovery related to these sites as a receivable.
Information regarding environmental sites is provided below:
1.Dow-owned sites are sites currently or formerly owned by the Company. In the United States, remediation obligations are imposed by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act or analogous state law. At December 31, 2020, 24 of these sites (28 sites at December 31, 2019) were formerly owned by Dowell Schlumberger, Inc., a group of companies in which the Company previously owned a 50 percent interest. The Company sold its interest in Dowell Schlumberger in 1992.
2.Superfund sites are sites, including sites not owned by the Company, where remediation obligations are imposed by Superfund Law.
Additional information is provided below for the Company’s Midland, Michigan, manufacturing site and Midland off-site locations (collectively, the "Midland sites"), as well as a Superfund site in Wood-Ridge, New Jersey, the locations for which the Company has the largest potential environmental liabilities.
In the early days of operations at the Midland manufacturing site, wastes were usually disposed of on-site, resulting in soil and groundwater contamination, which has been contained and managed on-site under a series of Resource Conservation and Recovery Act permits and regulatory agreements. The Hazardous Waste Operating License for the Midland manufacturing site, issued in 2003, and renewed and replaced in September 2015, also included provisions for the Company to conduct an investigation to determine the nature and extent of off-site contamination from historic Midland manufacturing site operations. In January 2010, the Company, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") and the State of Michigan ("State") entered into an Administrative Order on Consent that requires the Company to conduct a remedial investigation, a feasibility study and a remedial design for the Tittabawassee River, the Saginaw River and the Saginaw Bay, and pay the oversight costs of the EPA and the State under the authority of CERCLA. See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information relating to Midland off-site environmental matters.
Rohm and Haas, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, is a PRP at the Wood-Ridge, New Jersey Ventron/Velsicol Superfund Site, and the adjacent Berry’s Creek Study Area ("BCSA") (collectively, the "Wood-Ridge sites"). Rohm and Haas is a successor in interest to a company that owned and operated a mercury processing facility, where wastewater and waste handling resulted in contamination of soils and adjacent creek sediments. In 2018, the Berry’s Creek Study Area Potentially Responsible Party Group (“PRP Group”), consisting of over 100 PRPs, completed a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study for the BCSA. During that time, the EPA concluded that an “iterative or adaptive approach” was appropriate for cleaning up the BCSA. Thus, each phase of remediation will be followed by a period of monitoring to assess its effectiveness and determine if there is a need for more work. In September 2018, the EPA signed a Record of Decision ("ROD 1") which describes the initial phase of the EPA’s plan to clean-up the BCSA. ROD 1 will remediate waterways and major tributaries in the most contaminated part of the BCSA. The PRP Group has signed agreements with the EPA to design the selected remedy. Although there is currently much uncertainty as to what will ultimately be required to remediate the BCSA and Rohm and Haas's share of these costs has yet to be determined, the range of activities that are required in the interim Record of Decision is known in general terms.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had accrued liabilities totaling $370 million ($368 million at December 31, 2019) for environmental remediation at the Midland and Wood-Ridge sites. In 2020, the Company spent $53 million ($32 million in 2019) for environmental remediation at the Midland and Wood-Ridge sites.
During the third quarter of 2020, the Company accrued additional liabilities totaling $106 million related to environmental remediation matters resulting from the Company's evaluation of the costs required to manage remediation activities at sites Dow will permanently shut down as part of its 2020 Restructuring Program. In addition, the Company recorded indemnification assets of $50 million related to Dow Silicones' environmental matters. Net of indemnifications, the Company recognized a pretax charge of $56 million related to these environmental matters, included in "Restructuring, goodwill impairment and asset related charges - net" in the consolidated statements of income.
During the third quarter of 2019, the Company accrued additional liabilities totaling $447 million related to environmental remediation matters at a number of current and historical locations. The additional accrual primarily resulted from: the culmination of long-standing negotiations and discussions with regulators and agencies, including technical studies supporting higher cost estimates for final or staged remediation plans; the Company’s evaluation of the cost required to manage remediation activities at sites affected by Dow’s separation from DowDuPont and related agreements with Corteva and DuPont; and, the Company’s review of its closure strategies and obligations to monitor ongoing operations and maintenance activities. In addition, the Company recorded indemnification assets of $48 million related to Dow Silicones’ environmental matters. Net of indemnifications, the Company recognized a pretax charge of $399 million related to these environmental matters, included in “Cost of sales” in the consolidated statements of income.
In total, the Company’s accrued liability for probable environmental remediation and restoration costs was $1,244 million at December 31, 2020, compared with $1,155 million at December 31, 2019. This is management’s best estimate of the costs for remediation and restoration with respect to environmental matters for which the Company has accrued liabilities, although it is reasonably possible that the ultimate cost with respect to these particular matters could range up to approximately one and a half times that amount. Consequently, it is reasonably possible that environmental remediation and restoration costs in excess of amounts accrued could have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. It is the opinion of the Company’s management, however, that the possibility is remote that costs in excess of the range disclosed will have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
The amounts charged to income on a pretax basis related to environmental remediation totaled $234 million in 2020, $588 million in 2019 and $176 million in 2018. The amounts charged to income on a pretax basis related to operating the Company's current pollution abatement facilities, excluding internal recharges, totaled $616 million in 2020, $677 million in 2019 and $695 million in 2018. Capital expenditures for environmental protection were $80 million in 2020, $83 million in 2019 and $55 million in 2018.
Asbestos-Related Matters of Union Carbide Corporation
Union Carbide is and has been involved in a large number of asbestos-related suits filed primarily in state courts during the past four decades. These suits principally allege personal injury resulting from exposure to asbestos-containing products and frequently seek both actual and punitive damages. The alleged claims primarily relate to products that Union Carbide sold in the past, alleged exposure to asbestos-containing products located on Union Carbide’s premises, and Union Carbide’s responsibility for asbestos suits filed against a former Union Carbide subsidiary, Amchem. In many cases, plaintiffs are unable to demonstrate that they have suffered any compensable loss as a result of such exposure, or that injuries incurred in fact resulted from exposure to Union Carbide’s products.
The table below provides information regarding asbestos-related claims pending against Union Carbide and Amchem based on criteria developed by Union Carbide and its external consultants:
Plaintiffs’ lawyers often sue numerous defendants in individual lawsuits or on behalf of numerous claimants. As a result, the damages alleged are not expressly identified as to Union Carbide, Amchem or any other particular defendant, even when specific damages are alleged with respect to a specific disease or injury. In fact, there are no asbestos personal injury cases in which only Union Carbide and/or Amchem are the sole named defendants. For these reasons and based upon Union Carbide’s litigation and settlement experience, Union Carbide does not consider the damages alleged against Union Carbide and Amchem to be a meaningful factor in its determination of any potential asbestos-related liability.
For additional information see Part I, Item 3. Legal Proceedings and Asbestos-Related Matters of Union Carbide Corporation in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.