Item 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis below for Darden Restaurants, Inc. (Darden, the Company, we, us or our) should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related financial statement notes included in Part II of this report under the caption “Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” We operate on a 52/53-week fiscal year, which ends on the last Sunday in May. Fiscal 2021, which ended May 30, 2021, consisted of 52 weeks and fiscal 2020, which ended May 31, 2020, consisted of 53 weeks.
OVERVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Our business operates in the full-service dining segment of the restaurant industry. At May 30, 2021, we operated 1,834 restaurants through subsidiaries in the United States and Canada under the Olive Garden®, LongHorn Steakhouse®, Cheddar’s Scratch Kitchen®, Yard House®, The Capital Grille®, Seasons 52®, Bahama Breeze® and Eddie V’s Prime Seafood® trademarks. We own and operate all of our restaurants in the United States and Canada, except for 2 joint venture restaurants managed by us and 33 franchised restaurants. We also have 24 franchised restaurants in operation located in Latin America. All intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
COVID-19 Pandemic
For much of fiscal 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a significant reduction in guest traffic at our restaurants due to changes in consumer behavior as public health officials encouraged social distancing and required personal protective equipment and state and local governments mandated restrictions including suspension of dine-in operations, reduced restaurant seating capacity, table spacing requirements, bar closures and additional physical barriers. Beginning in late March 2020, we operated with all of our dining rooms closed and served our guests in a To Go only or To Go and delivery format. In late April 2020, state and local governments began to allow us to open dining rooms at limited capacities, along with other operating restrictions.
As a result, we began fiscal 2021 with significant limitations on our operations, which over the course of the fiscal year varied widely from time to time, state to state and city to city. During November 2020, rising case rates resulted in certain jurisdictions implementing restrictions that again reduced dining room capacity or mandated the re-closure of dining rooms. Once COVID-19 vaccines were approved and moved into wider distribution in the United States in early 2021, public health conditions improved and almost all of the COVID-19 restrictions on businesses have eased. As of the date of this report, all of our restaurants were able to open their dining rooms to some extent and few capacity restrictions or other COVID-19 restrictions remained in place in the United States. However, it is possible additional outbreaks could require us to again reduce our capacity or limit or suspend our in-restaurant dining operations.
As we navigated through the pandemic, we took significant steps to adapt our business model to allow us to continue to serve guests and support our team members, including investing in our team members through enhanced pay and benefits, streamlining our restaurant processes, simplifying our menus, and accelerating the rollout of technology to all of our brands to enhance the off-premise and in-restaurant guest experience. As our dining rooms have returned to full or close-to-full capacity, we are focused on continuing to provide a safe environment for our team members and guests, and maintaining many of the operating efficiencies established during fiscal 2021.
Fiscal 2021 Financial Highlights
Our sales from continuing operations were $7.20 billion in fiscal 2021 compared to $7.81 billion in fiscal 2020. The 7.8 percent decrease in sales from continuing operations was primarily driven by negative combined Darden same-restaurant sales of 7.8 percent and one less week of operations in fiscal 2021, partially offset by revenue from the addition of 30 net new company-owned restaurants. The decrease in same-restaurant sales was driven by the impact of COVID-19.
Net earnings from continuing operations for fiscal 2021 was $632.4 million ($4.80 per diluted share) compared with a net loss from continuing operations for fiscal 2020 of $49.2 million ($0.40 per diluted share). Our results from continuing operations for fiscal 2021 increased compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the economic impacts of COVID-19 which had a material adverse effect specifically on the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, including $390.0 million of impairments.
Our net loss from discontinued operations was $3.1 million ($0.03 per diluted share) for fiscal 2021, compared with a net loss from discontinued operations of $3.2 million ($0.03 per diluted share) for fiscal 2020. When combined with results from
continuing operations, our diluted net earnings per share was $4.77 for fiscal 2021 and diluted net loss per share was $0.43 for fiscal 2020.
Outlook
We expect fiscal 2022 sales from continuing operations to increase between 28 percent and 32 percent, driven by Darden same-restaurant sales growth of 25 percent to 29 percent and approximately 35-40 new restaurants. In fiscal 2022, we expect our annual effective tax rate to be between 13.0 percent and 14.0 percent and we expect capital expenditures incurred to build new restaurants, remodel and maintain existing restaurants and technology initiatives to be between $375.0 million and $425.0 million.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR FISCAL 2021 AND 2020
To facilitate review of our results of operations, the following table sets forth our financial results for the periods indicated. All information is derived from the consolidated statements of earnings for the fiscal years ended May 30, 2021 and May 31, 2020:
The following table details the number of company-owned restaurants currently reported in continuing operations, compared with the number open at the end of fiscal 2020:
(1)Includes three The Capital Burger restaurants in fiscal 2021 and two in fiscal 2020.
SALES
The following table presents our company-owned restaurant sales, U.S. same-restaurant sales (SRS) and average annual sales per restaurant by segment for the periods indicated:
(1)Same-restaurant sales is a year-over-year comparison of each period’s sales volumes for a 52-week year and is limited to restaurants open at least 16 months.
(2)Average annual sales are calculated as sales divided by total restaurant operating weeks multiplied by 52 weeks; excludes franchise locations.
Olive Garden’s sales decrease for fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by a U.S. same-restaurant sales decrease and one less week of operations, partially offset by revenue from new restaurants. The decrease in U.S. same-restaurant sales in fiscal 2021 was driven by the impact of COVID-19 and resulted from a 12.8 percent decrease in same-restaurant guest counts offset by a 2.9 percent increase in average check.
LongHorn Steakhouse’s sales increase for fiscal 2021 was driven by a same-restaurant sales increase combined with revenue from new restaurants, partially offset by one less week of operations. The increase in same-restaurant sales in fiscal 2021 resulted from a 3.3 percent increase in same-restaurant guest counts combined with a 2.2 percent increase in average check.
Fine Dining’s sales decrease for fiscal 2021 was driven by a same-restaurant sales decrease and one less week of operations, partially offset by revenue from new restaurants. The decrease in same-restaurant sales in fiscal 2021 was driven by the impact of COVID-19 and resulted from a 20.7 percent decrease in same-restaurant guest counts offset by a 1.5 percent increase in average check.
Other Business’s sales decrease for fiscal 2021 was driven by a same-restaurant sales decrease and one less week of operations, partially offset by revenue from new restaurants. The decrease in same-restaurant sales in fiscal 2021 was driven by the impact of COVID-19 and resulted from a 15.5 percent decrease in same-restaurant guest counts offset by a 2.0 percent increase in average check.
COSTS AND EXPENSES
The following table sets forth selected operating data as a percent of sales from continuing operations for the periods indicated. This information is derived from the consolidated statements of earnings for the fiscal years ended May 30, 2021 and May 31, 2020.
Total operating costs and expenses from continuing operations were $6.55 billion in fiscal 2021 and $7.76 billion in fiscal 2020.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020:
•Food and beverage costs increased as a percent of sales primarily due to a 0.7% impact from inflation and 0.4% impact from investments in food quality, partially offset by a 0.6% impact from pricing leverage and 0.4% impact from menu mix.
•Restaurant labor costs decreased as a percent of sales primarily due to a 4.0% impact from productivity improvement driven by operational simplification and a 0.7% impact from pricing, partially offset by a 1.7% impact from sales deleverage and a 0.5% impact from inflation.
•Restaurant expenses decreased as a percent of sales primarily due to a 1.4% impact from lower repairs and maintenance expenses, utility costs, and rent expense, and a 0.4% impact from pricing, partially offset by a 1.6% impact from sales deleverage.
•Marketing expenses decreased as a percent of sales primarily due to a 2.0% impact from lower media spending at Olive Garden and LongHorn Steakhouse, partially offset by a 0.3% impact from sales deleverage.
•General and administrative expenses increased as a percent of sales primarily due to a 0.6% impact related to our corporate restructuring actions during the first quarter of fiscal 2021, a 0.4% impact from the mark to market of our deferred compensation plans, and a 0.4% impact due to sales deleverage, partially offset by a 0.6% impact from cost savings initiatives and a 0.2% impact from a legal recovery.
•Depreciation and amortization expenses increased as a percent of sales primarily due to sales deleverage.
•Impairments and disposal of assets, net decreased as a percent of sales due to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on fiscal 2020. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we recorded non-cash impairment charges of $220.8 million related to a portion of our other indefinite-lived intangible assets, restaurant-level and other assets.
•Goodwill impairment decreased as a percent of sales due to the economic impact of COVID-19 on fiscal 2020. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $169.2 million related to a portion of our goodwill.
INCOME TAXES
During fiscal 2021, we had an income tax benefit of $55.9 million ((9.7) percent effective tax rate) compared to an income tax benefit of $111.8 million (69.4 percent effective tax rate) in fiscal 2020. The significant change was driven primarily by the fact that we had $576.5 million in earnings before taxes in fiscal 2021, compared to a net loss before taxes $161.0 million in fiscal 2020. For fiscal 2021, our effective tax rate was also impacted by the generation of a net operating loss for tax purposes that will be carried back to the previous five tax years. We generated a net operating loss for tax purposes due to several factors, including the impact of COVID-19, accelerated tax depreciation, increased tax deductions for equity vestings and exercises, tax accounting method changes and various other tax planning initiatives. An income tax benefit is generated due to the difference in federal tax rates between fiscal year 2021 and the years to which the federal net operating loss will be carried back.
NET EARNINGS AND NET EARNINGS PER SHARE FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS
Net earnings from continuing operations for fiscal 2021 were $632.4 million ($4.80 per diluted share) compared with net loss from continuing operations for fiscal 2020 of $49.2 million ($0.40 per diluted share).
Our results from continuing operations for fiscal 2021 increased compared with fiscal 2020 primarily due to the economic impacts of COVID-19 which had a material adverse effect on the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 including $390.0 million of asset impairments during the fourth quarter. In fiscal 2021, our diluted per share results from continuing operations were positively impacted by $0.76 due to a non-recurring income tax benefit, partially offset by $0.27 due to our corporate restructuring in the first quarter of fiscal 2021. In fiscal 2020, our diluted per share results from continuing operations were negatively impacted by approximately $2.19 due to non-cash goodwill and trademark impairments, approximately $0.29 due to non-cash restaurant-level impairments and approximately $0.18 due to inventory and note receivable write-downs. Additionally, our diluted per share results from continuing operations for fiscal 2020 were adversely impacted by approximately $0.89 due to a pension settlement charge and approximately $0.02 due to an international structure simplification from the second quarter of fiscal 2020.
LOSS FROM DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
On an after-tax basis, results from discontinued operations for fiscal 2021 were a net loss of $3.1 million ($0.03 per diluted share) compared with a net loss for fiscal 2020 of $3.2 million ($0.03 per diluted share).
SEGMENT RESULTS
We manage our restaurant brands, Olive Garden, LongHorn Steakhouse, Cheddar’s Scratch Kitchen, Yard House, The Capital Grille, Seasons 52, Bahama Breeze and Eddie V’s in the U.S. and Canada as operating segments. We aggregate our operating segments into reportable segments based on a combination of the size, economic characteristics and sub-segment of full-service dining within which each brand operates. Our four reportable segments are: (1) Olive Garden, (2) LongHorn Steakhouse, (3) Fine Dining and (4) Other Business. See Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this report) for further details.
Our management uses segment profit as the measure for assessing performance of our segments. The following table presents segment profit margin for the periods indicated:
The increase in the Olive Garden segment profit margin for fiscal 2021 was driven primarily by lower restaurant labor as well as lower marketing expenses. The increase in the LongHorn Steakhouse segment profit margin for fiscal 2021 was driven by leveraging positive same-restaurant sales as well as lower marketing expenses. The increase in in the Fine Dining segment profit margin for 2021 was driven by lower marketing expenses and lower food and beverage costs. The increase in the Other Business segment profit margin for 2021 was driven by lower restaurant labor and lower marketing expenses.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR FISCAL 2020 COMPARED TO 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2020 and May 26, 2019, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on July 24, 2020.
SEASONALITY
Our sales volumes have historically fluctuated seasonally. Typically, our average sales per restaurant are highest in the winter and spring, followed by the summer, and lowest in the fall. However, throughout fiscal 2021, a variety of factors, including the impacts of COVID-19 on our business, government actions taken to respond to COVID-19 and to stimulate the United States’ recovery from COVID-19, and changing consumer preferences caused fluctuations in our sales volumes that were different than our typical seasonality. Additionally, holidays, changes in the economy, severe weather and similar conditions may impact sales volumes seasonally in some operating regions. Because of the historical seasonality of our business and these other factors, results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be achieved for the full fiscal year.
IMPACT OF INFLATION
We attempt to minimize the annual effects of inflation through appropriate planning, operating practices and menu price increases. We do not believe inflation had a significant overall effect on our annual results of operations during fiscal 2021 or 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of sales and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this report). Judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. We consider the following estimates to be most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
Leases
We evaluate our leases at their inception to estimate their expected term, which commences on the date when we have the right to control the use of the leased property and includes the non-cancelable base term plus all option periods we are reasonably certain to exercise. Our judgment in determining the appropriate expected term and discount rate for each lease affects our evaluation of:
•The classification and accounting for leases as operating versus finance;
•The rent holidays and escalation in payments that are included in the calculation of the lease liability and related right-of-use asset; and
•The term over which leasehold improvements for each restaurant facility are amortized.
These judgments may produce materially different amounts of lease liabilities and right-of-use assets recognized on our consolidated balance sheets, as well as depreciation, amortization, interest and rent expense recognized in our consolidated statements of earnings if different discount rates and expected lease terms were used.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
Land, buildings and equipment, operating lease right-of-use assets and certain other assets, including definite-lived intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. A significant amount of judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred. Such indicators may include, among others: a significant decline in our expected future cash flows; changes in expected useful life; unanticipated competition; slower growth rates, ongoing maintenance and improvements of the assets, or changes in the usage or operating performance. Any adverse change in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of these assets and could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Based on a review of operating results for each of our restaurants, the amount of net book value associated with lower performing restaurants that would be deemed at risk for impairment is not material to our consolidated financial statements.
Valuation and Recoverability of Goodwill and Trademarks
We have eight reporting units, six of which had goodwill and seven of which had trademarks. Goodwill and trademarks are not subject to amortization and goodwill has been assigned to reporting units for purposes of impairment testing. The reporting units are our restaurant brands. A significant amount of judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred. Such indicators may include, among others: a significant decline in our expected future cash flows; a sustained, significant decline in our stock price and market capitalization; a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate; unanticipated competition; the testing for recoverability of a significant asset group within a reporting unit; and slower growth rates. Any adverse change in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of these assets and could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. We review our goodwill and trademarks for impairment annually, as of the first day of our fourth fiscal quarter, or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist.
During fiscal 2021, we elected to perform a qualitative assessment for our annual impairment review of goodwill and trademarks to determine whether or not indicators of impairment exist. In considering the qualitative approach related to goodwill, we evaluated factors including, but not limited to, COVID-19, macro-economic conditions, market and industry conditions, commodity cost fluctuations, competitive environment, share price performance, results of prior impairment tests, operational stability, the overall financial performance of the reporting units and the impacts of discount rates. As it relates to trademarks, we evaluate similar factors from the goodwill assessment, in addition to impacts of royalty rates. Based on the results of the qualitative assessment which considered the improvements of each of our brands’ financial performance, as well as the improved overall operating environment, no indicators of impairment were identified. Changes in circumstances existing at the measurement date or at other times in the future, or in the numerous estimates associated with management’s judgments and assumptions made in assessing the fair value of our goodwill and trademarks, could result in an impairment loss of a portion or all of our goodwill or trademarks.
Impairment of our assets, including goodwill or trademarks, adversely affects our financial position and results of operations, and our leverage ratio for purposes of our revolving credit agreement (Revolving Credit Agreement) increases. A leverage ratio exceeding the maximum permitted under our Revolving Credit Agreement would be a default under our Revolving Credit Agreement. At May 30, 2021, additional write-downs of goodwill, other indefinite-lived intangible assets, or any other assets in excess of approximately $1.69 billion would have been required to cause our leverage ratio to exceed the permitted maximum. As our leverage ratio is determined on a quarterly basis, and due to the seasonal nature of our business, a lesser amount of impairment in future quarters could cause our leverage ratio to exceed the permitted maximum.
Unearned Revenues
Unearned revenues primarily represent our liability for gift cards that have been sold but not yet redeemed. The estimated value of gift cards expected to remain unused is recognized over the expected period of redemption as the remaining gift card values are redeemed, generally over a period of 12 years. Utilizing this method, we estimate both the amount of breakage and the time period of redemption. If actual redemption patterns vary from our estimates, actual gift card breakage income may differ from the amounts recorded. We update our estimates of our redemption period and our breakage rate periodically and apply that rate to gift card redemptions on a prospective basis. Changing our breakage-rate estimates by 50 basis points would have resulted in an adjustment in our breakage income of approximately $2.4 million for fiscal 2021.
Income Taxes
We estimate certain components of our provision for income taxes. These estimates include, among other items, depreciation and amortization expense allowable for tax purposes, allowable tax credits for items such as taxes paid on reported employee tip income, effective rates for state and local income taxes and the tax deductibility of certain other items. We adjust our annual effective income tax rate as additional information on outcomes or events becomes available.
Assessment of uncertain tax positions requires judgments relating to the amounts, timing and likelihood of resolution. As described in Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this report), the $51.8 million balance of unrecognized tax benefits at May 30, 2021, includes $35.9 million related to tax positions for which it is reasonably possible that the total amounts could change during the next 12 months based on the outcome of examinations. Of the $35.9 million, $18.0 million relates to items that would impact our effective income tax rate.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Typically, cash flows generated from operating activities are our principal source of liquidity, which we use to finance capital expenditures for new restaurants and to remodel and maintain existing restaurants, to pay dividends to our shareholders and to repurchase shares of our common stock. Since substantially all of our sales are for cash and cash equivalents, and accounts payable are generally paid in 5 to 90 days, we are typically able to carry current liabilities in excess of current assets. As previously noted, during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, all of our restaurants began operating at reduced capacities due to COVID-19 and initially were not able to generate sufficient cash from operations to cover all of our projected expenditures while
operating at those reduced capacities. Accordingly, we took significant steps to adapt our business, which allowed us to continue to serve guests, support our team members and secure our liquidity position to provide financial flexibility. As state and local governments allowed us to open dining rooms at limited capacities our cash flows improved, and during fiscal 2021 we generated positive operating cash flows and fully repaid our $270.0 million 364-day term loan prior to maturity. Additionally, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $1.10 per share to be paid on August 2, 2021 to all shareholders of record as of the close of business on July 9, 2021.
We currently manage our business and financial ratios to target an investment-grade bond rating, which has historically allowed flexible access to financing at reasonable costs. Our publicly issued long-term debt currently carries the following ratings:
•Moody’s Investors Service “Baa3”;
•Standard & Poor’s “BBB-”; and
•Fitch “BBB-”.
Our commercial paper has ratings of:
•Moody’s Investors Service “P-3”;
•Standard & Poor’s “A-3”; and
•Fitch “F-3”.
These ratings are as of the date of the filing of this report and have been obtained with the understanding that Moody’s Investors Service, Standard & Poor’s and Fitch will continue to monitor our credit and make future adjustments to these ratings to the extent warranted. The ratings are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold our securities, may be changed, superseded or withdrawn at any time and should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
We maintain a $750.0 million Revolving Credit Agreement with Bank of America, N.A. (BOA), as administrative agent, and the lenders and other agents party thereto. The Revolving Credit Agreement is a senior unsecured credit commitment to the Company and contains customary representations and affirmative and negative covenants (including limitations on liens and subsidiary debt and a maximum consolidated lease adjusted total debt to total capitalization ratio of 0.75 to 1.00) and events of default usual for credit facilities of this type. As of May 30, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the Revolving Credit Agreement.
The Revolving Credit Agreement matures on October 27, 2022, and the proceeds may be used for working capital and capital expenditures, the refinancing of certain indebtedness, certain acquisitions and general corporate purposes. Loans under the Revolving Credit Agreement bear interest at a rate of LIBOR plus a margin determined by reference to a ratings-based pricing grid (Applicable Margin), or the base rate (which is defined as the highest of the BOA prime rate plus 0.075 percent, the Federal Funds rate plus 0.500 percent, and the Eurocurrency Rate plus 1.075 percent) plus the Applicable Margin. Assuming a “BBB-” equivalent credit rating level, the Applicable Margin under the Revolving Credit Agreement will be 1.075 percent for LIBOR loans and 0.075 percent for base rate loans. As of May 30, 2021, we had no outstanding balances under the Revolving Credit Agreement.
At May 30, 2021, our long-term debt consisted principally of:
•$500.0 million of unsecured 3.850 percent senior notes due in May 2027;
•$96.3 million of unsecured 6.000 percent senior notes due in August 2035;
•$42.8 million of unsecured 6.800 percent senior notes due in October 2037; and
•$300.0 million of unsecured 4.550 percent senior notes due in February 2048.
The interest rate on our $42.8 million 6.800 percent senior notes due October 2037 is subject to adjustment from time to time if the debt rating assigned to such series of notes is downgraded below a certain rating level (or subsequently upgraded). The maximum adjustment is 2.000 percent above the initial interest rate and the interest rate cannot be reduced below the initial interest rate. As of May 30, 2021, no such adjustments are made to this rate.
Through our shelf registration statement on file with the SEC, depending on conditions prevailing in the public capital markets, we may issue equity securities or unsecured debt securities from time to time in one or more series, which may consist of notes, debentures or other evidences of indebtedness in one or more offerings.
From time to time, we may repurchase our outstanding debt in privately negotiated transactions. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements and other factors.
From time to time, we enter into interest rate derivative instruments to manage interest rate risk inherent in our operations. See Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this report).
A summary of our contractual obligations and commercial commitments at May 30, 2021, is as follows:
(1)Includes interest payments associated with existing long-term debt. Excludes discount and issuance costs of $9.1 million.
(2)Includes non-cancelable future operating lease and finance lease commitments.
(3)Includes commitments for food and beverage items and supplies, capital projects, information technology and other miscellaneous commitments.
(4)Includes expected contributions associated with our supplemental defined benefit pension plan and payments associated with our postretirement benefit plan and our non-qualified deferred compensation plan through fiscal 2031.
(5)Includes interest on unrecognized income tax benefits of $2.3 million, $1.4 million of which relates to contingencies expected to be resolved within one year.
(6)Includes letters of credit for $70.5 million of workers’ compensation and general liabilities accrued in our consolidated financial statements and letters of credit for $28.9 million of surety bonds related to other payments.
(7)Consists solely of guarantees associated with leased properties that have been assigned to third parties and are primarily related to the disposition of Red Lobster.
Our adjusted debt to adjusted total capital ratio was 55 percent and 61 percent as of May 30, 2021 and May 31, 2020, respectively. Based on these ratios, we believe our financial condition is strong. We include the lease-debt equivalent and contractual lease guarantees in our adjusted debt to adjusted total capital ratio reported to shareholders, as we believe its inclusion better represents the optimal capital structure that we target from period to period and because it is consistent with the calculation of the covenant under our Revolving Credit Agreement. For fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, the lease-debt equivalent includes 6.00 times the total annual minimum rent for consolidated lease obligations of $385.7 million and $392.6 million, respectively. The composition of our capital structure is shown in the following table:
Net cash flows provided by operating activities from continuing operations were $1.19 billion and $717.4 million in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net cash flows provided by operating activities include net earnings from continuing operations of $632.4 million in fiscal 2021 and net loss from continuing operations of $49.2 million in fiscal 2020. Net cash flows provided by operating activities from continuing operations increased in fiscal 2021 primarily due to higher net earnings from continuing operations.
Net cash flows used in investing activities from continuing operations were $263.7 million in fiscal 2021 compared to net cash flows used in investing activities from continuing operations of $544.0 million in fiscal 2020. Capital expenditures incurred principally for building new restaurants, remodeling existing restaurants, replacing equipment, and technology initiatives were $254.9 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $459.9 million in fiscal 2020. The reduction in capital expenditures during fiscal 2021 was due to COVID-19. Net cash flows used in investing activities for fiscal 2020 also reflect net cash used of $55.8 million in the acquisition of Cheddar’s Scratch Kitchen restaurants from existing franchisees.
Net cash flows used in financing activities from continuing operations were $478.9 million in fiscal 2021, compared to net cash flows provided by financing activities from continuing operations of $138.7 million in fiscal 2020. Net cash flows used in financing activities in fiscal 2021 included repayment of $270.0 million from a 364-day term loan, dividend payments of $202.6 million and share repurchases of $45.4 million, partially offset by proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options. Net cash flows providing by financing activities in fiscal 2020 included proceeds of $750.0 million from drawing on our Revolving Credit Agreement, net proceeds of $505.1 million from a follow-on common stock offering, proceeds of $270.0 million from a 364-day term loan and proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options, partially offset by repayment of the $750.0 million drawn from our Revolving Credit Agreement, dividend payments of $322.3 million and share repurchases of $330.3 million.
Our defined benefit and other postretirement benefit costs and liabilities are determined using various actuarial assumptions and methodologies prescribed under Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification Topic 715, Compensation - Retirement Benefits and Topic 712, Compensation - Nonretirement Postemployment Benefits. In April 2018, our Benefit Plans Committee approved the termination of our primary non-contributory defined benefit pension plan (the Retirement Income Plan for Darden Restaurants, Inc.). Plan participants who had not yet begun receiving their benefit payments were provided the opportunity to receive their full accrued benefits from plan assets by either (i) electing immediate lump sum
distributions or annuities or (ii) deferring commencement of their benefits to a later date. During fiscal 2020, we made a funding contribution of approximately $12.7 million to fully fund the benefit obligation. As of May 31, 2020, all of the plan assets were either (i) distributed to settle the benefits for participants who selected the lump sum option or (ii) transferred to a third-party annuity provider for all other eligible participants. The settlement of the benefit obligation to plan participants in fiscal 2020 resulted in a pre-tax pension settlement charge of $145.5 million recorded in other (income) expense, net in our consolidated statement of earnings. We expect to contribute approximately $0.4 million to our supplemental defined benefit pension plan and approximately $2.0 million to our postretirement benefit plan during fiscal 2022.
We are not aware of any trends or events that would materially affect our capital requirements or liquidity. We believe that our internal cash-generating capabilities, the potential issuance of equity or unsecured debt securities under our shelf registration statement and short-term commercial paper or drawings under our Revolving Credit Agreement should be sufficient to finance our capital expenditures, debt maturities and other operating activities through fiscal 2022.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, sales or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Our total current assets were $1.87 billion at May 30, 2021, compared with $1.10 billion at May 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in cash and cash equivalents driven by cash from operations as well as an increase in prepaid income taxes.
Our total current liabilities were $1.85 billion at May 30, 2021, compared with $1.79 billion at May 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in other current liabilities and accounts payable, partially offset by the repayment of our $270 million term loan in fiscal 2021.
APPLICATION OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this report) for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards.