Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” and Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
General Overview
The Company is an owner and operator of golf-related leisure and entertainment venues focused on bringing people together through competitive socializing. Our common stock is traded on the NYSE under the symbol “DS.”
The Company conducts its business through two primary operating segments:
Entertainment Golf Business | Drive Shack
Our Entertainment Golf business is primarily focused on competitive socializing within the leisure and social entertainment industry, combining chef-inspired food and beverage offerings, with innovative technology modernizing ways to experience golf as a sport and form of entertainment that appeals to a broad range of audiences and competitive appetites.
During the second half of 2019, we opened three Generation 2.0 Drive Shack venues in Raleigh, North Carolina; Richmond, Virginia and West Palm Beach, Florida.
We opened our first Drive Shack venue in Orlando, Florida in April 2018, which has largely served as our research and development and testing venue. During the fourth quarter of 2019, we briefly closed this venue to retrofit with Generation 2.0 enhancements, including new ball tracking technology (TrackMan™), enhanced gaming and a redesigned outfield to provide a more engaging guest experience.
Additionally, the Company is committed to leases in New Orleans, Louisiana and in Manhattan (Randall’s Island), New York for its entertainment golf venues.
Traditional Golf Business
Our Traditional Golf business, American Golf, is one of the largest operators of golf properties in the United States. As of December 31, 2020, we owned, leased or managed 60 properties across 9 states and have more than 30,000 members.
During 2020, the Company sold one golf property for an aggregate sale price of $34.5 million. As of December 31, 2020, we have successfully sold 25 of our 26 owned golf properties for a total aggregate sales price of $204.2 million, which was reinvested in our Entertainment Golf business as part of our overall growth strategy to expand golf as a sport and form of entertainment, after repayment of the Traditional Golf loan in December 2018.
During 2020, the Company entered into a total of four new management agreements. One of the new management agreements related to the golf property sold during the year and another related to a terminated lease but in both instances, the Company was retained as manager.
For further information relating to our business, see “Item 1. Business.”
Market Considerations
Our ability to execute our business strategy, particularly the development of our Entertainment Golf business, depends to a degree on our ability to monetize our remaining investments in loans and securities, optimize our Traditional Golf business, including sales of certain owned properties, and obtain additional capital. We have substantially monetized our historical investments in loans and securities and have a small number of positions remaining that we could sell or use as collateral or support in a lending transaction. We recently raised capital through the equity markets in February 2021; however, rising interest rates or stock market volatility could impair our future ability to raise equity capital on attractive terms.
Our ability to generate income is dependent on, among other factors, our ability to raise capital and finance properties on favorable terms, deploy capital on a timely basis at attractive returns, and exit properties at favorable yields. Market conditions
outside of our control, such as interest rates, inflation, consumer discretionary spending and stock market volatility affect these objectives in a variety of ways.
Entertainment Golf Business
Our ability to open our targeted number of Entertainment Golf-related venue formats in 2021 and beyond will depend on many factors, including our ability to identify sites that meet our requirements and negotiate acceptable purchase or lease terms.
There is competition within the bid process, and land development and construction are subject to obtaining the necessary regulatory approvals. Delays in these processes, as well as completing construction and recruiting and training the necessary talent, could impact our business.
Trends in consumer spending, as well as climate and weather patterns, could have an impact on the markets in which we currently, or will in the future operate. In addition, our Entertainment Golf business could be impacted on a season-to-season basis, based upon corporate event and social gatherings during peak and off-peak times.
Traditional Golf Business
Our Traditional Golf business is subject to trends in consumer discretionary spending, as well as climate and weather patterns, which has a significant impact on the markets in which we operate. Traditional Golf is generally subject to seasonal fluctuations caused by significant reductions in golf activities due to shorter days and colder temperatures in the first and fourth quarters of each year. Consequently, a significantly larger portion of our revenue from our Traditional Golf operations is earned in the second and third quarters of our fiscal year. In addition, severe weather patterns can also negatively impact our results of operations.
While consumer spending in the Traditional Golf industry has not grown in recent years, we believe improving economic conditions and improvements in local housing markets have helped and will continue to help drive membership growth and increase the number of golf rounds played. In addition, we believe growth in related industries, including leisure, fitness and entertainment, may positively impact our Traditional Golf business.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires the use of estimates and assumptions that could affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses. Our estimates are based on information available to management at the time of preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements, including the result of historical analysis, our understanding and experience of the Company’s operations, our knowledge of the industry and market-participant data available to us.
Actual results have historically been in line with management’s estimates and judgments used in applying each of the accounting policies described below, and management periodically re-evaluates accounting estimates and assumptions. Actual results could differ from these estimates and materially impact our Consolidated Financial Statements. However, the Company does not expect our assessments and assumptions below to materially change in the future.
A summary of our significant accounting policies is presented in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, which appear in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” The following is a summary of our accounting policies that are most affected by judgments, estimates and assumptions.
Impairment of Property and Equipment and Intangible Assets
Long-lived property, equipment and definite-lived intangible assets are tested for potential impairment when changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the assets, or other appropriate grouping of assets, may not be fully recoverable. Indicators of impairment include material adverse changes in the projected revenues and expenses, significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, and significant negative industry or economic trends. An impairment is determined to have occurred if the future net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated is less than the carrying value of an asset. The impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value. Significant judgment is required both in determining impairment and in estimating the fair value. We may use assumptions and estimates derived from a review of our operating results, business projections, expected growth rates, discount rates, and tax rates. We also make certain assumptions about future economic conditions interest rates, and other market data. Many of the factors used in these assumptions and estimates are outside the control of management, and can change in future periods.
Membership Deposit Liabilities
In our Traditional Golf business, private country club members generally pay an advance initiation fee deposit upon their acceptance as a member to the their country club. Initiation fee deposits are refundable 30 years after the date of acceptance as a member. The difference between the initiation fee deposit paid by the member and the present value of the refund obligation is deferred and recognized into revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Operations on a straight-line basis over the expected life of an active membership, which is estimated to be seven years. The determination of the estimated average expected life of an active membership is based on company-specific historical data and involves judgment and estimation. The present value of the refund obligation is recorded as a membership deposit liability in the Consolidated Balance Sheets and accretes over a 30-year nonrefundable term using the effective interest method. This accretion is recorded as interest expense, net in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Impairment of Other Investments
We evaluate our other investments for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount might not be recoverable. The evaluation of recoverability is based on management’s assessment of the financial condition and near term prospects of the commercial real estate project, the length of time and the extent to which the market value of the investment has been less than cost, availability and cost of financing, demand for space, competition for tenants, changes in market rental rates, and operating costs. As these factors are difficult to predict and are subject to future events that may alter management’s assumptions, the values estimated by management in its recoverability analyses may not be realized, and actual losses or impairment may be realized in the future.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation for options in accordance with the fair value recognition provisions, under which we use the Black-Scholes option valuation model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions. These assumptions include expected volatility, expected dividend yield of our stock, expected term of the awards and the risk-free interest rate.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for information about recent accounting pronouncements.
Results of Operations
The following tables summarize the changes in our consolidated results of operations from year-to-year (dollars in thousands):
N.M. - Not meaningful
(A)Includes $50.4 million and $52.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, due to management contract reimbursements reported under revenue accounting standard, ASC 606.
Revenues from Golf Operations
Revenues from golf operations decreased by $26.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a $29.2 million decrease in Traditional Golf revenue, partially offset by a $2.7 million increase in Entertainment Golf revenue. The decrease in Traditional Golf revenue was primarily due to lost revenues during temporary closures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a $13.7 million decrease due to fewer leased and owned Traditional Golf properties in 2020, and a $2.0 million decrease in revenues from managed courses, primarily due to a decrease in reimbursed expenses. Entertainment Golf revenue increased by $2.7 million due to three additional venues operating in 2020 for more months as compared to the prior period, offset by lower event revenue due to COVID-19 restrictions.
Sales of Food and Beverages
Sales of food and beverages decreased by $25.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a $28.3 million decrease in Traditional Golf sales, partially offset by a $2.7 million increase in Entertainment Golf sales. The decrease in Traditional Golf sales was primarily due to the loss of tournament and large group event-related revenues resulting from continued COVID-19 related operational restrictions in effect in 2020 combined with a $2.6 million decrease due to fewer leased and owned Traditional Golf properties in 2020. Entertainment Golf sales increased by $2.7 million due to three additional venues operating in 2020 for more months as compared to the prior period, offset by lower event revenue due to COVID-19 restrictions.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses decreased by $40.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a $43.7 million decrease in Traditional Golf operating expenses, partially offset by a $3.1 million increase in Entertainment Golf operating expenses. The decrease in Traditional Golf expenses was primarily due to $15.1 million in payroll and payroll-related cost reductions largely resulting from the furlough of the substantial majority of our employees during the temporary closures, a $7.2 million decrease in rent expenses, a $14.3 million decrease due to fewer leased and owned traditional golf properties and a $2.0 million decrease in reimbursed expenses for our managed courses. Entertainment Golf expenses increased $3.1 million due to three additional venues operating in 2020 for more months as compared to the prior period.
Cost of Sales - Food and Beverages
Cost of sales - food and beverages decreased by $6.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a $7.1 million decrease in Traditional Golf cost of sales, partially offset by a $0.7 million increase in Entertainment Golf cost of sales. The decrease in Traditional Golf cost of sales was due to lower food and beverage sales in addition to temporary closures in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a $1.0 million decrease due to fewer leased and owned Traditional Golf properties in 2020. Entertainment Golf cost of sales increased by $0.7 million due to three additional venues operating in 2020 for more months as compared to the prior period.
General and Administrative Expense (including Acquisition and Transaction Expense)
General and administrative expense decreased by $16.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a $7.7 million decrease in Traditional Golf expense, a $6.8 million decrease in Entertainment Golf expense, and a $2.2 million decrease in corporate expense. The decreases across segments were primarily due to payroll and payroll-related cost reductions of $9.0 million resulting from employee furloughs and headcount reductions, $5.2 million due to decreased professional fees, $1.4 million in decreased employee meal and travel costs, and a $1.1 million reduction in corporate-level marketing spend.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased by $4.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to depreciation of assets placed into service at the three Entertainment Golf venues opened in 2019, and on assets placed in service for the renovation of our Orlando, Florida Entertainment Golf venue in November 2019, partially offset by a reduction in depreciation in the Traditional Golf business primarily due to properties that were sold and exited in prior periods.
Pre-Opening Costs
Pre-opening costs decreased by $7.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to costs associated with the opening of three new Entertainment Golf venues in 2019. Pre-opening costs can fluctuate based on timing of venue openings and geographic locations.
(Gain) Loss on Lease Terminations and Impairment
During the year ended December 31, 2020, impairment consisted of: a (i) $2.9 million gain on the termination of two traditional golf leases in 2020 primarily due to the derecognition of long-lived asset, intangible asset, and ROU asset and liability balances and, (ii) a $2.0 million gain on sale of Entertainment Golf equipment, partially offset by $3.9 million of impairment on two Traditional Golf properties and $0.2 million of losses on asset retirements. During the year ended December 31, 2019, impairment consisted of: (i) $1.2 million on three Traditional Golf properties that were classified as held-for-sale and subsequently sold, (ii) $3.8 million on two leased Traditional Golf properties, (iii) $10.2 million of losses on asset retirements of certain software and equipment as a result of the decision to discontinue use at our Entertainment Golf venues, and (iv) $0.2 million of losses on asset retirements in our Traditional Golf business.
Interest and Investment Income
Interest and investment income decreased by $0.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to lower balances and rates in interest bearing cash accounts.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net increased by $2.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a decrease of interest expense capitalized into construction in progress balances associated with the opening of three golf Entertainment Golf venues in 2019 compared to one Entertainment Golf venue with significant construction activities in 2020.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net decreased by $28.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to an other-than-temporary impairment charge of $24.7 million in 2020 on the Company's equity method investment and a decrease of $2.9 million in gains on the sale of traditional golf properties over the same period.
N.M. - Not meaningful
(A)Includes $52.4 million and $22.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, due to management contract reimbursements reported under revenue accounting standard, ASC 606.
Revenues from Golf Operations
Revenues from golf operations decreased by $28.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to decreases of: (i) $66.6 million related to fewer Traditional Golf properties owned or operated in 2019, (ii) $3.1 million related to greens fees and cart rental fees for Traditional Golf business operating in early 2019, and (iii) $0.5 million driven by fewer events at our Traditional Golf properties, partially offset by an increase of (iv) $33.4 million in revenues from management contracts including $30.3 million of reimbursed expenses, (v) $1.6 million related to increases in The Players' Club memberships, (vi) $1.6 million related to increases in dues at private golf properties, and (vii) $5.6 million in our Entertainment Golf business due to three new venues that opened in 2019.
Sales of Food and Beverages
Sales of food and beverages decreased by $14.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to a decreases of: (i) $21.1 million due to fewer Traditional Golf properties owned or operated in 2019 and (ii) $2.3 million driven by fewer events at our Traditional Golf properties, partially offset by an increase of (iii) $9.2 million in our Entertainment Golf business due to three new venues that opened in 2019.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses decreased by $22.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to decreases of: (i) $64.7 million due to fewer Traditional Golf properties owned or operated in 2019, (ii) $1.4 million due to decreased utility and water usage, partially offset by increases of: (iii) $30.3 million of reimbursed expenses from management contracts, (iv) $2.0 million in Traditional Golf repairs and maintenance expenses due to the benefit of insurance proceeds in 2018, (v) $0.5 million in payroll expense primarily due to an increase in California minimum wage, and (vi) $11.0 million in our Entertainment Golf business due to three new venues that opened in 2019.
Cost of Sales - Food and Beverages
Cost of sales - food and beverages decreased by $4.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to decreases of (i) $7.0 million due to fewer Traditional Golf properties owned or operated in 2019 and (ii) $0.2 million due to lower sales volumes for Traditional Golf properties operated in both periods, partially offset by (iii) an increase of $2.3 million in our Entertainment Golf Business due to three new venues that opened in 2019.
General and Administrative Expense (including Acquisition and Transaction Expense)
General and administrative expense increased by $9.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to increases of: (i) $5.2 million of higher payroll and payroll related expenses primarily related to the hiring of employees in our Entertainment Golf segment, (ii) $1.3 million of higher travel and other related expenses as part of the development of the Entertainment Golf business, (iii) $0.6 million of expenses associated with Entertainment Golf sites that we are no longer pursuing, (iv) $0.5 million of higher rent and related office expenses associated with our corporate offices in New York and Dallas, (v) $1.0 million of higher marketing expenses primarily related to the re-branding of our Entertainment Golf business in 2019, and (vi) $0.7 million of higher costs primarily related to the negotiation and development of potential Entertainment Golf venue locations.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased by $2.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 due to increases of: (i) $2.9 million in depreciation of assets placed into service in our Entertainment Golf business for our Orlando, Florida venue in April 2018 and for our three venues in Raleigh, North Carolina; Richmond, Virginia; and West Palm Beach, Florida in August, September and October 2019, respectively, (ii) $1.1 million due to amortization on additional finance lease right-of-use ("ROU") assets for equipment, and (iii) depreciation of additional assets placed in service at Traditional Golf properties, partially offset by (iv) a $1.8 million reduction in depreciation due to Traditional Golf properties that were exited in 2018 and 2019.
Pre-Opening Costs
Pre-opening costs increased by $6.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to costs associated with the opening of three new Entertainment Golf venues in 2019 compared to one venue opened in 2018. Pre-opening costs can fluctuate based on timing of venue openings and geographic locations.
(Gain) Loss on Lease Terminations and Impairment
During the year ended December 31, 2019 impairment consisted of: (i) $1.2 million loss on three Traditional Golf properties that were classified as held-for-sale and subsequently sold, (ii) $3.8 million loss on two leased Traditional Golf properties, (iii) $10.2 million of losses on asset retirements of certain software and equipment as a result of the decision to discontinue use at our Entertainment Golf venues, and (iv) $0.2 million of losses on asset retirements in our Traditional Golf business. During the year ended December 31, 2018 impairment consisted primarily of $7.0 million due to impairment on five Traditional Golf properties that were classified as held-for-sale and $0.9 million on three leased Traditional Golf properties.
Realized and Unrealized (Gain) Loss on Investments
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recorded a net realized gain on the mark-to-market value of a derivative which was unwound in December 2018.
Interest and Investment Income
Interest and investment income decreased by $0.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to lower balances in interest bearing cash accounts.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net decreased by $7.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to a decrease of $8.0 million related to the Traditional Golf loan payoff in December 2018, partially offset by an increase of interest expense capitalized into construction in progress balances associated with the opening of three Entertainment Golf venues in 2019.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net increased by $18.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to: (i) $10.6 million in higher gains from sale of Traditional Golf properties, (ii) $0.9 million of losses recognized during the year ended December 31, 2018 related to Traditional Golf lease modifications and terminations, (iii) $5.3 million of losses recognized during the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to a $4.9 million settlement of a legal dispute related to the exit of a Traditional Golf leased course, and (iv) $1.3 million in lower losses on the extinguishment of debt primarily due to the payoff of a Traditional Golf loan in December 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity are our current balances of cash and cash equivalents. We also generated capital through the completion of the sales of 25 of our 26 owned Traditional Golf properties which was completed by December 31, 2020. The proceeds generated by these transactions were reinvested in our Entertainment Golf business and used to pay overhead expenses.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $47.8 million of available cash, including $16.2 million of cash from the Traditional Golf business.
Our primary cash needs are capital expenditures for developing and opening new Drive Shack and new smaller format Puttery venues, remodeling and maintaining existing facilities, funding working capital, operating lease and finance lease obligations, servicing our debt obligations, paying dividends on our preferred stock, and for general corporate purposes.
The Company’s growth strategy is capital intensive and our ability to execute is dependent upon many factors, including the current and future operating performance of our Entertainment Golf venues and Traditional Golf properties, the pace of expansion, real estate markets, site locations, our ability to raise financing and the nature of the arrangements negotiated with landlords. Based upon current levels of operations and anticipated growth, we expect that cash flows from operations, combined with other financing alternatives in place or available, and further combined with the asset sales, as discussed below, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the foreseeable future.
As of December 31, 2020, we are actively exploring the capital markets to meet our short and long-term liquidity requirements to fund our planned growth, including new venue development and construction, product innovation, and general corporate needs. Our financial objectives include diversifying our financing sources, optimizing the mix and maturity of new debt financings, public or private equity issuances, and strategically monetizing our remaining real estate securities and other investments. We continually monitor market conditions for these financing and capital opportunities, and at any given time, may enter into or pursue one or more of the transactions described above. However, we cannot ensure that capital will be available on reasonable terms, if at all.
In February 2021, the Company was able to raise $54.6 million in net proceeds through an equity offering. See Note 17 in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for information about this transaction.
For a further discussion of risks that could affect our liquidity, access to capital resources and our capital obligations, see Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” above.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table and discussion summarize our key cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities:
Operating Activities
Cash flows used in operating activities consist primarily of net losses adjusted for certain items including depreciation and amortization of assets, amortization of prepaid golf member dues, impairment losses, other gains and losses from the sale of assets, stock-based compensation expense, and the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash flow used in operating activities changed from $28.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. It changed from $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $28.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. These changes resulted primarily from the factors described below:
2020 compared to 2019
•Operating cash flows increased due to the following:
◦$17.1 million decrease of general and administrative expenses due to decreased headcount and professional fees primarily due to COVID-19 related reductions
◦$7.3 million increase in operating cash flows from the Traditional Golf business primarily due to addition of managed courses during 2019 and 2020 and the exit of non-profitable courses in 2019
◦$2.3 million increase in operating cash flows primarily due to the more months in operation in 2020 for the Entertainment Golf venues in Raleigh, North Carolina, Richmond, Virginia and West Palm Beach, Florida as compared to 2019.
2019 compared to 2018
•Operating cash flows decreased due to the following:
◦$9.9 million increase of general and administrative expenses due to increased headcount and professional fees primarily due to the development of the Entertainment Golf business; and
◦$10.1 million decrease of decreased revenues from the Traditional Golf business due to the sale of properties during 2019; and
◦$4.4 million increase of pre-open costs primarily due to the opening of three Entertainment Golf venues in 2019 compared to one venue opened in 2018.
•Operating cash flows increased due to the following:
◦$1.8 million due to management fees paid in 2018 that were incurred in 2017 when the Company was externally managed; and
◦$1.7 million increase in operating cash flows primarily due to the opening of Entertainment Golf venues in Raleigh, North Carolina, Richmond, Virginia and West Palm Beach, Florida.
Investing Activities
Cash flows generated from investing activities primarily relate to proceeds from the dispositions of Traditional Golf properties and sales of and repayments from investments in securities and loans and were primarily used for capital expenditures related to the development of the Entertainment Golf venues, and renovations of existing facilities.
Cash provided by investing activities increased by $36.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Cash provided by investing activities decreased by $37.9 million in 2019 compared to 2018.
Capital Expenditures. Our total capital expenditures for 2020, 2019, and 2018 were $10.7 million, $74.9 million, and $62.4 million respectively.
We expect our capital expenditures over the next 12 months to range between $57.1 and $58.6 million, which includes developing new Drive Shack and smaller format Puttery venues and remodeling and maintaining existing facilities.
Traditional Golf property dispositions. As of December 31, 2020, we have successfully sold 25 of our 26 owned golf properties for a total aggregate sales price of $204.2 million, of which $33.6 million, $62.9 million, and $88.3 million was received, net of transaction costs, in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. We continue to own one Traditional Golf property, which is classified as held-for-use. We may continue to pursue the monetization of our owned golf property to generate capital for reinvestment in the Entertainment Golf business.
Financing Activities
Cash flows used in or provided by financing activities consist primarily of cash from the repayment of debt obligations, deposits received on golf memberships, and the payment of preferred dividends.
Cash used in financing activities decreased by $6.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Cash used in financing activities decreased by $98.9 million in 2019 compared to 2018.
Dividends. The Company has paid preferred dividends declared in the amount of $5.6 million in each 2019 and 2018 and has not declared preferred dividends in 2020. The Company has an ongoing obligation to satisfy the distribution requirements of the preferred shares, in accordance with the terms of the issuance. Effective January 1, 2017, the Company revoked its election to be treated as a REIT for federal income tax purposes. As a result, the Company is no longer subject to the distribution requirements applicable to REITs, and the timing and amount of distributions are in the sole discretion of its board of directors, which has elected not to declare common stock dividends for 2018 through 2020 to retain capital for growth.
Debt Obligations. The Company made contractual payments on its finance leases in 2020, 2019 and 2018. In 2018, the Company repaid the Traditional Golf loan using proceeds from the sale of Traditional Golf properties.
Golf Membership Deposits. Private country club members generally pay an advance initiation fee deposit upon their acceptance as a member to the respective country club, which are refundable 30 years after the date of acceptance as a member.
Debt Instruments
See Note 8 in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further information related to our debt obligations and contractual maturities as of December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had the following material off-balance sheet arrangements. We believe that these off-balance sheet structures presented the most efficient and least expensive form of financing for these assets at the time they were entered, and represented the most common market-accepted method for financing such assets.
•In April 2006, we securitized Subprime Portfolio I. The loans were sold to a securitization trust, of which 80% were treated as a sale, which is an off-balance sheet financing.
•In July 2007, we securitized Subprime Portfolio II. The loans were sold to a securitization trust, of which 90% were treated as a sale, which is an off-balance sheet financing.
We have no obligation to repurchase any loans from either of our subprime securitizations. Therefore, it is expected that our exposure to loss is limited to the carrying amount of our retained interests in the securitization entities, in the amount of $3.2 million as of December 31, 2020. A subsidiary of ours gave limited representations and warranties with respect to the second securitization; however, it has no assets and does not have recourse to the general credit of the Company.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual arrangements as of December 31, 2020, and the timing and effect that such commitments are expected to have on our liquidity and capital requirements in future periods:
(A)Includes interest based on rates existing at lease inception or ASC 842 adoption on January 1, 2019. Leases that are repayable prior to maturity at our options are reflected as their contractual maturity dates. See Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussions.
(B)Includes interest based on rates existing at December 31, 2020 and assumes no prepayments. Obligations that are repayable prior to maturity at our option are reflected at their contractual maturity dates. See Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussions.
(C)Includes leases of golf courses and related facilities, carts and equipment. Excludes escalation charges which per our lease agreements are not fixed and determinable payments. Also excludes four month-to-month property leases which are cancellable by the parties with 30 days written notice and various month-to-month operating leases for carts and equipment. The aggregate monthly expense of these leases was $0.1 million. See Notes 2 and 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussions.
(D)Amounts represent gross initiation fee deposits refundable 30 years after the date of acceptance of a member. See Notes 2 and 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.