ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Overview
We are a distributor of products and services to the industrial, commercial, institutional, and governmental maintenance, repair and operations ("MRO") marketplace. We operate in two reportable segments: Lawson and Bolt. The Lawson operating segment primarily distributes MRO products to its customers through a network of sales representatives throughout the U.S. and Canada. The Bolt operating segment primarily distributes its MRO products through a network of 14 branches located in Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba and British Columbia, Canada.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared a new strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to negatively impact the global economy by disrupting global supply chains and financial markets and has negatively impacted our operational and financial performance. The continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance, including our ability to execute our business strategies and initiatives in the expected time frame, will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related restrictions on travel and transports, all of which remain uncertain. An extended period of global supply chain and economic disruption could materially affect our business, sales, results of operations and financial condition.
Lawson continues to be defined as an essential business by the state of Illinois. A change in this status could result in the temporary closure of our business. Additionally the COVID-19 pandemic could result in a temporary closure of some or all of our distribution facilities or the Bolt branch locations, which would negatively impact our operations. Other disruptions to our supply chain such as reduced capacity or temporary shutdowns of freight carriers could also negatively impact our performance. The pandemic has negatively impacted our current operations and may negatively impact our future financial results, liquidity and overall performance. Additionally, it is possible that estimates made in support of our financial statements may be materially and adversely impacted in the near term as a result of these conditions, including delay in payment of receivables, impairment losses related to goodwill and other long-lived assets, and inability to utilize deferred tax assets.
The Company experienced the most severe impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in the second quarter 2020. The onset of the pandemic and government regulations, including social distancing guidelines and shutdowns of nonessential businesses, led to closure of customer businesses throughout the United States and Canada, as well as substantial restrictions on the ability of Lawson MRO sales representatives to visit customer locations and perform VMI services. Additionally government regulations also severely restricted the ability of customers to visit Bolt branch locations. The economic climate in the third and fourth quarters improved as many nonessential businesses have reopened in both limited capacity and full capacity. The relaxed restrictions have resulted in consistent customer visits and increased customer contact.
While business conditions improved in the third and fourth quarters, the Company expects to continue to be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the various federal, state and local restrictions enacted to combat the pandemic. In the fourth quarter of 2020, U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved certain vaccines that have demonstrated effectiveness in preventing the spread of the COVID-19 virus. However, it is projected that the production, distribution and administration of the vaccine to a sufficient percentage of the population to significantly minimize the future effect of the pandemic will not be reached until mid-2021 or later.
We continue to take action to mitigate the potential negative impacts of COVID-19. The actions taken included, but are not limited to, furloughing employees, reducing base salaries and incentive awards for a period of time, canceling travel and award trips, temporarily consolidating our Suwanee distribution center operations into the McCook facility, eliminating non-critical capital expenditures and eliminating various positions throughout the Company.
We continue to monitor our balance sheet and liquidity position and take actions to protect our cash flows from operations while at the same time managing our operating expenses in relation to current sales trends. At December 31, 2020, we had $28.4 million of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents and an additional $66.0 million of borrowing capacity, net of outstanding letters of credit. Our outstanding letters of credit include a letter of credit for $33.0 million to secure the remaining payment of the Partsmaster acquisition.
We will continue to closely monitor the overall economic and operating environment and we will take appropriate actions to protect the safety of our employees, customers and suppliers while continuing to meet our working capital needs and remain in compliance with our debt covenants. While COVID-19 has negatively impacted our sales, cost control measures and ability to effectively service our customers, we have continued to generate positive cash flow that has enabled us to maintain a strong financial position. We plan to continue to respond to pandemic developments in a prompt and disciplined manner with an emphasis on protecting our employees and maintaining our strong financial position.
Sales Drivers
The North American MRO market is highly fragmented. We compete for business with several national distributors as well as a large number of regional and local distributors. The MRO business is influenced by the overall strength of the manufacturing sector of the U.S. economy which has been significantly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. One measure used to evaluate the strength of the industrial products market is the PMI index published by the Institute for Supply Management. The PMI index is a composite index of economic activity in the United States manufacturing sector and is available at https://www.instituteforsupplymanagement.org. A measure of that index above 50 generally indicates expansion of the manufacturing sector while a measure below 50 generally represents contraction. The average monthly PMI (Purchasing Managers Index) was 52.5 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 51.3 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The average monthly PMI for the fourth quarter of 2020 was 59.2, which indicates expansion of the manufacturing sector compared to the previous periods. This is compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 which was 48.1, which indicates contraction of the manufacturing sector compared to the previous periods.
One metric we use to measure our success is Average Daily Sales ("ADS") in which we calculate our total sales divided by the number of selling days, which exclude weekends and holidays. Our sales are affected by the number and effectiveness of sales representatives and the amount of sales each representative can generate from providing products and services to our customers, which we measure as average sales per day per sales representative. We had an average of 1,012 sales representatives working for us in 2020, a 2.1% increase over 2019. Excluding the Partsmaster acquisition, we had an average of 944 sales representatives working for us in 2020.
Partsmaster Acquisition
In August 2020, we acquired Partsmaster, a leading Maintenance, Repair and Operations ("MRO") distributor from NCH Corporation ("NCH"). Partsmaster has approximately 200 sales representatives and serves approximately 16,000 customers throughout the United States and Canada. We also subleased the Partsmaster distribution center located in Greenville, Texas from NCH, and we will continue to fulfill orders from this facility as we integrate Partsmaster into our MRO segment operations.
The purchase price of the acquisition was $35.3 million in cash and the assumption of certain liabilities. We paid $2.3 million at the time of the acquisition and we will pay the remaining $33.0 million in May 2021. We plan to pay the remaining portion of the purchase price with cash on hand with any remaining portion using our existing credit facility.
Assets acquired and liabilities assumed as a result of the acquisition were accounted for at their fair value on the acquisition date. The identified assets include $5.0 million of intangible assets for customer relationships and $2.8 million for trade names with estimated useful lives of 10 years and 5 years, respectively. Goodwill of $15.8 million related to this acquisition reflects the purchase price less the fair market value of the identifiable assets. The liabilities assumed include approximately $2.9 million relating to deferred employee compensation and $4.1 million of accounts payable and other accrued liabilities. The appropriate fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based on preliminary estimates and assumptions. These preliminary estimates and assumptions could change during the purchase price measurement period as we finalize the valuations of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
Additional information related to the Partsmaster acquisition is provided in Note 3 - Acquisition in the notes to the consolidated financial statements. The Partsmaster acquisition is reported in the Lawson MRO segment.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR 2020 AS COMPARED TO 2019
Non-GAAP Financial Measure - Adjusted Operating Income
The Company's management believes that certain non-GAAP financial measures may provide users of this financial information with additional meaningful comparisons between current results and results in prior operating periods. Management believes that these non-GAAP financial measures can provide additional meaningful reflection of underlying trends of the business because they provide a comparison of historical information that excludes certain infrequently occurring, seasonal or non-operational items that impact the overall comparability. These non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, the Company's reported results prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted operating income is defined by us as GAAP operating income excluding stock-based compensation, severance expense, and other non-recurring items in the period in which these items are incurred.
Operating income was $20.6 million for 2020 inclusive of $2.0 million of stock-based compensation compared to $9.1 million in 2019 which included $17.8 million of stock-based compensation. Excluding stock-based compensation, severance and other non-recurring items, adjusted operating income decreased to $27.4 million from $28.6 million on lower sales, offset by cost control measures enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the contribution of Partsmaster to the adjusted non-GAAP operating income of $1.7 million.
(1) Expense for stock-based compensation, of which a portion varies with the Company's stock price
(2) Includes severance expense from actions taken in 2020 and 2019 along with 2020 severance and retention costs related to the Partsmaster acquisition.
(3) Represents the goodwill impairment related to the 2018 acquisition of Screw Products, Inc as the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeded its estimated fair value.
(4) Primarily legal and accounting costs pertaining to the Partsmaster acquisition.
Sales and Gross Profits
Sales and gross profit results by operating segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Consolidated revenue in 2020 decreased 5.2% to $351.6 million from $370.8 million in 2019. Sales were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and lower sales to oil and gas customers. All customer categories have been negatively impacted by the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic. The most acute negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic were experienced in the second quarter at the onset of the pandemic. Restrictions related to the pandemic began to be relaxed in the third quarter and continued to be relaxed in the fourth quarter, which led to improved customer activity, as well as increased customer contact for Lawson MRO sales representatives and greater foot traffic for the Bolt branches compared to the second quarter. Excluding Partsmaster, sales decreased 11.3% primarily as a result of the pandemic. The decrease in sales was offset by the inclusion of $22.6 million of sales contributed by the Partsmaster acquisition since August 31, 2020. Average daily sales decreased to $1.390 million in 2020 compared to $1.471 million in 2019 with one more selling day in 2020. Excluding a foreign currency effect of $0.7 million, consolidated revenue decreased by 5.0% for the year.
Gross profit decreased to $186.5 million in 2020 from $197.4 million in 2019 driven primarily by the decrease in sales due to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the inclusion of $13.2 million of gross profit from Partsmaster. Gross profit as a percent of sales decreased to 53.1% from 53.2% a year ago. Gross profit as a percentage of sales generated by sales representatives acquired from the Partsmaster acquisition was 58.4% post-acquisition. The organic Lawson MRO (excluding Bolt, Screw Products, and Partsmaster) gross margin as a percent of sales declined to 59.8% compared to the prior year organic gross margin percent of 60.7% primarily as a result of lower margin products comprising a larger portion of our sales compared to the prior year and fixed distribution costs allocated over a lower sales base.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling expenses decreased to $76.8 million in 2020 from $85.3 million in 2019 and, as a percent of sales decreased to 21.8% in 2020 from 23.0% in 2019. The decrease in selling expense as a percent of sales was primarily driven by reduced sales compensation driven by lower sales and a reduction of travel related expenses after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. These declines were partially offset by an inclusion of $6.5 million of selling expenses from the Partsmaster acquisition.
General and administrative expenses decreased to $89.2 million in 2020 from $102.9 million in 2019 primarily due to a decrease in stock-based compensation expense of $15.8 million, a portion of which varies with the Company stock price, and lower employee compensation, lower travel expense and other cost control measures in order to mitigate the negative impacts of COVID-19. The decline was offset by the inclusion of $7.4 million of General and administrative expense from the Partsmaster acquisition and the goodwill impairment of $1.9 million related to the 2018 acquisition of Screw Products as the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeded its fair value. Additionally the Company recorded $1.4 million under the Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy ("CEWS") as a reduction of general and administrative expenses.
Goodwill Impairment
The Company performed a quantitative goodwill impairment analysis as of December 1, 2020 for the Screw Products reporting unit. The Company engaged a third-party valuation firm to determine the value of the Screw Products reporting unit and determined that the carrying value of the net assets exceeded the fair value of the reporting unit and accordingly recognized an impairment charge of $1.9 million.. The impairment charge is included in general and administrative expense.
Interest Expense
Interest expenses increased $0.1 million in 2020 over the prior year, due primarily to the inclusion of imputed interest expense from our accrued acquisition liability offset by lower average outstanding balances under our credit agreement.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net was $0.9 million in 2020 compared to other income, net of $1.2 million in 2019. Other income, net in both years was driven by fluctuations in the Canadian currency exchange rate.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expenses were $5.7 million resulting in a 27.3% effective tax rate for 2020 compared to income tax expense of $2.5 million and a 25.4% effective tax rate for 2019. The higher effective tax rate in 2020 is due primarily to increases in uncertain tax positions and lower stock compensation deductions.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash provided by operating activities was $32.5 million and $9.2 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, reflecting stronger operating results along with tightly managing its working capital.
Capital expenditures of $1.7 million and $2.0 million in 2020 and 2019 respectively, were primarily for improvements to our distribution centers and information technology. In the third quarter of 2020, the Company paid $2.3 million in cash related to the Partsmaster acquisition.
In 2019, our Board of Directors authorized a program in which we may repurchase up to $7.5 million of our common stock from time to time in open market transactions, privately negotiated transactions or by other methods. In the first quarter of 2020 we purchased 47,504 shares of our common stock at an average purchase price of $36.93 under the repurchase program. During 2019, the Company purchased 32,362 shares of common stock at an average purchase price of $38.13 under the repurchase program. On December 31, 2020, the Company had $4.5 million available under its repurchasing program.
Credit Agreement
At December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings under the Credit Agreement and had borrowing availability of $66.0 million. See Note 13 - Credit Agreement for further information on the Company Credit Agreement.
In addition to other customary representations, warranties and covenants, the Credit Agreement contains certain financial covenants. The following chart reflects the EBITDA to fixed charges ratio and total net leverage ratio covenant:
The Company was in compliance with all financial covenants as of December 31, 2020.
No cash dividends have been paid in the two years ended December, 31 2020. Dividends are subject to certain restrictions under our Credit Agreement.
Partsmaster Acquisition Liability
As a part of the Partsmaster acquisition, payment of $33.0 million is due to the sellers in May 2021. The payment has been guaranteed under the Purchase Agreement, which includes the issuance of a $33.0 million irrevocable standby letter of credit. Payment will be made with cash on hand and with any remaining portion using our existing credit facility. The $33.0 million obligation has been discounted to its present value and is recognized as a current liability of $32.7 million in our condensed consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The majority of our operating leases were recognized as right of use assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet upon the adoption of ASU 2016-02, Leases ("ASU 2016-02") in the first quarter of 2019. See Note 12 - Leases for the transition to ASU 2016-02.
Also, as of December 31, 2020, we had contractual commitments to purchase approximately $24.4 million of product from our suppliers and contractors.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
We have disclosed our significant accounting policies in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements. The following provides information on the accounts requiring more significant estimates.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts - We evaluate the collectability of accounts receivable based on a combination of factors. In circumstances where we are aware of a specific customer’s inability to meet its financial obligations (e.g.,
bankruptcy filings, substantial down-grading of credit ratings), a specific reserve for bad debts is recorded against amounts due to reduce the receivable to the amount we believe will be collected. For all other customers, we recognize reserves for bad debts based on our historical experience of bad debt write-offs as a percent of accounts receivable outstanding. If circumstances change (e.g., higher than expected defaults or an unexpected material adverse change in a major customer’s ability to meet its financial obligations), the estimates of the recoverability of amounts due to us could be revised. At December 31, 2020, our reserve was 1.4% of our gross accounts receivable outstanding. A hypothetical change of one percent to our reserve as a percent of our gross accounts receivable would have affected our annual doubtful accounts expense by approximately $0.4 million.
Inventory Reserves - Inventories consist principally of finished goods and are stated at the lower of cost (determined using the first-in-first-out method for the Lawson segment and weighted average for the Bolt segment) or net realizable value. Most of our products are not exposed to the risk of obsolescence due to technology changes. However, some of our products do have a limited shelf life, and from time to time we add and remove items from our catalogs, brochures or website for marketing and other purposes.
To reduce our inventory to a lower of cost or market value, we record a reserve for slow-moving and obsolete inventory based on historical experience and monitoring of our current inventory activity. We use estimates to determine the necessity of recording these reserves based on periodic detailed analysis, using both qualitative and quantitative factors. As part of this analysis, we consider several factors including the inventories’ length of time on hand, historical sales, product shelf life, product life cycle, product category and product obsolescence. In general, depending on the product category, we reserve inventory with low turnover at higher rates than inventory with higher turnover.
At December 31, 2020, our inventory reserve was $5.3 million, equal to approximately 7.8% of our gross inventory. A hypothetical change of one percent to our reserve as a percent of total inventory would have affected our cost of goods sold by $0.6 million.
Income Taxes - Deferred tax assets or liabilities reflect temporary differences between amounts of assets and liabilities for financial and tax reporting. Such amounts are adjusted, as appropriate, to reflect changes in enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions as well as deferred tax asset and liability balances, including the estimation of valuation allowances and the evaluation of uncertain tax positions.
Goodwill Impairment - Goodwill represents the cost of business acquisitions in excess of the fair value of identifiable net tangible and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is allocated to the appropriate reporting unit as reviewed by the Company's segment managers. The Company reviews goodwill for potential impairment annually on December 1st, or when an event or other circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the asset below its carrying value. The first step in the multi-step process to determine if goodwill has been impaired and to what degree is to review the relevant qualitative factors that could cause the fair value of the reporting unit to decrease below the carrying value of the reporting unit. The Company considers factors such as macroeconomic, industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance and other relevant factors that would affect the individual reporting units. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than the carrying value of the reporting unit, then no further impairment testing is needed. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the carrying value of the reporting unit is greater than the fair value of the reporting unit, the Company will move to the next step in the process. The Company will estimate the fair value of the reporting unit and compare it to the reporting unit's carrying value. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the Company will record an impairment of goodwill equal to the amount the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, up to the total amount of goodwill previously recognized.
Revenue Recognition - For reporting purposes, the Company has two separate performance obligations including products and vendor managed inventory services. The allocation of product and service revenue as well as the estimation of service costs requires judgments and assumptions including the standalone selling prices, the period of time that it takes for the service obligation to be fulfilled and the amount of time spent on vendor managed inventory services during the sales process. Changes in various assumptions could increase or decrease the allocation of service revenue and related costs; however, would not materially impact total reported revenues or reported operating income.