Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis (“this MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. The forward-looking statements are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside the Company’s control. The Company’s actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Introduction
This MD&A is intended to provide investors with an understanding of the Company’s recent performance, financial condition and prospects. This discussion and analysis compares 2020 results to 2019. For a discussion that compares the Company’s 2019 results to 2018, see Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II, Item 7 of 2019
Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The Company is a leading provider and consolidator of transportation and logistics solutions focused exclusively on flatbed and specialized (open-deck) freight in North America. The transportation and logistics market is one of the largest industries in the United States. The flatbed and specialized freight market currently represents approximately 10% of transportation and logistics market.
The Company believes it provides one of the most comprehensive transportation and logistics solution offerings in the open-deck industry. The Company delivers a diverse offering of transportation and logistics solutions to approximately 6,700 customers across the continental United States, Canada and Mexico through two reportable segments: Flatbed Solutions and Specialized Solutions. The Flatbed Solutions segment focuses on delivering transportation and logistics solutions that principally require the use of flatbed and retractable-sided transportation equipment, and the Specialized Solutions segment focuses on delivering transportation and logistics solutions that require the use of specialized trailering transportation equipment. The Flatbed Solutions segment and Specialized Solutions segment generated approximately 40% and 60%, respectively, of revenue in 2020.
In 2020, the Company generated revenue of approximately $1.5 billion, compared to $30 million in 2009 (its first year of operation), reflecting a compound annual growth rate of approximately 42%.
Both of the Company’s reportable segments operate highly flexible business models comprised of company-owned tractors and trailers and asset-light operations (which consist of owner-operator transportation, freight brokerage and logistics). The Company’s asset-based operations have the benefit of providing shippers with certainty of delivery and continuity of operations. Alternatively, the Company’s asset-light operations offer flexibility and scalability to meet customers’ dynamic needs and have lower capital expenditure requirements and fixed costs. Approximately 50% of 2020 freight, logistics and brokerage revenue was derived from company-owned equipment and approximately 50% was derived from asset-light services.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Pandemic
In light of the ongoing spread of the novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, in the United States and abroad, including the emergence of new variants of the coronavirus, government and public health authorities continue to recommend social distancing and impose various quarantine and isolation measures on large portions of the population, including measures directed at businesses. These measures include imposing restrictions on travel and business operations, increasing border and port controls and closures throughout the United States and other parts of the world, and advising or requiring individuals to limit or forego time outside of their homes. The uncertainty regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and various governmental actions taken to mitigate its impact, have resulted in a severely depressed economic environment.
As an essential business under the guidelines issued by each of the Company’s states of operations, the Company has been allowed to continue to operate its business through the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company has permitted some personnel to work from home and has taken additional precautions to ensure the safety of its workforce, customers and the communities in which it operates. In general, the Company has experienced limited operational impacts as a result of COVID-19 directly. A substantial majority of its operating sites have remained open and operating, although some of the nation’s ports that the Company serves have experienced reduced hours of operation and reduced freight volumes.
Beginning in the last half of March 2020, the Company experienced a decline in demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as sectors of the economy began to shut down. Towards the end of April 2020, the Company experienced a significant decline in freight volumes and rates as stay-at-home orders across the country led to a halt in overall industrial production. In May and June 2020, the rate environment started to slowly improve and the Company’s freight volumes progressively increased nearly every week, albeit off the lower base, and during the third quarter of 2020, the Company observed a strong sequential rebound in demand for freight across both its Flatbed and Specialized segments, as well as improving strength in freight rates. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company continued to see recovery in our flatbed solutions segment through year over year and sequential rate improvement while our specialized solutions segment rates remained relatively flat and freight volumes decreased slightly as wind freight volumes decreased offset by a recovery in rates in other specialized areas.
The Company expects that its results of operations and financial condition may likely continue to be adversely impacted in the near-term in 2021 by the COVID-19 pandemic, as levels of activity in the Company’s business have historically been positively correlated
to broad measures of economic activity and to measures of industrial production since many of the Company’s customers are in the manufacturing and industrial segments. In particular, shelter-in-place mandates, the closing of manufacturing facilities and the overall depressed economic environment have significantly affected demand for many of the Company’s customers, including those in aerospace and manufacturing industries. However, given the diversity of the Company’s customer base and the various end markets that Daseke serves, not all of the Company’s customers have been as affected. During 2020, demand for the Company’s services by customers in certain end markets, such as wind energy, defense projects and high security cargo, increased, partially offsetting softness in other end markets, and at the beginning of 2021, the Company is seeing pockets of strength throughout its industrial customer base that were previously pressured by the pandemic.
The Company believes that a significant portion of its cost structure is variable, and the Company has taken and will continue to take aggressive actions to adjust its expenses to reflect changes in demand for its services. These actions, which have been supported by the operational integrations and business improvement plans that the Company began to implement in 2019 (and which are discussed below), have included reduced use of contractors, reduced travel and advertising costs, reduced employee hours, furloughs, layoffs and voluntary use of paid time off, consistent with local regulations. Although the Company has not been able to fully offset the effects of significantly reduced freight volumes on its results of operations, the actions that the Company is taking, combined with the variable components of its cost structure, has, and should continue to, partially mitigate the impact of the pandemic on its results of operations. Conversely, however, the Company is taking additional measures and incurring additional expense to protect the health and safety of its workforce and its customers. In addition, the Company could incur restructuring and other costs as it modifies and right-sizes its operations for declines and/or surges in demand, and may incur incremental interest expense this year as a result of steps it may take in order to further strengthen its liquidity.
We currently expect that the COVID-19 pandemic may likely continue to negatively impact the Company in 2021, and we currently expect freight volumes to remain consistent with 2020 levels. We have a diverse customer base with exposure to a wide array of industrial end markets, each of which are experiencing their own respective growth and economic recovery patterns. The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may remain prevalent for a significant period of time and may continue to adversely affect the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided and “stay at home” mandates have been lifted. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts the Company will depend on numerous evolving factors and future developments that we are not able to predict, including: the severity and duration of the pandemic; governmental, business and other actions in response to the pandemic (which could include limitations on the Company’s operations or mandates to provide services in a specified manner); the impact of the pandemic on economic activity; the response of the overall economy and the financial markets; the extent and duration of the effect on consumer confidence and spending; the health of and the effect on our workforce and our ability to meet staffing needs; any impairment in the value of our tangible or intangible assets which could be recorded as a result of a weaker economic conditions; and the potential effects on our internal controls, including those over financial reporting, as a result of changes in working environments, such as shelter-in-place and similar orders that are applicable to our employees and business partners, among others. There are no comparable recent events that provide guidance as to the effect the COVID-19 global pandemic may have, and as a result, the ultimate impact of the pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Relating to the COVID-19 Pandemic” for more information regarding risks relating to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operational Integrations and Business Improvement Plans
In the third quarter of 2019, the Company initiated a plan (“Project Synchronize”) to integrate three operating segments with three other operating segments, thereby reducing the number of operating segments from sixteen to thirteen. Project Synchronize was implemented to streamline and reduce the Company’s cost structure, improve asset utilization and capitalize on operational synergies. During 2020, the Company successfully completed the integration plan, which is expected to deliver $30.0 million in annual operating income improvement on a run-rate basis. Additionally, in the third quarter of 2019, the Company announced the implementation of Business Improvement Plans and a comprehensive restructuring plan (“Project Pivot”) to reduce its cost base, right size its organization and management team and increase and accelerate its previously announced operational improvement goals. Project Pivot was completed in 2020.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company announced a plan to integrate three operating segments with three other operating segments (“Phase II of the Plan”), to further streamline and reduce the Company’s cost structure, improve asset utilization and capitalize on operational synergies. Phase II of the Plan was initially expected to be significantly completed by June 30, 2020, however, due to uncertainties and changes in focus caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company delayed and reevaluated Phase II of the Plan and reduced the planned number of integrations from three to two operating segments. As of December 31, 2020, one
of these integrations had been completed, and the Company expects to complete the remaining integration in late 2021. Upon completion of Phase II of the Plan, the Company’s operating segments will be reduced from eleven to ten.
The Company believes that these operational integration and business improvement plans have contributed meaningfully to its operational and financial performance in 2020. In particular, as a result of these plans, the Company has been able to reduce costs and optimize its assets, creating further resilience in its business model during a particularly challenging environment caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Aveda Transportation and Energy Services Inc. (“Aveda”) Disposition
In March 2020, the Company’s board of directors approved a plan for the sale of certain Aveda terminals located in Texas and Oklahoma. The divestiture was completed during 2020, and the Company’s exposure to the oil and gas end market decreased significantly.
Revenue
The Company records four types of revenue: freight (company and owner operator), brokerage, logistics and fuel surcharge. Freight revenue is generated by hauling freight for the Company’s customers using its trucks or its owner-operators’ equipment. Generally, the Company’s customers pay for its services based on the number of miles in the most direct route between pick-up and delivery locations and other ancillary services the Company provides. Freight revenue is the product of the number of revenue-generating miles driven and the rate per mile the Company receives from customers plus accessorial charges, such as loading and unloading freight for its customers, cargo protection, fees for detaining its equipment or fees for route planning and supervision. Freight revenue is affected by fluctuations in North American economic activity as well as changes in specific customer demand, the level of capacity in the industry and driver availability.
The Company’s brokerage revenue is generated by its use of third-party carriers when it needs capacity to move its customers’ loads. The main factor that affects brokerage revenue is the availability of the Company’s drivers and owner-operators (and hence the need for third-party carriers) and the rate for the load. Brokerage revenue is also affected by fluctuations in North American economic activity as well as changes in the level of capacity in the industry and driver availability.
Logistics revenue is generated from a range of services, including value-added warehousing, loading and unloading, vehicle maintenance and repair, preparation and packaging, fuel management, and other fleet management solutions. Logistics revenue is primarily driven by specific customer requirements for additional services and may fluctuate depending on customers’ utilization of these services due to changes in cargo specifications, delivery staging and fluctuations in North American economic activity.
Fuel surcharges are designed to compensate the Company for fuel costs above a certain cost per gallon base. Generally, the Company receives fuel surcharges on the miles for which it is compensated by customers. However, the Company continues to have exposure to increasing fuel costs related to empty miles, fuel efficiency due to engine idle time and other factors and to the extent the surcharge paid by the customer is insufficient. The main factors that affect fuel surcharge revenue are the price of diesel fuel and the number of loaded miles. In general, a declining energy and fuel price environment negatively affects the Company’s fuel surcharge revenues, and conversely, an environment with rising fuel and energy prices benefits its fuel surcharge revenues. Although the Company’s surcharge programs vary by customer, they typically involve a computation based on the change in national or regional fuel prices. The Company’s fuel surcharges are billed on a delayed basis, meaning it typically bills customers in the current week based on a previous week’s applicable index. Therefore, in times of increasing fuel prices, the Company does not recover as much as it is currently paying for fuel. In periods of declining prices, the opposite is true. Also, its fuel surcharge programs typically require a specified minimum change in fuel cost to prompt a change in fuel surcharge revenue. Therefore, many of these programs have a time lag between when fuel costs change and when the change is reflected in fuel surcharge revenue.
Expenses
The Company’s most significant expenses vary with miles traveled and include driver wages (which are recorded on the “Salaries, wages and employee benefits” line of the Company’s consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss)), services purchased from owner-operators and other transportation providers (which are recorded on the “Purchased freight” line of the Company’s consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss)) and fuel. Driver-related expenses vary with miles traveled.
Maintenance and tire expenses and cost of insurance and claims generally vary with the miles the Company travels but also have a controllable component based on safety improvements, fleet age, efficiency and other factors. The Company’s primary fixed costs are depreciation of long-term assets (such as tractors, trailers and terminals), interest expense, rent and non-driver compensation.
The Company’s fuel surcharge programs help to offset increases in fuel prices but typically do not offset empty miles, idle time and out of route miles driven. As discussed above under “Revenue,” its fuel surcharge programs have a time lag between when fuel costs change and when the change is reflected in fuel surcharge revenue. Due to this time lag, the Company’s fuel expense, net of fuel surcharge, negatively impacts its operating income during periods of sharply rising fuel costs and positively impacts its operating income during periods of falling fuel costs. In general, due to the fuel surcharge programs, its operating income is less negatively affected by an environment with higher, stable fuel prices than an environment with lower fuel prices. In addition to its fuel surcharge programs, the Company believes the most effective protection against fuel cost increases is to maintain a fuel-efficient fleet by incorporating fuel efficiency measures. Also, the Company has arrangements with some of its significant fuel suppliers to buy the majority of its fuel at contracted pricing schedules that fluctuate with the market price of diesel fuel. The Company has not used derivatives as a hedge against higher fuel costs in the past but continues to evaluate this possibility.
We have seen a trend of higher insurance costs in 2020 due to a tightening insurance market, and we expect this trend to continue into 2021, where we are expecting approximately an $8 million increase in consolidated insurance costs in 2021 when compared to 2020.
Income (loss) from operations
Differences in the mix of drivers and assets between the segments impact the proportion of operating income as a percentage of revenue. The Flatbed Solutions segment has historically had a proportionately higher operating income as a percentage of revenue when compared to the Specialized Solutions segment because certain operating expenses in the Specialized Solutions segment are proportionately greater. For example, the Specialized Solutions segment drivers, who typically are required to have a higher level of training and expertise, generally receive a higher driver pay per total mile than Flatbed Solutions segment drivers. In addition, the Flatbed Solutions segment utilizes a larger percentage of owner-operators as opposed to Company drivers, which results in purchased freight expense being a more significant expense for this segment. The larger percentage of Company drivers in the Specialized Solutions segment also results in a greater percentage of fuel expense and operations and maintenance expense relative to our Flatbed Solutions segment, each of which is impacted by the miles per gallon realized with company equipment and the number of miles driven by Company drivers. Similarly, the Specialized Solutions segment had higher depreciation and amortization expense primarily due to the increase in company-owned vehicles. However, in 2020, the specialized solutions segment had a higher operating income as a percentage of revenue when compared to the flatbed solutions segment, primarily due to contributions from operational integrations and business improvement plans, and by strong wind energy and high security cargo revenues and margins in the specialized solutions segment.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth items derived from the Company’s consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue and the increase or decrease in the dollar amounts of those items.
The following table sets forth the Company’s Specialized Solutions segment’s revenue, operating expenses and operating income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 in dollars and as a percentage of its Specialized Solutions segment’s total revenue and the increase or decrease in the dollar amounts of those items. The following table also sets forth certain operating statistics for the Company’s Specialized Solutions segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
SPECIALIZED SOLUTIONS
(1) Includes intersegment revenues and expenses, as applicable, which are eliminated in the Company’s consolidated results.
The following table sets forth the Company’s Flatbed Solutions segment’s revenue, operating expenses, operating ratio, adjusted operating ratio and operating income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 in dollars and as a percentage of its Flatbed Solutions segment’s total revenue and the increase or decrease in the dollar amounts of those items. The following table also sets forth certain operating statistics for the Company’s Flatbed Solutions segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
FLATBED SOLUTIONS
(1) Includes intersegment revenues and expenses, as applicable, which are eliminated in the Company’s consolidated results.
Revenue. Total revenue decreased 16.3% to $1,454.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1,737.0 million for the same period in 2019, driven primarily by the decrease in freight volumes due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on various industrial end markets, and the strategic reduction of business related to the consolidations. The decreases in company freight and owner operator freight revenue were primarily a result of a 6.9% decrease in rate per mile and a 7.5% decrease in total miles driven. The decrease in brokerage revenue was primarily due to a decrease in customer freight volumes. The decrease in logistics revenue was primarily the result of decreases in logistics activities. The decrease in fuel surcharge revenue was primarily due to a decrease in loaded miles and the decrease in the price of diesel fuel, which averaged $2.55 per gallon in 2020 compared to $3.06 per gallon in 2019.
The Company’s Specialized Solutions segment’s revenue decreased $202.0 million, or 18.4%, to $893.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1,095.7 million for the same period in 2019, driven primarily by the decrease in freight volumes due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on various industrial end markets, and the strategic reduction of business related to the consolidations. The decrease in overall freight revenue was primarily a result of a 10.8% decrease in rate per mile and a 7.8% decrease in total miles driven compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease in rate per mile was mainly driven by the exit of the Aveda operation which historically had the highest rate per mile within the segment. The decrease in brokerage revenue was primarily due to a decrease in customer freight volumes. The decrease in logistics revenue was primarily the result of decreases in logistics activities. The decrease in fuel surcharge revenue was primarily due to a decrease in loaded miles and the decrease in the price of diesel fuel, which averaged $2.55 per gallon in 2020 compared to $3.06 per gallon in 2019.
The Company’s Flatbed Solutions segment’s revenue decreased $84.1 million, or 12.7%, to $578.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $663.0 million for the same period in 2019, driven primarily by the decrease in freight volumes due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on various industrial end markets. The decreases in company freight and owner operator freight was primarily the result of a 7.1% decrease in total miles driven compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease in brokerage revenue was primarily due to a decrease in customer freight volumes. The decrease in fuel surcharge revenue was primarily due to a decrease in loaded miles and the decrease in the price of diesel fuel, which averaged $2.55 per gallon in 2020 compared to $3.06 per gallon in 2019.
Salaries, Wages and Employee Benefits. Salaries, wages and employee benefits expense, which consists of compensation for all employees, is primarily affected by the number of miles driven by company drivers, the rate per mile paid to company drivers, employee benefits including, but not limited to, health care and workers’ compensation, and to a lesser extent, the number of, and compensation and benefits paid to, non-driver employees. In general, the Specialized Solutions segment drivers receive a higher driver pay per total mile than Flatbed Solutions segment drivers due to the former requiring a higher level of training and expertise.
Salaries, wages and employee benefits expense decreased 17.3% to $399.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $483.2 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease in salaries, wages and employee benefits expense was primarily due to decreased employee headcount related to the integrations and restructuring and driver pay due to the decrease in company miles compared to the same period in 2019. Temporary furloughs and recruiting pauses were put in place during the year to offset the impact of volume decreases due to the pandemic. Salaries, wages and employee benefits expense, as a percentage of consolidated revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was generally consistent with the same period in 2019.
The Company’s Specialized Solutions segment had a $66.9 million, or 20.8%, decrease in salaries, wages and employee benefits expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, primarily as a result of the decreased employee headcount related to integrations and restructurings and driver pay due to the decrease in company miles compared to the same period in 2019. Temporary furloughs and recruiting pauses were put in place during the year to offset the impact of volume decreases due to the pandemic. Salaries, wages and employee benefits expense, as a percentage of Specialized Solutions revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was generally consistent with the same period in 2019.
The Company’s Flatbed Solutions segment had a $12.4 million, or 9.1%, decrease in salaries, wages and employee benefits expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, primarily as a result of the decreased employee headcount related to integrations and driver pay due to the decrease in company miles compared to the same period in 2019. Temporary furloughs and recruiting pauses were put in place during the year to offset the impact of volume decreases due to the pandemic. Salaries, wages and employee benefits expense, as a percentage of Flatbed Solutions revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was generally consistent with the same period in 2019.
Fuel.  Fuel expense consists primarily of diesel fuel expense for company-owned tractors and fuel taxes. The primary factors affecting fuel expense are the cost of diesel fuel, the miles per gallon realized with company equipment and the number of miles driven by Company drivers.
Total consolidated fuel expense decreased $51.2 million, or 37.0%, to $87.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $138.5 million for the same period in 2019. Total fuel expense for the Specialized Solutions segment decreased $32.4 million, or 36.6%, to $56.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $88.6 million for the same period in 2019. Total fuel expense for the Flatbed Solutions segment decreased $18.8 million, or 37.7%, to $31.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $49.9 million for the same period in 2019. These decreases were primarily due to a 16.5% decrease in average diesel prices from $3.06 in 2019 to $2.55 in 2020. Total Company miles driven decreased 9.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. Company miles driven in our Specialized Solutions segment decreased 7.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. Company miles driven in our Flatbed Solutions segment decreased 11.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019.
Operations and Maintenance. Operations and maintenance expense consists primarily of ordinary vehicle repairs and maintenance, operating lease cost for revenue equipment, costs associated with preparing tractors and trailers for sale or trade-in, driver recruiting, training and safety costs, permitting and pilot car fees and other general operations expenses. Operations and maintenance expense is primarily affected by the age of company-owned tractors and trailers, the number of miles driven in a period and driver turnover.
Operations and maintenance expense decreased 20.6% to $169.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $213.1 million for the same period in 2019 due to a decrease of $17.1 million in maintenance and upkeep of trucks and trailers, $4.9 million in lease costs, and $15.9 million in operations expenses due to decrease in freight volumes. Operations and maintenance expense in our Specialized Solutions segment decreased 20.3% to $127.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $160.0 million for the same period in 2019 due to a decrease of $11.2 million in maintenance and upkeep of trucks and trailers, $6.0 million in lease costs, and $11.1 million in operations expenses due to decrease in freight volumes. Operations and maintenance expense in our Flatbed Solutions segment decreased 20.8% to $41.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $52.5 million for the same period in 2019 due to a decrease of $5.9 million in maintenance and upkeep of trucks and trailers and $4.8 million in operations expenses due to decrease in freight volumes. Operations and maintenance expense, as a percentage of revenue, on a consolidated basis and for each segment, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was generally consistent with the same period in 2019.
Purchased Freight. Purchased freight expense consists of the payments to owner-operators, including fuel surcharge reimbursements, and payments to third-party capacity providers that haul loads brokered to them. Purchased freight expense generally takes into account changes in diesel fuel prices, resulting in lower payments during periods of declining fuel prices.
Total purchased freight expense decreased $106.3 million or 17.8% to $491.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $597.7 million for the same period in 2019. Purchased freight expense from owner-operators decreased 8.6% to $330.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $361.9 million during the same period in 2019 as a result of a 5.3% decrease in owner operator miles driven. Purchased freight expense from third-party capacity providers decreased 31.8% to $160.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $235.8 million for the same period in 2019, as a result of lower rates and decreased utilization of third-party capacity providers. Purchased freight expense, as a percentage of consolidated revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was generally consistent with the same period in 2019.
The Company’s Specialized Solutions segment’s purchased freight expense decreased 22.0% to $245.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $314.6 million for the same period in 2019. Purchased freight expense from owner-operators decreased 14.1% to $111.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $129.2 million for the same period in 2019, as a result of a 9.1% decrease in owner operator miles driven. Purchased freight expense from third-party capacity providers decreased 27.5% to $134.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $185.4 million for the same period in 2019, as a result of a decrease in utilization of third-party capacity providers. Purchased freight expense, as a percentage of Specialized Solutions revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was generally consistent with the same period in 2019.
The Company’s Flatbed Solutions segment’s purchased freight expense decreased 13.2% to $264.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $304.8 million for the same period in 2019. Purchased freight expense from owner-operators decreased 5.6% to $219.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $232.7 million for same period in 2019, as a result of a 3.9% decrease in owner operators’ miles driven. Purchased freight expense from third-party capacity providers decreased 37.8% to $44.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $72.1 million for the same period in 2019, primarily as a result of decreased
utilization of third-party capacity providers. Purchased freight expense, as a percentage of Flatbed Solutions revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was generally consistent with the same period in 2019.
Administrative Expenses. Administrative expenses consists of operating lease cost for real estate, professional fees and other expenses that are not directly associated with the Company’s fleet services. Administrative expense decreased $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 as a result of cost reduction initiatives. Administrative expenses, as a percentage of revenue, was generally consistent with the same period in 2019.
Taxes and Licenses.  Operating taxes and licenses expense primarily represents the costs of taxes and licenses associated with the Company’s fleet of equipment and will vary according to the size of its equipment fleet. Taxes and license expense decreased $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. Operating taxes and license expense, as a percentage of revenue, was generally consistent with the same period in 2019.
Insurance and Claims.  Insurance and claims expense consists of insurance premiums and the accruals the Company makes for estimated payments and expenses for claims for bodily injury, property damage, cargo damage and other casualty events. The primary factor affecting the Company’s insurance and claims expense is seasonality (the Company typically experiences higher accident frequency in winter months), the frequency and severity of accidents, trends in the development factors used in its accruals and developments in large, prior-year claims. The frequency of accidents tends to increase with the miles the Company travels. Insurance and claims expense increased 34.1% to $66.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $49.9 million for the same period in 2019 due to increases in insurance claims and premiums. Insurance and claims, as a percentage of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 1.7% compared to the same period in 2019. We have seen a trend of higher insurance costs in 2020 due to a tightening insurance market, and we expect this trend to continue into 2021, where we are expecting approximately an $8 million increase in consolidated insurance costs in 2021 when compared to 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization.  Depreciation and amortization expense consists primarily of depreciation for company-owned tractors and trailers and amortization of those financed with finance leases. The primary factors affecting these expense items include the size and age of company-owned tractors and trailers and the cost of new equipment. Amortization of intangible assets is also included in this expense.
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $48.2 million, or 32.9%, to $98.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $146.5 million for the same period in 2019 as a result of a 10.4% decrease in average tractor count in the Company’s fleet and further reduced by the impact of $97.6 million of impairments recorded in the third quarter of 2019.
The Company’s Specialized Solutions segment’s depreciation and amortization expense decreased $34.9 million, or 37.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 as a result of a 8.3% decrease in average tractor count in the segment’s fleet and further reduced by the impact of $58.6 million of impairments recorded in the third quarter of 2019.
The Company’s Flatbed Solutions segment’s depreciation and amortization expense decreased $13.5 million, or 26.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 as a result of a 14.3% decrease in average tractor count in the segment’s fleet and further reduced by the impact of a $39.0 million of impairments recorded in the third quarter of 2019.
Impairment.  Impairment expense was $15.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to Aveda’s intangible assets, property and equipment and right-of-use assets and the reorganization and merger of two of the Company’s operating companies. For the year ended December 31, 2020, there was $13.4 million impairment expense in our Specialized Solutions segment related to Aveda, and $2.0 million in our Flatbed Solutions segment related to a tradename impairment resulting from the reorganization of two our operating companies. Impairment expense of $312.8 million was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2019 related to goodwill, intangible assets, property and equipment and right-of-use assets. Impairment charges for the Specialized Solutions segment totaled $196.1 million and for the Flatbed Solutions segment totaled $116.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Restructuring Costs.  Restructuring costs were $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which related to Phase I of Project Synchronize, which was completed in the first quarter of 2020, Phase II of Project Synchronize and the closure of certain Aveda terminals. For the year ended December 31, 2020, restructuring costs for the Specialized Solutions segment totaled $8.8 million and for the Flatbed Solutions segment totaled $0.6 million. Restructuring costs of $8.4 million were recognized in the year ended December 31, 2019 in connection with Project Synchronize and Project Pivot (the Plans). For the year ended December 31,
2019, restructuring costs for the Specialized Solutions segment totaled $3.9 million, for the Flatbed Solutions segment totaled $1.7 million, and for the corporate office totaled $2.8 million.
Other (Income) Expense. Interest expense consists of cash interest, amortization of related issuance costs and fees and prepayment penalties. Interest expense decreased 10.9% to $44.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $50.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to lower interest rates on the Term Loan Facility and decreases in equipment term loan outstanding balance. Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $14.9 million compared to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an arbitration settlement relating to the Aveda earnout liability, which resulted in a gain of $13.7 million during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Income Tax.  Income tax benefit was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to income tax benefit of $54.6 million for the same period in 2019. The effective tax rate was (3.3%) for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 15.1% for the same period in 2019. The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 varies from the federal statutory rate primarily due to state income taxes and the impact of nondeductible permanent differences, including driver per diems and the arbitrated decrease in contingent consideration.
Liquidity and Capital Resources and Capital Requirements
The Company had the following sources of liquidity available as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The Company previously included working capital surplus in the table above, however management no longer considers working capital surplus in our calculation of sources of liquidity as of December 31, 2020. As such, we have also removed it from our calculation as of December 31, 2019.
The Company’s primary sources of liquidity have been provided by operations, issuances of capital stock and borrowings under its credit facilities. Cash increased by $80.5 million at December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019. This increase primarily resulted from an increase of $30.8 million in net cash provided by operating activities and a $15.8 million increase in net cash provided by investing activities. See below for more information. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no borrowings, $16.2 million in outstanding letters of credit (discussed below), with $83.2 million available under the ABL Facility.
The Company’s business requires substantial amounts of cash for operating expenses, including salaries and wages paid to employees, contract payments to independent contractors, insurance and claims payments, tax payments, and others. The Company expects to implement a share repurchase program in 2021 for a minimum of 3,000,000 shares of common stock, which will require cash to repurchase the shares. The Company also uses large amounts of cash and credit for the following activities:
Capital Expenditures
The Company follows a dual strategy of both owning assets and employing asset-light activities, the latter of which reduces the capital expenditures required to operate the business. Asset-light activities are conducted utilizing tractors and trailers provided by owner-operators and third-party carriers for significant portions of our flatbed and specialized services. Company-owned asset expenditures require substantial cash and financing (including finance and operating leases) to maintain a modern tractor fleet, refresh the trailer fleet, fund replacement and or growth in the revenue equipment fleet, and for the acquisition of real property and improvements to existing terminals and facilities. The Company had net cash provided by property and equipment purchases and sales of $31.6 million and financed $58.3 million of non-cash capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Total capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are shown below:
The decrease in total net capital assets additions is due to timing of the Company’s replacement cycle for revenue equipment, the exit of Aveda operation and effort to right size the Company’s fleet.
Additionally, the Company entered into operating leases for revenue equipment with terms of 1 to 5 years and real property with terms of 3 to 15 years having asset values at lease inception of $40.2 million and $14.4 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
ABL and Term Loan Facilities and Equipment Financing Agreements
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has (i) a $500.0 million senior secured term loan credit facility, consisting of a $250.0 million term loan, a $150.0 million tack-on loan and $100.0 million of term loans funded under a delayed draw term loan facility, and (ii) an asset-based senior secured revolving credit facility with an aggregate maximum credit amount equal to $100.0 million (that may be increased to $150.0 million, subject to availability under a borrowing base). The delayed draw term loans were used to support the Company’s acquisition activities. See Note 9 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information regarding the Term Loan Facility and the ABL Facility. As management believes there could be opportunities in the marketplace to reduce our interest expense, the Company is exploring potential transactions to refinance the Term Loan Facility, however the Company cannot guarantee any such transaction will be consummated on favorable terms, or at all.
The Company had $164.9 million of equipment and real estate loans and $31.3 million of finance leases collateralized primarily by revenue equipment, with the majority of the equipment loans and finance leases having terms of 48 to 60 months. Certain of the term loans contain conditions, covenants, representations and warranties, events of default, and indemnification provisions applicable to the Company and certain of its subsidiaries that are customary for equipment financings, including, but not limited to, limitations on the incurrence of additional debt and the prepayment of existing indebtedness, certain payments (including dividends and other distributions to persons not party to its ABL Facility) and transfers of assets.
The Company believes it can finance its expected cash needs, including debt repayment, in the short-term with cash flows from operations and borrowings available under the ABL Facility. The Company expects that the ABL Facility will provide sufficient credit availability to support its ongoing operations, fund debt service requirements, capital expenditures, and working capital needs. Over the long-term, the Company will continue to have significant capital requirements, and expects to devote substantial financial resources to grow its operations and fund its acquisition activities. As a result of these funding requirements, the Company likely will need to sell additional equity or debt securities or seek additional financing through additional borrowings, lease financing or equity capital, though it is not likely that the Company will issue any common stock in the near term. The availability of financing or equity capital will depend upon the Company’s financial condition and results of operations as well as prevailing market conditions. If such additional borrowings, lease financing or equity capital is not available at the time it needs to incur such expenditures, the Company may be required to extend the maturity of then outstanding indebtedness, rely on alternative financing arrangements or engage in asset sales.
Letters of credit - Under the terms of the ABL Facility, lenders may issue up to $40 million of standby letters of credit on our behalf. Outstanding letters of credit reduce the availability on the $100 million ABL Facility. Standby letters of credit are generally issued for the benefit of regulatory authorities, insurance companies and state departments of insurance for the purpose of satisfying certain collateral requirements, primarily related to automobile, workers’ compensation, and general insurance liabilities.
Business combinations - The Company’s strategy has historically been to consolidate the open-deck transportation industry and it has used significant amounts of capital to acquire 20 businesses since Daseke Companies, Inc.’s inception in 2008. However, during
2019 and 2020, the Company focused on organic growth, increasing free cash flow and margins. The Company will continue to evaluate potential acquisitions and any other sources of growth it considers in its best interest.
Cash Flows
The Company’s summary statements of cash flows information for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is set forth in the table below:
Operating Activities.  Cash provided by operating activities was $144.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted of $6.2 million of net income plus $96.2 million of non-cash items, consisting primarily of depreciation, impairments, and non-cash adjustments to contingent consideration, plus $42.5 million of net cash provided by working capital and other activities. Cash provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2020 improved to $42.5 million compared to $13.3 million cash used by changes in operating assets and liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to accounts receivable impact of $34.0 million and accrued expenses and other liabilities impact of $20.3 million.
The $30.8 million increase in cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily the result of a $313.6 million increase from net loss to net income, reduced by a $41.1 million decrease in depreciation, a $7.1 million decrease in amortization of intangible assets, $2.3 million in write-off of deferred financing fees, a $297.4 million decrease in impairment, $35.2 million decrease in non-cash operating lease expense and $2.5 million decrease in bad debt expense. There was a $59.7 million decrease in deferred tax benefit, a $2.1 increase in stock-based compensation expense, a $55.8 million increase in net cash provided by working capital, which was reduced by $1.7 million for the gain on disposition of property and equipment and $13.9 million in non-cash adjustments to contingent consideration during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Investing Activities. Cash flows from investing activities increased from $15.8 million provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $31.6 million provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflecting an increase of $15.2 million in cash equipment purchases and an increase of $31.0 million in cash receipts from sales of revenue equipment for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Total net cash capital expenditures (receipts) for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are shown below:
Financing Activities. Cash flows used in financing activities increased from $79.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $96.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily a result of net debt payments of $9.6 million and $7.6 million payments of contingent consideration.
Material Debt
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had the following material debt:
● the Term Loan Facility and the ABL Facility;
● secured equipment loans and finance lease obligations; and
● bank mortgage secured by real estate
The amounts outstanding under such agreements, excluding financing fees, were as follows as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
See Note 9 and Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein for information regarding the Company’s material debt and finance lease obligations, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures and capital resources are not materially affected by off-balance sheet transactions. The Company had stand-by letters of credit in the amount of $18.1 million and $15.9 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The letters of credit provide collateral primarily for liability insurance claims.
At December 31, 2020, there were 17,520,328 shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of outstanding warrants at a strike price of $11.50 per share.
Contractual Obligations
The table below summarizes the Company’s contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Includes interest obligations on long-term debt and excludes fees. For variable rate debt, the interest rate in effect as of December 31, 2020 was utilized. The table assumes long-term debt is held to maturity.
(2) Finance lease obligations relate primarily to revenue equipment.
(3) Represents future monthly rental payment obligations, which include an interest element, under operating leases for tractors, trailers, facilities and real estate. Substantially all lease agreements for revenue equipment have fixed payment terms based on the passage of time. The tractor lease agreements generally stipulate maximum miles and provide for mileage penalties for excess miles. These leases generally run for a period of three to five years for tractors and five to seven years for trailers.
Inflation
Inflation can have an impact on the Company’s operating costs. A prolonged period of inflation could cause interest rates, fuel, wages and other costs to increase, which would adversely affect the Company’s results of operations unless freight rates correspondingly increase. The Company attempts to limit the effects of inflation through increases in freight rates, certain cost control efforts and limiting the effects of fuel prices through fuel surcharges and measures intended to reduce the consumption of fuel. Over the past three years, the effect of inflation has been minor.
Seasonality
In the transportation industry, results of operations generally show a seasonal pattern. The Company’s productivity decreases during the winter season because inclement weather impedes operations, end-users reduce their activity and certain shippers reduce their shipments during winter. At the same time, operating expenses increase and fuel efficiency decreases because of engine idling and harsh weather creating higher accident frequency, increased claims and higher equipment repair expenditures. The Company also may suffer from weather-related or other events such as tornadoes, hurricanes, blizzards, ice storms, floods, fires, earthquakes and explosions, which may increase in frequency or intensity due to climate change. These events may disrupt fuel supplies, increase fuel costs, disrupt freight shipments or routes, affect regional economies, destroy the Company’s assets, increase insurance costs or adversely affect the business or financial condition of its customers, any of which could adversely affect the Company’s results of operations or make such results more volatile.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires it to make estimates and assumptions that impact the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Therefore, the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and associated disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities are affected by these estimates and assumptions. The Company evaluates these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis, utilizing historical experience, consultation with experts and other methods considered reasonable in the particular circumstances. Nevertheless, actual results may differ significantly from these estimates and assumptions, and it is possible that materially different amounts will be reported using differing estimates or assumptions. The Company considers critical accounting policies to be those that require it to make more significant judgments and estimates when preparing financial statements. The Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates include the following:
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill and other intangible assets result from business acquisitions. The Company accounts for business acquisitions by assigning the purchase price to tangible and intangible assets and liabilities. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their fair values and the excess of the purchase price over amounts assigned is recorded as goodwill.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually (or more frequently if impairment indicators arise) for each reporting unit by applying either a qualitative or quantitative analysis in accordance with the authoritative accounting guidance on goodwill. The Company first assesses qualitative factors to evaluate whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as the basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. The Company may bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly with the quantitative analysis. The quantitative analysis compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount. The Company estimates the fair value of a reporting unit using discounted expected future cash flows. The Company’s annual assessment is conducted as of October 1 of each year (see Note 5 for additional details).
Other intangible assets recorded consist of indefinite lived trade names and definite lived non-competition agreements and customer relationships. These intangible assets are stated at estimated fair value at the time of acquisition less accumulated amortization. Amortization is recorded using the straight-line method over the following estimated useful lives: (i) non-competition agreements: two to five years and (ii) customer relationships: 10 to 15 years. The Company evaluates its definite lived intangible assets for impairment when current facts or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets to be held and used may not be recoverable. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually by applying a fair value based analysis in accordance with the authoritative accounting guidance for such assets. During the third quarter of 2019, the Company recorded an impairment
charge to intangible assets of $85.6 million for non-competition agreements, customer relationships and trade names categories of intangible assets. During 2020, the Company recorded impairment charges to intangible assets of $8.2 million for the trade names category of intangible assets. The trade name was impaired as a result of the planned divestiture of Aveda and the reorganization and merger of two of the Company’s operating companies.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for using an asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the consolidated financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities at the applicable enacted tax rates.
The Company adheres to the provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 740-10, Income Taxes, relating to accounting for uncertain tax positions. The Company recognizes the tax benefit from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax positions will be sustained on examination by the tax authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefit is measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
Accrued Insurance and Claims
The Company uses a combination of purchased insurance, self-insurance, and captive group programs. The insurance provides for the cost of vehicle liability, cargo loss, damage, general liability, property, workers’ compensation claims and employee medical benefits. Self-insurance accruals relate primarily to vehicle liability, cargo damage, workers’ compensation and employee medical claims. The measurement and classification of self-insured costs requires the consideration of historical cost experience, demographic and severity factors, and judgments about the current and expected levels of cost per claim and retention levels. These methods provide estimates of the liability associated with claims incurred as of the balance sheet date, including claims not reported. The Company believes these methods are appropriate for measuring these highly judgmental self-insurance accruals. However, the use of any estimation method is sensitive to the assumptions and factors described above, based on the magnitude of claims and the length of time from the date the claim is incurred to ultimate settlement. Accordingly, changes in these assumptions and factors can materially affect actual costs paid to settle the claims and those amounts may be different than estimates.
Stock-Based Compensation
Awards of equity instruments issued to employees and directors are accounted for under the fair value method of accounting and recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss). Compensation cost is measured for all equity-classified stock-based awards at fair value on the date of grant and recognized using the straight-line method over the service period over which the awards are expected to vest. Compensation cost is remeasured for all liability-classified stock-based awards at fair value at each period-end and recognized using the straight-line method over the service period over which the awards are expected to vest. Fair value of all time-vested options as of the date of grant is estimated using the Black-Scholes option valuation model, which was developed for use in estimating the fair value of traded options that have no vesting restrictions and are fully transferable. Option valuation models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected stock price volatility. Since the Company does not have a sufficient history of exercise behavior, expected term is calculated using the assumption that the options will be exercised ratably from the date of vesting to the end of the contractual term for each vesting tranche of awards. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve for the period of the expected term of the stock option. For equity-classified awards, expected volatility is calculated using an index of publicly traded peer companies. For liability-classified awards, expected volatility is calculated using split and dividend adjusted closing stock prices over a lookback period commensurate with the remaining term of each award. Fair values of non-vested stock awards (restricted stock units) are equal to the market value of the common stock on the date of the award with compensation costs amortized over the vesting period of the award. Fair values of performance stock units are estimated using the Monte Carlo valuation model in a risk-neutral framework to model future stock price movements based upon highly subjective assumptions, including historical volatility, risk-free rates of return and the stock price simulated over the performance period. The risk-free interest rate is based on the interpolated constant maturity treasury curve for the performance period. Expected volatility is calculated using annualized historical volatility with a lookback period equal to the remaining performance period.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12 - Income Taxes (Topic 740) Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, as part of its initiative to reduce complexity in the accounting standards. The amendments in ASU 2019-12 eliminate certain exceptions related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. ASU 2019-12 also clarifies and simplifies other aspects of the accounting for income taxes. The amendments in ASU 2019-12 will become effective for the Company on January 1, 2022. Early adoption is permitted, including adoption in any interim period. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of adopting this guidance.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Accounting for Credit Losses (Topic 326). ASU 2016-13 requires the use of an “expected loss” model on certain types of financial instruments. The ASU sets forth a “current expected credit loss” (CECL) model which requires the Company to measure all expected credit losses for financial instruments held at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable supportable forecasts. This replaces the existing incurred loss model and is applicable to the measurement of credit losses on financial assets, including trade receivables. The new standard will become effective for the Company beginning with the first quarter 2023 and is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.