ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. When reviewing the discussion below, you should keep in mind the substantial risks and uncertainties that could impact our business. In particular, we encourage you to review the risks and uncertainties described in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A. in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected in forward-looking
statements contained in this report or implied by past results and trends. Our fiscal year ends on March 31. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
We offer the market-leading software intelligence platform, purpose-built for dynamic multicloud environments. As enterprises embrace the cloud to effect their digital transformation, our all-in-one intelligence platform is designed to address the growing complexity faced by technology and digital business teams. With automatic and intelligent observability, our all-in-one platform delivers precise answers about the performance and security of applications, the underlying infrastructure and the experience of all users to enable organizations to innovate faster, simplify cloud complexity, collaborate more efficiently, and secure cloud-native applications. We designed our software intelligence platform to allow our customers to modernize and automate IT operations, develop and release high quality software faster, and improve user experiences for consistently better business outcomes. As a result, as of March 31, 2021, our products are trusted by approximately 2,900 Dynatrace customers in 90 countries in diverse industries such as banking, insurance, retail, manufacturing, travel and software.
Since we began operations, we have been a leader within the application performance monitoring and observability spaces. In 2014, we leveraged the knowledge and experience of the same engineering team that founded Dynatrace to develop a new platform, the Dynatrace Software Intelligence Platform, from the ground up with automation and intelligence at its core to address the complexity of modern, dynamic multiclouds and the applications that run on them.
We market Dynatrace® through a combination of our global direct sales team and a network of partners, including resellers, system integrators, and managed service providers. We target the largest 15,000 global enterprise accounts, which generally have annual revenues in excess of $1 billion.
We generate revenue primarily by selling subscriptions, which we define as (i) Software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) agreements, (ii) Dynatrace® term-based licenses, for which revenue is recognized ratably over the contract term, (iii) Dynatrace® perpetual licenses, which are recognized ratably over the term of the expected optional maintenance renewals, which is generally three years, and (iv) maintenance and support agreements.
We deploy our platform as a SaaS solution, with the option of retaining the data in the cloud, or at the edge in customer-provisioned infrastructure, which we refer to as Dynatrace® Managed. The Dynatrace® Managed offering allows customers to maintain control of the environment where their data resides, whether in the cloud or on-premises, combining the simplicity of SaaS with the ability to adhere to their own data security and sovereignty requirements. Our Mission Control functionality automatically upgrades all Dynatrace® instances and offers on-premise cluster customers auto-deployment options that suit their specific enterprise management processes.
Dynatrace® is an all-in-one platform, which is typically purchased by our customers with the full-stack Application Performance Module and extended with our Infrastructure Monitoring, Digital Experience Monitoring, Digital Business Analytics, Application Security, or Cloud Automation Modules. Customers also have the option to purchase the infrastructure monitoring module where the full-stack APM is not required, with the ability to upgrade to the full-stack APM when necessary. Our Dynatrace® platform has been commercially available since 2016 and is the primary offering we sell. Dynatrace® customers increased to 2,936 as of March 31, 2021 from 2,373 as of March 31, 2020.
Our Classic products include AppMon, Classic Real User Monitoring, or RUM, Network Application Monitoring, or NAM, and Synthetic Classic. As of April 2018, these products are only available to customers who had previously purchased them and were sunset as of April 1, 2021.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Impact
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our business going forward will depend on numerous evolving factors that we cannot reliably predict. These factors may adversely impact business spending on technology as well as customers’ ability to pay for our products and services on an ongoing basis.
While the broader implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations and overall financial performance remain uncertain, the COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse effects have become more prevalent in the locations where we, our customers and partners conduct business. We may experience curtailed customer demand that could adversely impact our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods. Specifically, we may be impacted by changes in our customers’ ability or willingness to purchase our offerings; changes in the timing of our current or prospective customers’ purchasing decisions; pricing discounts or extended payment terms; reductions in the amount or duration of customers’ subscription contracts; or increased customer attrition rates. While our revenue, customer retention, and earnings are relatively predictable as a result of our subscription-based business model, the effect, if any, of the COVID-19 pandemic would not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods.
While the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic remain uncertain, we plan to continue to make investments to support business growth. We believe that the growth of our business is dependent on many factors, including our ability to expand our customer base, develop new products and applications to extend the functionality of our products, and provide a high level of customer service. We expect to continue to invest in sales and marketing to support customer growth. We also expect to continue to invest in research and development as we continue to introduce new products and applications to extend the functionality of our products. We also intend to maintain a high level of customer service and support which we consider critical for our continued success. We also expect to continue to incur general and administrative expenses to support our business and to maintain the infrastructure required to be a public company. We intend to use our cash flow from operations to fund these growth strategies and support our business despite the potential impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. See the section titled “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our historical financial performance has been, and we expect our financial performance in the future to be, driven by our ability to:
•Extend our technology and market leadership position. We intend to maintain our position as the market-leading software intelligence platform through increased investment in research and development and continued innovation. We expect to focus on expanding the functionality of Dynatrace® and investing in capabilities that address new market opportunities. We believe this strategy will enable new growth opportunities and allow us to continue to deliver differentiated high-value outcomes to our customers.
•Grow our customer base. We intend to drive new customer growth by expanding our direct sales force focused on the largest 15,000 global enterprise accounts, which generally have annual revenues in excess of $1 billion. We added 584 new customers during the year ended March 31, 2021. In addition, we expect to leverage our global partner ecosystem to add new customers in geographies where we have direct coverage and work jointly with our partners. In other geographies, such as Africa, Japan, the Middle East, Russia and South Korea, we utilize a multi-tier “master reseller” model.
•Increase penetration within existing customers. We plan to continue to increase penetration within our existing customers by expanding the breadth of our platform capabilities to provide for continued cross-selling opportunities. In addition, we believe the ease of implementation for Dynatrace® provides us the opportunity to expand adoption within our existing enterprise customers, across new customer applications, and into additional business units or divisions. Our Dynatrace® net expansion rate has been above 120% for the last twelve quarters.
•Enhance our strategic partner ecosystem. Our strategic partners include industry-leading system integrators, software vendors, and cloud and technology providers. We intend to continue to invest in our partner ecosystem, with a particular emphasis on expanding our strategic alliances and cloud-focused partnerships, such as AWS, Azure, Google Cloud Platform, Red Hat OpenShift, and VMware Tanzu.
Key Metrics
In addition to our U.S. GAAP financial information, we monitor the following key metrics to help us measure and evaluate the effectiveness of our operations:
Dynatrace® Customers: We define the number of Dynatrace® customers at the end of any reporting period as the number of accounts, as identified by a unique account identifier, that generate at least $10,000 of Dynatrace® ARR as of the reporting date. In infrequent cases, a single large organization may comprise multiple customer accounts when there are distinct divisions, departments or subsidiaries that operate and make purchasing decisions independently from the parent organization. In cases where multiple customer accounts exist under a single organization, each customer account is counted separately based on a mutually exclusive accounting of ARR. As such, even though we target the largest 15,000 global enterprise accounts, there are more than 15,000 addressable Dynatrace® customers. We believe that our ability to grow the number of Dynatrace® customers is an indicator of our ability to drive market adoption of our platform, as well as our ability to grow the business and generate future subscription revenues.
Annual Recurring Revenue (“ARR”): We define annual recurring revenue, or ARR, as the daily revenue of all subscription agreements that are actively generating revenue as of the last day of the reporting period multiplied by 365. We exclude from our calculation of ARR any revenues derived from month-to-month agreements and/or product usage overage billings, where customers
are billed in arrears based on product usage. Total ARR was $774 million as of March 31, 2021. Over the past year, Total ARR has grown by $201 million, or 35%. This growth was the result of a $62 million increase in ARR from new customer additions, a $128 million increase in ARR from the expansion of existing customers on the Dynatrace® platform, and an $11 million increase in ARR as a result of expansion at the time of conversion from our Classic customers, net of churn.
Dynatrace® Net Expansion Rate: We define the Dynatrace® net expansion rate as the Dynatrace® ARR at the end of a reporting period for the cohort of Dynatrace® accounts as of one year prior to the date of calculation, divided by the Dynatrace® ARR one year prior to the date of calculation for that same cohort. Dynatrace® net expansion rate has been above 120% for 12 consecutive quarters.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Revenue includes subscriptions, licenses and services.
Subscription. Our subscription revenue consists of (i) SaaS agreements, (ii) Dynatrace® term-based licenses which are recognized ratably over the contract term, (iii) Dynatrace® perpetual licenses that are recognized ratably over the term of the expected optional maintenance renewals, which is generally three years, and (iv) maintenance and support agreements. We typically invoice SaaS subscription fees and term licenses annually in advance and recognize subscription revenue ratably over the term of the applicable agreement, provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have been satisfied. Fees for our Dynatrace® perpetual licenses are generally billed up front. See the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Revenue Recognition” included in Part II, Item 7 of this Annual Report for more information. Over time, we expect subscription revenue will increase as a percentage of total revenue as we continue to focus on increasing subscription revenue as a key strategic priority.
License. License revenue reflects the revenues recognized from sales of perpetual and term-based licenses of our Classic products that are sold only to existing customers. The license fee portion of Classic perpetual license arrangements is recognized upfront assuming all revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. Classic term license fees are also recognized up front. Classic term licenses are generally billed annually in advance and perpetual licenses are billed up front.
Service. Service revenue consists of revenue from helping our customers deploy our software in highly complex operational environments and train their personnel. We recognize the revenues associated with these professional services on a time and materials basis as we deliver the services or provide the training. We generally recognize the revenues associated with our services in the period the services are performed, provided that collection of the related receivable is reasonably assured.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of subscription. Cost of subscription revenue includes all direct costs to deliver and support our subscription products, including salaries, benefits, share-based compensation and related expenses such as employer taxes, allocated overhead for facilities, IT, third-party hosting fees related to our cloud services, and amortization of internally developed capitalized software technology. We recognize these expenses as they are incurred.
Cost of service. Cost of service revenue includes salaries, benefits, share-based compensation and related expenses such as employer taxes for our services organization, allocated overhead for depreciation of equipment, facilities and IT. We recognize these expenses as they are incurred.
Amortization of acquired technology. Amortization of acquired technology includes amortization expense for technology acquired in business combinations and the Thoma Bravo Funds’ acquisition of us in 2014.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is revenue less cost of revenue, and gross margin is gross profit as a percentage of revenue. Gross profit has been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including the mix of our license, subscription, and services and other revenue, the costs associated with third-party cloud-based hosting services for our cloud-based subscriptions, and the extent to which we expand our customer support and services organizations. We expect that our gross margin will fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay of these various factors.
Operating Expenses
Personnel costs, which consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, share-based compensation and, with regard to sales and marketing expenses, sales commissions, are the most significant component of our operating expenses. We also incur other non-personnel costs such as an allocation of our general overhead expenses.
Research and development. Research and development expenses primarily consists of the cost of programming personnel. We focus our research and development efforts on developing new solutions, core technologies, and to further enhance the functionality, reliability, performance and flexibility of existing solutions. We believe that our software development teams and our core technologies represent a significant competitive advantage for us and we expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase, as we invest in research and development headcount to further strengthen and enhance our solutions.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses primarily consists of personnel and facility-related costs for our sales, marketing, and business development personnel, commissions earned by our sales personnel and the cost of marketing and business development programs. We expect that sales and marketing expenses will continue to increase as we continue to hire additional sales and marketing personnel and invest in marketing programs.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses primarily consist of the personnel and facility-related costs for our executive, finance, legal, human resources and administrative personnel; and other corporate expenses, including those associated with our ongoing public reporting obligations. We anticipate continuing to incur additional expenses due to growing our operations and being a public company, including higher legal, corporate insurance and accounting expenses.
Amortization of other intangibles. Amortization of other intangibles primarily consists of amortization of customer relationships and capitalized software and tradenames.
Restructuring and Other. Restructuring and other expenses primarily consists of various restructuring activities we have undertaken to achieve strategic and financial objectives. Restructuring activities include, but are not limited to, product offering cancellation and termination of related employees, office relocation, administrative cost of structure realignment and consolidation of resources.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net consists primarily of interest expense and foreign currency realized and unrealized gains and losses related to the impact of transactions denominated in a foreign currency, including balances between subsidiaries. Interest expense, net of interest income, consists primarily of interest on our term loan facility, amortization of debt issuance costs, loss on debt extinguishment and prepayment penalties.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
Our income tax (expense) benefit, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best assessment of estimated current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the consolidated income tax expense.
Our income tax rate varies from the U.S. federal statutory rate mainly due to (1) the impact of tax return to provision true-ups resulting from changes in estimates to the reorganization transaction tax and the corresponding impact to the uncertain tax positions, (2) differing tax rates and regulations in foreign jurisdictions, (3) differences in accounting and tax treatment of our share-based compensation, and (4) foreign withholding taxes. We expect this fluctuation in income tax rates, as well as its potential impact on our results of operations, to continue.
Immaterial Revision of Previously Issued Consolidated Financial Statements
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we identified an immaterial error in the calculation of our income tax provision for the year ended March 31, 2020. Accordingly, the results for the year ended March 31, 2020 have been adjusted to incorporate the revised amounts, where applicable, as further described in Note 7 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
_________________
(1)Includes share-based compensation expense as follows:
Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Subscription
Subscription revenue increased by $167.4 million, or 34%, for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2020, primarily due to the growing adoption of the Dynatrace® platform by new customers combined with existing customers expanding their use of our solutions. Our subscription revenue increased to 93% of total revenue for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to 89% of total revenue for the year ended March 31, 2020.
License
License revenue decreased by $11.2 million, or 89%, for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2020, primarily due to the decline of sales of our Classic products to existing customers as they convert to our Dynatrace® platform. We are no longer selling our Classic products.
Service
Service revenue increased by $1.6 million, or 3%, for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. We generally recognize the revenues associated with professional services as we deliver the services.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of subscription
Cost of subscription revenue increased by $4.3 million, or 6%, for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to higher personnel costs to support the growth of our subscription cloud-based offering of $9.7 million and cloud-based hosting costs and software subscriptions of $7.4 million. Partially offsetting this increase was lower share-based compensation of $8.3 million as well as decreases in costs for data centers closed during fiscal 2021.
Cost of service
Cost of service and other revenue decreased by $4.4 million, or 11%, for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease was the result of lower share-based compensation of $3.1 million and decreased travel costs of $2.1 million. Partially offsetting this decrease was increased personnel costs.
Amortization of acquired technologies
For the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, amortization of acquired technologies is primarily related to amortization expense for technology acquired in connection with Thoma Bravo’s acquisition of us in 2014.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Subscription
Subscription gross profit increased by $163.1 million, or 39%, during the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. Subscription gross margin increased from 85% to 88% during the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the growth of the Dynatrace® platform and lower share-based compensation.
License
License gross profit decreased by $11.2 million, or 89%, during the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease was the result of a decline in sales of perpetual and term licenses for our Classic products.
Service
Service gross profit increased by $6.0 million, or 99%, during the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. Service gross margin increased from 13% to 26% during the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. Lower share-based compensation and travel costs increased gross profit by $3.1 million and $2.1 million, respectively, compared to last fiscal year.
Operating Expenses
Research and development
Research and development expenses decreased by $7.9 million, or 7%, for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily attributable to lower share-based compensation of $27.0 million, partially offset by a 24% increase in headcount and related allocated overhead, resulting in increased personnel and other costs to expand our product offerings of $15.3 million, and increased cloud-based hosting costs of $2.6 million.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses decreased by $20.7 million, or 8%, for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to lower share-based compensation of $60.5 million and lower travel expenses of $11.1 million, partially offset by a 25% increase in headcount, resulting in an increase of $31.2 million in personnel costs, and increased advertising and marketing costs of $15.3 million.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased by $69.8 million, or 43%, for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2020, primarily due to a decrease in share-based compensation of $65.8 million and lower transaction costs of $18.3 million primarily related to the initial public offering completed in fiscal 2020. Partially offsetting this decrease was a 24% increase in headcount, resulting in an increase of $7.4 million in personnel costs, and increased professional fees of $3.5 million. Sponsor related costs were zero and $1.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. Sponsor costs were reduced to zero as we stopped incurring these costs upon completion of our initial public offering.
Amortization of other intangibles
Amortization of other intangibles decreased by $5.5 million, or 14%, for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily the result of lower amortization for certain intangible assets that are amortized on a systematic basis that reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits of the intangible assets are estimated to be realized and the completion of amortization on certain intangibles.
Restructuring and other
Restructuring expenses decreased by $1.1 million, or 96%, for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2020, due to costs incurred in the prior fiscal year for various restructuring activities to achieve our strategic and financial objectives including costs related to a restructuring program designed to align employee resources with our product offering and future plans.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net decreased by $32.6 million, or 70%, for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease in other expense was primarily a result of lower interest expense on our term loans as we had less principal outstanding compared to last fiscal year.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense decreased by $193.1 million resulting in an expense of $2.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to an expense of $195.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to the tax expense resulting from our reorganization transaction, net of attributes utilized, and related uncertain tax positions during fiscal 2020.
Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Subscription
Subscription revenue increased by $138.0 million, or 39%, for the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2019, primarily due to the growing adoption of the Dynatrace® platform by new customers combined with existing customers expanding their use of our solutions. Our subscription revenue increased to 89% of total revenue for the year ended March 31, 2020 compared to 81% of total revenue for the year ended March 31, 2019.
License
License revenue decreased by $27.7 million, or 69%, for the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2019, primarily due to decline of sales of our Classic products to existing customers as they convert to our Dynatrace® platform. We are no longer selling our Classic products to new customers.
Service
Service revenue increased by $4.5 million, or 11%, for the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2019. We recognize the revenues associated with professional services as we deliver the services.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of subscription
Cost of subscription revenue increased by $16.3 million, or 29%, for the year ended March 31, 2020 compared to the year ended March 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to higher share-based compensation of $9.0 million as well as higher personnel costs to support the growth of our subscription cloud-based offering.
Cost of service
Cost of service revenue increased by $7.8 million, or 25%, for the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2019. The increase was the result of higher share-based compensation of $3.9 million as well as increased personnel costs to support the increase in use of our consulting and training services to support our new customers.
Amortization of acquired technologies
For the years ended March 31, 2020 and 2019, amortization of acquired technologies includes $16.2 million and $17.7 million, respectively, of amortization expense for technology acquired in connection with the Thoma Bravo Funds’ acquisition of us in 2014, with the remaining balance related primarily to the Qumram acquisition in November 2017.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Subscription
Subscription gross profit increased by $121.7 million, or 42%, during the year ended March 31, 2020 compared to the year ended March 31, 2019. Subscription gross margin increased from 84% to 85%, during the year ended March 31, 2020 compared to the year ended March 31, 2019.
License
License gross profit decreased by $27.7 million, or 69%, during the year ended March 31, 2020 compared to the year ended March 31, 2019. The decrease was the result of a decline in sales of perpetual and term licenses for our Classic products.
Service
Service gross profit decreased by $3.2 million, or 35%, during the year ended March 31, 2020 compared to the year ended March 31, 2019. Service gross margin decreased from 23% to 13%, during the year ended March 31, 2020 compared to the year ended March 31, 2019. Higher share-based compensation costs decreased gross profit by $3.9 million compared to the last fiscal year.
Operating Expenses
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased $42.5 million, or 55%, for the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to higher share-based compensation of $26.1 million and a 20% increase in headcount and related allocated overhead, as well as other costs to expand our product offerings of $8.1 million. Higher software and maintenance expenses, primarily cloud-based hosting costs related to the development of our cloud-based offering of $3.8 million also contributed to the increase.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $87.3 million, or 49%, for the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2019, primarily due to higher share-based compensation of $60.0 million. Further contributing to the increase was a 14% increase in headcount, resulting in an increase of $23.1 million in personnel costs.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $70.2 million, or 76%, for the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in share-based compensation of $52.3 million and higher transaction costs of $12.8 million related to the initial public offering completed in fiscal 2020. Further contributing to the increase was an increase in personnel costs and insurance costs. Sponsor related costs were $1.6 million and $4.9 million for the years ended March 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Sponsor costs declined in 2020 because we stopped incurring these costs upon completion of our initial public offering.
Amortization of other intangibles
Amortization of other intangibles decreased by $7.4 million, or 16%, for the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily the result of lower amortization for certain intangible assets that are amortized on a systematic basis that reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits of the intangible assets are estimated to be realized and the completion of amortization on certain intangibles.
Restructuring and other
Restructuring expenses decreased by $0.7 million, or 38%, for the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2019, due to lower costs incurred for various restructuring activities to achieve our strategic and financial objectives including costs related to a restructuring program designed to align employee resources with our product offering and future plans.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net decreased by $20.6 million, or 31%, for the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended March 31, 2019. The decrease in other expense was primarily a result of lower interest expense on our related party promissory notes as described further in Note 17 with the consolidated financial statements included herein.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
Income tax expense increased by $219.0 million resulting in an expense of $195.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to an income tax benefit of $23.7 million for the year ended March 31, 2019. This change was primarily due to an increase in income tax expense as a result of our reorganization transactions during fiscal 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of March 31, 2021, we had $325.0 million of cash and cash equivalents and $44.4 million available under our revolving credit facility.
Since inception we have financed our operations primarily through payments by our customers for use of our product offerings and related services and, to a lesser extent, the net proceeds we have received from sales of equity securities and borrowings on our term loan facilities. In August 2019, we completed our IPO in which we issued and sold an aggregate of 38.9 million shares of common stock at a price of $16.00 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds of $585.3 million from the IPO, after underwriting discounts and commissions and payments of offering costs.
Over the past three years, cash flows from customer collections have increased. However, operating expenses have also increased as we have invested in growing our business. Our operating cash requirements may increase in the future as we continue to invest in the strategic growth of our company.
Our historical expansion with customers has typically been achieved by executing additional contracts, each with unique pricing and anniversary dates. We are transitioning to a program that combines these contracts into one single, often multi-year contract per customer with one single anniversary date, which may result in variability in the timing and amounts of our billings which could impact the timing of our cash collections from period to period.
Cash from operations could be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks detailed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A. However, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, short-term investment balances, funds available under our debt agreement, and cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support research and development efforts, the continued expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced products, seasonality of our billing activities, timing and extent of spending to support our growth strategy, and the continued market acceptance of our products. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Our Credit Facilities
As of March 31, 2021, the balance outstanding under our first lien term loan was $401.1 million and is included in long-term debt on our consolidated balance sheets. We had $44.4 million available under the revolving credit facility after considering $15.6 million of letters of credit outstanding.
All of our obligations under our term loans are guaranteed by our existing and future domestic subsidiaries and, subject to certain exceptions, secured by a security interest in substantially all of our tangible and intangible assets. At March 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all applicable covenants pertaining to the First Lien Credit Agreement. Our credit facilities are discussed further in Note 9 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report.
Summary of Cash Flows
_________________
(1) Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities includes cash payments for interest and tax as follows:
Operating Activities
For the year ended March 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $220.4 million as a result of net income of $75.7 million, and adjusted by non-cash charges of $113.6 million and a change of $31.2 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges are primarily comprised of depreciation and amortization of $61.0 million and share-based compensation of $57.8 million. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of an increase in deferred revenue of $96.5 million due to seasonality in our sales cycle, which is higher in the third and fourth quarters of our fiscal year, an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $26.6 million driven by the timing of payments, and a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $5.7 million driven by the timing of payments in advance of future services. These changes were partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $82.0 million due to the timing of receipts of payments from customers and an increase in deferred commissions of $16.3 million due to commissions paid on new bookings.
For the year ended March 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $142.5 million as a result of a net loss of $413.8 million, inclusive of a $255.8 million income tax payment related to the reorganization transactions, and adjusted by non-cash charges of $248.7 million and a change of $22.7 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges are primarily comprised of share-based compensation of $222.5 million and depreciation and amortization of $66.3 million, net of deferred income taxes of $46.2 million. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of an increase in deferred revenue of $91.4 million due to higher subscription sales and timing of amounts billed to customers compared to revenue recognized during the same period, which were partially offset by an increase in deferred commissions of $20.1 million due to commissions paid on new bookings. Further contributing to the change was an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $57.6 million related to an
increase in income taxes refundable, an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $53.0 million driven by our growth and the timing of payments, and an increase in accounts receivable of $44.0 million in line with higher sales and the timing of cash collections between the two periods.
For the year ended March 31, 2019, cash provided by operating activities was $147.1 million as a result of a net loss of $116.2 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $115.9 million and a change of $147.4 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges are primarily comprised of depreciation and amortization of $80.1 million, share-based compensation of $71.2 million, and deferred income taxes of $34.2 million. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of an increase in deferred revenue of $127.0 million due to the timing of billings and cash received in advance of revenue recognition primarily for subscription and support services and a decrease in accounts receivable of $18.0 million due to the timing of receipts of payments from customers, partially offset by an increase in deferred commissions of $20.0 million, and an increase in prepayments and other assets of $12.4 million.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended March 31, 2021 was $13.9 million, as a result of the purchases of property and equipment of $14.1 million and capitalized software additions of $0.3 million, gross of $0.5 million of derecognized software costs.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended March 31, 2020 was $20.6 million, as a result of the purchases of property and equipment of $19.7 million and capitalized software additions of $0.9 million.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended March 31, 2019 was $9.3 million, as a result of purchases of property and equipment of $7.4 million and capitalized software additions of $1.9 million.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities during the year ended March 31, 2021 was $97.8 million, primarily as a result of repayments of our term loans of $120.0 million, partially offset by proceeds from the exercise of our stock options of $13.1 million and proceeds from our employee stock purchase plan of $9.2 million.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended March 31, 2020 was $329.4 million, primarily as a result of net proceeds from our initial public offering of $590.3 million and a contribution received for our tax obligation generated by our reorganization transactions of $265.0 million, which were partially offset by repayments on our term loans of $515.2 million, settlement of deferred offering costs of $5.0 million, and installments related to an acquisition of $4.7 million.
Cash used in financing activities during the year ended March 31, 2019 was $161.5 million, primarily as a result of payments to related parties of $1,177.0 million, repayments on our term loans of $83.9 million, debt issuance costs of $16.3 million and equity repurchases of $0.6 million, partially offset by $1,120.0 million in proceeds from term loans.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Under various agreements, we are obligated to make future cash payments. These include payments under our long-term debt agreements, rent payments required under operating lease agreements, interest obligations on our term loans, and other contractual commitments.
The following table summarizes our payments under contractual obligations as of March 31, 2021:
________________
(1) The amounts included in the table above represent principal maturities only.
(2) Amounts represent estimated future interest payments on borrowings under our First Lien Term Loan, which were estimated using the interest rate effective at March 31, 2021 multiplied by the principal outstanding on March 31, 2021. The First Lien Term Loan consists of $401.1 million currently bearing interest at 2.4%.
(3) As of March 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility, $15.6 million of letters of credit outstanding, and $44.4 million was available for borrowing under our revolving credit facility.
As of March 31, 2021, we had accrued liabilities related to uncertain tax positions, which are reflected in our consolidated balance sheets. These accrued liabilities are not reflected in the table above since it is unclear when these liabilities will be repaid.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with revenue recognition, share-based compensation, income taxes, goodwill, and impairment of long-lived assets have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. Accordingly, we believe these are the most critical to fully understand and evaluate our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from contracts with customers using the five-step method described in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements, included elsewhere in this Annual Report. At contract inception we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as a single contract and whether the combined or single contract includes more than one performance obligation. We combine contracts entered into at or near the same time with the same customer if (i) we determine that the contracts are negotiated as a package with a single commercial objective, (ii) the amount of consideration to be paid in one contract depends on the price or performance of the other contract, or (iii) the services promised in the contracts are a single performance obligation.
The identification of our performance obligations involves review and consideration for the contractual terms, the implied rights of our customers, if any, product demonstrations and published website and marketing materials. Our performance obligations consist of (i) subscription and support services, (ii) licenses for our Classic products, and (iii) professional and other services. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on their relative standalone selling price. We determine standalone selling price, or SSP, for all our performance obligations using observable inputs, such as standalone sales and historical contract pricing. SSP is consistent with our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration the type of subscription services and professional and other services. SSP also reflects the amount we would charge for that performance obligation if it were sold separately in a standalone sale, and the price we would sell to similar customers in similar circumstances. We have determined that our pricing for software licenses and subscription services is highly variable and we therefore allocate the transaction price to those performance obligations using the residual approach.
In general, we satisfy the majority of our performance obligations over time as we transfer the promised services to our customers. We review the contract terms and conditions to evaluate (i) the timing and amount of revenue recognition, (ii) the related contract balances, and (iii) our remaining performance obligations. We also estimate the number of hours expected to be incurred based on an expected hours approach that considers historical hours incurred for similar projects based on the types and sizes of customers. These evaluations require significant judgment that could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognized.
Share-based Compensation
We historically issued Management Incentive Units (“MIUs”) and Appreciation Units (“AUs”) under the Management Incentive Unit Plan, or the MIU Plan. Following the IPO, we ceased granting awards under the MIU Plan, and all outstanding awards were converted into shares of common stock, restricted stock, and restricted stock units under the Amended and Restated 2019 Equity Incentive Plan, or the 2019 Plan. Under the 2019 Plan, we have granted stock options, restricted stock awards, restricted stock units to certain key employees and non-employee directors. For further information see Note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report.
Compensation expense relating to share-based payments is recognized in earnings using a fair-value measurement method. We use the straight-line attribution method of recognizing compensation expense over the vesting period. Forfeitures are accounted for in the period in which the awards are forfeited.
Prior to our IPO, the fair value of the MIUs and AUs were estimated on the date of grant using the option-pricing model, or OPM, or a hybrid of the probability-weighted expected return method and the option-pricing model, which we referred to as the hybrid method. Use of the OPM model and hybrid method required that we make assumptions as to the volatility of our equity awards, the expected term to expiration or a liquidity event, and the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our equity awards. The computation of expected volatility was based on the historical volatility of a group of publicly traded peer companies. We used the simplified method prescribed by SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment, to calculate the expected term of units granted to employees and directors. We based the expected term of options granted to non-employees on the contractual term of the units. We determined the risk-free interest rate by reference to the U.S. Constant Maturity Treasury yield curve in effect as of the valuation date with the maturity matching the expected term.
The following key assumptions were used to determine the fair value of the MIUs and AUs during the years ended March 31, 2020 and 2019:
Subsequent to our IPO, the fair value of each new equity award and purchase right under the employee stock purchase plan is estimated on the date of grant. We estimate the fair value of each option award and purchase right using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of restricted stock units and restricted stock awards is based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the New York Stock Exchange.
Our use of the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires that we make assumptions as to the volatility of our stock options and purchase rights under our 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, or the ESPP, the expected term to expiration or a liquidity event, and the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options and purchase rights under the ESPP. The computation of expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of a group of publicly traded peer companies. We expect to continue to do so until such time as we have adequate historical data regarding the volatility of our traded stock price. The computation of expected term for the stock options is based on the average period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding, generally calculated as the midpoint of the stock options’ remaining vesting term and contractual expiration period, as we do not have sufficient historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior. The computation of expected term for the purchase rights under the ESPP is based on the offering period, which is six months. We determined the risk-free interest rate based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for the expected life of the award. We use a dividend yield of zero, as we do not currently issue dividends, nor do we expect to do so in the future.
The following key assumptions were used to determine the fair value of the stock options granted during the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020:
The following key assumptions were used to determine the fair value of ESPP purchase rights granted during the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020:
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statements and tax bases of assets and liabilities and net operating loss and credit carryforwards using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date. We have the ability to permanently reinvest any earnings in our foreign subsidiaries and therefore do not record a deferred tax liability on any outside basis differences in our investments in subsidiaries.
We record net deferred tax assets to the extent we believe that these assets will more likely than not be realized. These deferred tax assets are subject to periodic assessments as to recoverability, and if it is determined that it is more likely than not that the benefits will not be realized, valuation allowances are recorded which would reduce deferred tax assets. In making such determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations.
We account for uncertain tax positions based on those positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We determine if the amount of available support indicates that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. We then measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon settlement. We adjust reserves for our uncertain tax positions due to changing facts and circumstances. To the extent that the final outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will impact our tax provision in our consolidated statements of operations in the period in which such determination is made. Interest and penalties related to uncertain income tax positions are included in the income tax provision.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of acquisition cost over the fair value of net tangible and identified net assets acquired. Goodwill and intangible assets that have indefinite lives are not amortized, but rather tested for impairment annually, as of January 1, or more often if and when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Goodwill impairment, if any, is determined by comparing the reporting unit’s fair value to its carrying value. An impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess of the reporting unit’s carrying value over its fair value, up to the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. There were no impairments of goodwill during the years ended March 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
For the purpose of testing goodwill for impairment, all goodwill acquired in a business combination is assigned to one or more reporting units. A reporting unit represents an operating segment or a component within an operating segment for which discrete financial information is available and is regularly reviewed by segment management for performance assessment and resource allocation. Components of similar economic characteristics are aggregated into one reporting unit for the purpose of goodwill impairment assessment. Reporting units are identified annually and re-assessed periodically for recent acquisitions or any changes in segment reporting structure. We have determined that we operate as one reporting unit.
The fair value of a reporting unit is generally determined using a combination of the income approach and the market approach. For the income approach, fair value is determined based on the present value of estimated future after-tax cash flows, discounted at an appropriate risk-adjusted rate.
We use our internal forecasts to estimate future after-tax cash flows and estimate the long-term growth rates based on our most recent views of the long-term outlook for each reporting unit. Actual results may differ from those assumed in our forecasts. We derive our discount rates using a capital asset pricing model and analyzing published rates for industries relevant to our reporting units to estimate the weighted average cost of capital. We adjust the discount rates for the risks and uncertainty inherent in the respective businesses and in our internally developed forecasts. For the market approach, we use a valuation technique in which values are derived based on valuation multiples of comparable publicly traded companies. We assess each valuation methodology based upon the relevance and availability of the data at the time we perform the valuation and weight the methodologies appropriately.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, including amortized intangibles, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If circumstances require a long-lived asset be tested for possible impairment, we first compare undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by an asset to the carrying value of the asset. If the carrying value of the long-lived asset is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, impairment is recognized to the extent that the carrying value exceeds its fair value. We estimate fair value using discounted cash flows and other market-related valuation models, including earnings multiples and comparable asset market values. If circumstances change or events occur to indicate that our fair market value has fallen below book value, then we will compare the estimated fair value of long-lived assets (including goodwill) to its book value. If the book value exceeds the estimated fair value, we will recognize the difference as an impairment loss in our consolidated statements of operations. We did not incur any impairment losses during the years ended March 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of our accompanying audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for a description of recently issued accounting pronouncements.