ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
The following discussion of our plan of operation and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes to the financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that relate to future events or our future financial performance. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. These risks and other factors include, among others, those listed under “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” and those included elsewhere in this report.
COMPANY OVERVIEW
The Company is a 25-year veteran in Business Continuity services, providing Disaster Recovery, Infrastructure as a Service, Cyber Security and Data Analytics. We provide our clients subscription based, long term agreements for Disaster Recovery as a Service solutions, Infrastructure as a Service product, telecommunications solutions, and high processing on site computing power and software solutions. While a significant portion of our revenue has been subscription based, we also generate revenue from the sale of equipment and software for cybersecurity, data storage, IBM Power systems equipment and managed service solutions.
Headquartered in Melville, NY, we provide solutions and services to a broad range of customers in several industries, including healthcare, banking and finance, distribution services, manufacturing, construction, education, and government. We maintain an internal business development team as well as a contracted independent distribution channel. DSC’s contracted distributors have the ability to provide disaster recovery and hybrid cloud solutions and IBM and Intel Infrastructure as a Service cloud-based solutions, without having to invest in infrastructure, data centers or telecommunication services or, in specialized technical staff, which substantially lowers the barrier of entry for the distributor to provide our solutions to their client base.
During 2020, we added new distributors, hired additional management focused on building our sales and marketing distribution, and expanded our technology assets in Dallas, TX. We also recently expanded our offering of cybersecurity solutions for remote tele-computing with ezSecurity™, a new 2020 product.
Our target marketplace for Infrastructure as a Service and Disaster Recovery as a Service globally is estimated at over one million Virtual IBM Power servers in the finance, retail, healthcare, government, and distribution industries and sectors according to the most recent information received from IBM. While Infrastructure as a Service and Disaster Recovery as a Service solutions are our core products, we also continue to provide ancillary solutions in this market.
For the past two decades, our mission has been to protect our clients’ data twenty-four hours a day, ensuring business continuity, and assisting in their compliance requirements, while providing better management and control over the clients’ digital information.
Our October 2016 acquisition of the assets of ABC Services, Inc. and ABC Services II, Inc. (collectively, “ABC”), including the remaining 50% of the assets of Secure Infrastructure & Services LLC, accelerated our strategy into cloud based managed services, expanded cybersecurity solutions and our hybrid cloud solutions with the ability to provide equipment and expanded technical support. We intend to continue our strategy of growth through synergistic acquisitions.
Our offices in New York include a technology center and lab, which are adapted to meet technology needs of our clients. In addition to office staffing, we employ additional remote staff. DSC maintains its infrastructure, storage and networking equipment required to provide our subscription solutions in four geographically diverse data centers located in New York, Massachusetts, Texas and North Carolina.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019
Revenue
Sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by approximately 10% to $9,320,933 as compared to sales for the year ended December 31,2019 or $8,483,608. We derive our sales from five types of services that we provide: infrastructure & disaster recovery / cloud services which is the largest source of our sales, followed by equipment and software sales, managed services, professional fees and Nexxis VOIP and internet access services. The infrastructure & disaster recovery / cloud services are subscription-based. We also provide equipment and software and actively participate in collaboration with IBM to provide innovative business solutions to clients. The professional services are providing the client IaaS and or Disaster Recovery implementation services as well as time and materials billing. Substantially all of our sales were to customers in the United States, with less than 2% of our sales to international customers.
The following chart details the changes in our sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in our infrastructure & disaster recovery/ cloud subscription services due to a higher demand for IBM Power systems cloud hosting. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, existing clients subscribed to increase their data storage and add new schedules onto their agreements
The increase in equipment and software sales is a result of upgrading to newer technology “on premise” client equipment and software.
Expenses
Cost of Sales. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of sales was $5,425,205, an increase of $678,904 or 14% compared to $4,746,031 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to expenses associated with the data centers for infrastructure and disaster recovery cloud services including new IBM systems, storage and network equipment for the Raleigh, NC expansion and new Dallas data center location. There were also additional costs related to the Nexxis VOIP services division, 80% owned subsidiary of the Company and equipment purchases for sale.
Operating Expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating expenses were $3,896,791, an increase of $365,738, or 13%, as compared to $3,531,053 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net increase is reflected in the chart below.
Salaries increased due to new hires during 2020, employee raises, and increased stock-based compensation from options issued to employees under our stock incentive program.
Officer’s Salaries increased due to raises granted to senior management.
Professional fees decreased primarily due to a reduction of services needed from an investment banking firm and investor relationship firms.
Software as a Service Expense (SaaS) increased due to additional costs paid to existing vendors to make improvements in Salesforce and purchases of new user licenses.
Advertising Expenses increased primarily due to additional marketing campaigns for Data Storage, which was offset by a decrease in marketing campaigns for Nexxis.
Commissions vary due to different contractual agreements with both the contracted distributors and employees.
All Other Expenses decreased primarily due to the reduction of travel and costs associated with the employees working from home due to the pandemic. In addition, the expenses related to our office space in Melville, New York and insurance were reduced compared to the prior period.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $1,849 to $175,602 from $177,451 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gain on contingent liability was $350,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019. In connection with our October 2012 acquisition of certain assets (the “ML Assets”) of Message Logic, Inc. (“Message Logic”), we maintained ownership of the ML Assets subject to a security interest in the ML Assets held by a third party banking institution (the “Bank”) in connection with a secured loan made by the Bank to Message Logic in June 2012 in the amount of $350,000 (the “ML Loan”). During 2020, we made a strategic decision to cease utilizing the ML Assets in its operations and advised the Bank of such information. The Bank did not seek repayment of the ML Loan and DSC was not obligated under the agreement. In connection with this and as a result, we recorded a gain on contingent liability in the amount of $350,000.
Net Income
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $173,359, as compared to a net income of $29,323 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared using generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”) applicable for a going concern, which assumes that DSC will realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the ordinary course of business.
To the extent we are successful in growing our business both organically and through acquisition, we continue to plan our working capital and the proceeds of any financing to finance such acquisition costs.
Our opinion concerning our liquidity is based on current information. If this information proves to be inaccurate, or if circumstances change, we may not be able to meet our liquidity needs, which may require a renegotiation of related party capital equipment leases, a reduction in advertising and marketing programs, renegotiation of our arrangement with Nexxis and/or a reduction in salaries for officers that are major shareholders.
We have long term contracts to supply our subscription-based solutions that are invoiced to clients monthly. We believe our total contract value of our subscription contracts with clients based on the actual contracts that we have to date, exceeds $10 million. Further, we continue to see an uptick in client interest, distribution channel expansion and in sales proposals. In 2021, we intend to continue to work to increase our presence in the IBM “Power I” infrastructure cloud and business continuity marketplace in the niche of IBM “Power ” and in the disaster recovery global marketplace utilizing our technical expertise, data centers utilization, assets deployed in the data centers, 24 x 365 monitoring and software.
If the Merger is consummated, we will require additional funding to finance the cash consideration and the Merger Agreement provides for a right of termination by us and the Flagship Equityholders if we have not consummated an underwritten public offering by May 31, 2021. There can be no assurance that we can complete an underwritten public offering by May 31, 2021 or that such offering will result in adequate funding to finance the Merger. We currently do not have any committed sources of outside financing.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, DSC’s cash increased $567,037 to $893,598 from $326,561 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash of $1,110,679 was provided by DSC’s operating activities resulting primarily from depreciation and amortization expense of $1,032,566. Net of PPP loan borrowings, $362,570 was used in financing activities resulting primarily from payments on lease obligations for equipment leases, including $718,690 of lease payments to related parties.
DSC’s working capital deficit was $2,666,448 at December 31, 2020, increasing by $84,790 from $2,571,583 at December 31, 2019.
Share Based Compensation
DSC follows the requirements of FASB ASC 718-10-10, Share Based Payments with regards to stock-based compensation issued to employees. DSC has agreements and arrangements that call for stock to be awarded to the employees and consultants at various times as compensation and periodic bonuses. The expense for this stock-based compensation is equal to the fair value of the stock price on the day the stock was awarded multiplied by the number of shares awarded.
The valuation methodology used to determine the fair value of the options issued during the year was the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes model requires the use of a number of assumptions including volatility of the stock price, the average risk- free interest rate, and the weighted average expected life of the options. Risk-free interest rates are calculated based on continuously compounded risk-free rates for the appropriate term. The dividend yield is assumed to be zero as we have never paid or declared any cash dividends on its common stock and does not intend to pay dividends on its Common stock in the foreseeable future. The expected forfeiture rate is estimated based on management’s best estimate.
Estimated volatility is a measure of the amount by which DSC’s stock price is expected to fluctuate each year during the expected life of the award. DSC’s calculation of estimated volatility is based on historical stock prices of entities over a period equal to the expected life of the awards. DSC uses the historical volatility of peer entities due to the lack of sufficient historical data of its stock price.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
DSC does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, financings, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons, also known as “special purpose entities”.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our financial statements and related public financial information are based on the application of GAAP. GAAP requires the use of estimates; assumptions, judgments and subjective interpretations of accounting principles that have an impact on the assets, liabilities, revenue, and expense amounts reported. These estimates can also affect supplemental information contained in our external disclosures including information regarding contingencies, risk and financial condition. We believe our use of estimates and underlying accounting assumptions adhere to GAAP and are consistently applied. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We continue to monitor significant estimates made during the preparation of our financial statements.
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 of our financial statements. While all these significant accounting policies impact our financial condition and results of operations, we view certain of these policies as critical. Policies determined to be critical are those policies that have the most significant impact on our financial statements and require management to use a greater degree of judgment and estimates. Actual results may differ from those estimates. Our management believes that given current facts and circumstances, it is unlikely that applying any other reasonable judgments or estimate methodologies would cause effect on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or liquidity for the periods presented in this report.
RECENTLY ISSUED AND NEWLY ADOPTED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU-2016-13”). ASU 2016-13 affects loans, debt securities, trade receivables, and any other financial assets that have the contractual right to receive cash. The ASU requires an entity to recognize expected credit losses rather than incurred losses for financial assets. ASU 2016-13 is effective for the fiscal year beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within that fiscal year. The Company expects that there would be no material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements upon the adoption of this ASU.
In October 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-16, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Intra-Entity Transfers of Assets Other than Inventory”, which eliminates the exception that prohibits the recognition of current and deferred income tax effects for intra-entity transfers of assets other than inventory until the asset has been sold to an outside party. The updated guidance is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption of the update is permitted. The adoption of ASU 2016-16 did not have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04 Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”): Simplifying the Accounting for Goodwill Impairment (“ASU 2017-04”). ASU 2017-04 simplifies the subsequent measurement of goodwill by eliminating Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. In computing the implied fair value of goodwill under Step 2, an entity had to perform procedures to determine the fair value at the impairment testing date of its assets and liabilities (including unrecognized assets and liabilities) following the procedure that would be required in determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Instead, under ASU 2017-04, an entity should perform its annual or interim goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An entity should recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. Additionally, an entity should consider income tax effects from any tax-deductible goodwill on the carrying amount of the reporting unit when measuring the goodwill impairment loss, if applicable. ASU 2017-04 is effective for annual or any interim goodwill impairment tests for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 and an entity should apply the amendments of ASU 2017-04 on a prospective basis. Early adoption is permitted for interim or annual goodwill impairment tests performed on testing dates after January 1, 2017. The adoption of ASU 2017-04 did not have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement - Disclosure Framework (Topic 820). The updated guidance improves the disclosure requirements for fair value measurements. The updated guidance was adopted on January 1, 2020 and did not have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other - Internal Use Software (Subtopic 350-40): Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That is a Service Contract. This guidance requires companies to apply the internal-use software guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350-40 to implementation costs incurred in a hosting arrangement that is a service contract to determine whether to capitalize certain implementation costs or expense them as incurred. The new guidance, is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019. The adoption of ASU 2018-15 did not have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET TRANSACTIONS
DSC has no off-balance sheet arrangements.