Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Form 10-K and other reports filed by the Company from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) contain or may contain forward-looking statements and information that are based upon beliefs of, and information currently available to, the Company’s management as well as estimates and assumptions made by Company’s management. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which are only predictions and speak only as of the date hereof. When used in the filings, the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “future,” “intend,” “plan,” or the negative of these terms and similar expressions as they relate to the Company or the Company’s management identify forward-looking statements. Such statements reflect the current view of the Company with respect to future events and are subject to risks, uncertainties, assumptions, and other factors, including the risks contained in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, relating to the Company’s industry, the Company’s operations and results of operations, and any businesses that the Company may acquire. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should the underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may differ significantly from those anticipated, believed, estimated, expected, intended, or planned.
Although the Company believes that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, the Company cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, the Company does not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results.
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). These accounting principles require us to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. These estimates, judgments and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Our consolidated financial statements would be affected to the extent there are material differences between these estimates and actual results. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We intend for this discussion to provide information that will assist in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles affect our financial statements.
Our Company
Information Systems Associates, Inc. (“ISA”). was incorporated in Florida on May 31, 1994. Our original business operations consisted of consulting services for asset management of large corporate data centers and the development and licensing of information technology (“IT”) asset management software. In late 2014, ISA entered negotiations with Duos Technologies, Inc. (“duostech™”) for the purposes of executing a merger between the two organizations (also known as a “reverse triangular merger”). Incorporated under the laws of Florida on November 30, 1990, duostech™ operated in various industry segments, specializing in the design, development and deployment of proprietary technology applications and turn-key engineered systems. This transaction was completed on April 1, 2015, whereby duostech™ became a wholly owned subsidiary of ISA. After the merger was completed, ISA changed its corporate name to Duos Technologies Group, Inc. The Company, based in Jacksonville, Florida, oversees its wholly owned subsidiary, duostech™ which employs approximately 59 people and is a technology integrator, software applications and artificial intelligence (“AI”) company with a strong portfolio of intellectual property. The Company’s headquarters are located at 6622 Southpoint Drive South, Suite 310, Jacksonville, Florida 32216 and main telephone number is (904) 296-2807.
Plan of Operation
The Company’s growth strategy includes expansion of its technology base through organic development efforts, strategic partnerships, and strategic acquisitions where appropriate. The Company provides its broad range of technology solutions with an emphasis on mission critical security, mechanical inspection and operations within the rail transportation sector including both freight and passenger modes. The Company is also enhancing its offerings for automating gatehouse operations for commercial clients and offers professional and consulting services for large data centers.
Specifically, based upon the current and anticipated business growth, the Company is investing in resources to focus on execution within its target markets, including but not limited to rail, distribution centers and data center operations. We continue to evaluate key requirements within those markets and add development resources to allow us to compete for additional projects to drive additional revenue growth.
Prospects and Outlook
Over the past several years, we have made substantial investments in product research and development and achieved significant milestones in the development of our technology and turnkey solutions. We have made significant progress in penetrating the market with our proprietary technology solutions, specifically in the rail industry which is currently undergoing a major shift in maintenance strategies. We believe that this shift will be a significant motivating factor for the industry’s use of our technologies.
Our business success in the immediate future will largely depend on the increased penetration into our target markets for our proprietary intelligent analytical technology solutions.
Notwithstanding the above, no assurance can be provided that our product offerings will generate the market acceptance and orders that we contemplate.
Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth a modified version of our Consolidated Statements of Operations that is used in the following discussions of our results of operations:
Revenues
Revenues were substantially lower in 2020, largely as the result of significant delays in receiving expected new orders due to the Covid-19 pandemic, which became a factor late in the first quarter. The effect of this was to postpone planned implementations that were originally anticipated during the year as well as impacting installations that were underway due to travel and other constraints. Importantly, the Company received no cancellations of current contracts or expected orders and the order flow began to recover in the fourth quarter where revenues were substantially better than in the prior quarters. Management focused its efforts during the slowdown to working on technology innovations and improvements in quality and execution, the results of which are expected to manifest themselves in 2021 and beyond. Management believes this was an anomaly in the otherwise steady increase in overall revenues experienced in prior years driven by the strength of the technology systems portion of our business. The Company’s stable capital structure since the raise in early 2020 as well as certain organizational changes, enables us to more aggressively pursue large projects requiring the ability to deploy major resources. The temporary decrease in systems deployments was offset by an increase in technical support revenues which are recurring in nature. This revenue source has been in transition for the past year as older legacy systems are replaced by the next generation of technology systems which are currently being installed. There is typically a lag of approximately 6 months from installation of a new system until the recurring revenue is recognized. The Company continues to replace the declining revenues from one customer with new, long term recurring revenue from new customers which will be coming on-line in the next several months. The maintenance and technical support revenues are driven by successful completion on projects and represent services and support for those installations. The expectation is that revenues from this area will continue to grow based on the success of multiple installations anticipated in 2021.
Our consulting services business is focused into the area of data center asset management. It experienced a decrease in revenues for 2020 due to the effects of the pandemic where two going projects were delayed significantly. The Company released a new version of its dcVue™ software which is anticipated to broaden market acceptance of its offerings. The software was beta tested at a financial institution with the objective of ultimately rolling out to additional locations and was deployed at a number of locations in 2020. The division continues to execute consulting services engagements through its partners.
The AI technologies recorded their first quarter of revenue during the second quarter of 2020 and recorded additional revenues for the rest of the year. The Company received a large (over $2 million) contract for AI related development from a large client which is expected to add revenues in the following quarters in 2021. The Company expects to continue the growth with new revenue from other existing customers which also will be coming on-line in the next several months.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues on technology systems decreased during the year compared to 2019, although at a slower rate than the decline in revenues. This is due to higher staffing costs related to project implementation which were put in place early in the year, prior to the impact from COVID-19. There is a continued focus on build costs and savings through efficiency, but the Company has elected to maintain key employees in anticipation of expected sales of such systems in 2021. Cost of revenues overall increased on technical support at a higher rate than the increase in revenue for technical support which is a negative trend for the year albeit the rate of increase was lower for the last half of the year and this trend is expected to continue with the re-organization in operations and focus on costs. Going forward the expectation is that more of the Company’s revenue will come from this recurring revenue business.
The consulting services recorded a small decrease in cost of revenues for the year reflecting the improvements in execution efficiency put in place from the Company’s new dcVue™ software. This trend is expected to continue as additional revenue from expected license sales of this software are recognized in 2021. The current pandemic related to COVID-19 has impacted both expected receipt of awards and delays in execution due to travel and other restrictions. These delays will continue to impact the consulting services revenue portion of our business at this time.
The AI technologies recorded costs during the last three quarters of 2020. The Company expects to continue the growth with new revenue from existing customers which will be coming on-line in the next several months.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $2,786,393 or 35% of revenues compared to $6,481,438 or 48% of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in gross profit of 57% was mainly the result of the significant slowdowns in project revenues due to the delay in new orders as previously discussed. This was offset by continued growth in our technical support and the positive effect of new revenues from the deployment of AI applications. It should be noted that the accounting treatment was changed to the ASC 606 reporting standard for 2019 and that the results compared with the previous year are now comparable. As previously discussed, the implementation of ASC 606 covering revenue from contracts with customers, has a temporary impact on overall gross margin as certain costs are recognized ahead of revenues. The Company recorded an overall increase in gross margin for the year compared to the prior year fourth quarter which is a positive trend highlighting that the business is starting a recovery from the pandemic delays in implementation. Management anticipates the overall gross margins for the business to continue to improve in the coming year driven by higher sales from both existing and new customers and certain “economies of scale” from larger projects. In late September 2020, the Company began several initiatives to improve margins from projects by focusing on costs of materials, implementation efficiencies and a better understanding of our overall costs for completing projects. We also expect that the increase in recurring technical support revenues will continue to positively impact overall revenues with an expected increase in gross margin.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses were higher by 6% than in 2019 largely as the result of a one-time charge for severance payment due to the retirement of the Company’s former CEO in the amount of approximately $885,000. Excluding this amount, expenses for continuing operations would have decreased overall by 4%. The Company implemented some staff cuts during the year but maintained key personnel reflecting necessary resources related to the Company’s anticipated growth in 2021. Research and development and AI development expenses, as an aggregate, decreased due to the completion of the TrueVue360 platform and a focus shift to executing machine learning algorithms for current contracts that are expected to be complete by year end. The increase in engineering expenses is largely due to increased staffing for unfilled positions that were identified earlier in the year as necessary for implementing new projects in 2021. Sales and marketing expense also decreased due to fluctuations in staffing and limited travel expense as a result of the pandemic. Administration expenses increased significantly as discussed above relating largely to a one-time charge for severance costs and increased legal and hiring costs for the new CEO. These costs were offset by lower overall expenses in the other functional areas.
Loss From Operations
The losses from operations for the years ended, December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $6,634,428 and $2,406,522, respectively. The losses for 2020 were considerably higher than originally anticipated largely as the result of delayed revenues and one-time costs related to senior management severance as previously discussed. The delayed revenues had a significant impact in that given the anticipated increase in business post-pandemic, and although certain staffing cuts were made, the Company elected to maintain key operations and technical staff to allow for a faster rebound. These extra costs were financed through a CARES Act PPP loan in the amount of $1,410,270, the expectation being that because of the staff levels that were maintained, much or all of the loan would be forgiven in accordance with its terms (see Note 15). The Company continues to focus on measures to move toward breakeven and profitability through a strategic plan that is being implemented in 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $150,137 and $69,322, respectively. The increase in interest expense was primarily due to the Company’s financing actions to fund certain staffing during the slowdowns experienced in the second and third quarters. This was partially offset by interest earned from substantial additional capital held in reserve (see Other Income).
Other Income
Other income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $ 37,130 and $4,962, respectively. The increase is money earned on deposits and which offsets some of the interest cost of short-term borrowings as previously discussed.
Net Loss
The net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $6,747,435 and $2,470,882, respectively. The large increase in net loss is primarily attributable to the decrease in revenues as previously discussed as well as certain one-time charges related to the former CEO severance. Net loss applicable to Common Stock was $6,747,435 in 2020 versus $2,470,882 in 2019, an increase of $4,276,553. Net loss per common share was $2.03 and $1.39 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has a cash balance of $3,969,100.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the major components of our statements of cash flows data for the periods presented:
Net cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $4,231,439 and $4,019,560, respectively. The slight increase in net cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to higher operating costs which was offset by cash generated from our AI and technical support, the majority of which is recurring in nature.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $287,331 and $219,575, respectively, representing continuing investments in computing and lab equipment during 2020 related to supporting the machine learning activities of TrueVue360.
Net cash provided in financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $8,431,621 and $3,086,083, respectively. Cash flows provided by financing activities during 2020 were primarily attributable to proceeds from the issuance of common stock as a result of our registered direct offering in conjunction with up-listing to a national exchange. We also received $1,410,270 in funding from the CARES Act PPP loan program. This loan, including the deferred interest was forgiven. The Company accrued interest in the amount of $10,577 during 2020.
During 2020, we funded our operations through a combination of the sale of our equity (or equity linked) securities, non-equity based debt and through revenues generated and cash received from ongoing project execution, services and associated maintenance revenues. As of March 26, 2021, we have cash on hand of approximately $7,435,000. We have approximately $140,500 in monthly lease and other mandatory payments, not including payroll and ordinary expenses which are due monthly.
On a long-term basis, our liquidity is dependent on the continuation and expansion of operations and receipt of revenues. Our current capital and revenues are sufficient to fund such expansion although we are now less dependent on timely payments by our customers for projects and work in process, however we expect such timely payments to continue.
Demand for the products and services will be dependent on, among other things, market acceptance of our products and services, the technology market in general, and general economic conditions, which are cyclical in nature. In as much as a major portion of our activities is the receipt of revenues from the sales of our products and services, our business operations may be adversely affected by our competitors and prolonged recession periods although these are not considered to be a factor at present.
Liquidity
Under Accounting Standards Update, or ASU, 2014-15, Presentation of Financial Statements-Going Concern (Subtopic 205-40) (“ASC 205-40”), the Company has the responsibility to evaluate whether conditions and/or events raise substantial doubt about its ability to meet its future financial obligations as they become due within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. As required by ASC 205-40, this evaluation shall initially not take into consideration the potential mitigating effects of plans that have not been fully implemented as of the date the financial statements are issued. Management has assessed the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern in accordance with the requirement of ASC 205-40.
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company had a positive working capital of $2,167,058 and an accumulated deficit of $39,488,150 at December 31, 2020. During the same period in 2019, the Company had a negative working capital of $607,372 and an accumulated deficit of $32,740,715. In previous financial reports, the Company had raised substantial doubt about continuing as a going concern. This was principally due to a lack of working capital prior to an underwritten offering which was completed during the first quarter of 2020 (the “2020 Offering”).
Upon completion of the 2020 Offering of approximately $8,200,000 after payment of expenses and fees, management has secured sufficient working capital to fund the Company for at least 12 months. Although the Company continues to be successful in attracting new business and establishing a backlog of projects, the effects of business delays to starting and implementing identified projects manifested themselves during the year. The Company was able to maintain operations due to this additional working capital which was further bolstered with the CARES Act loan previously discussed. This extra working capital allowed the Company to maintain key staffing and put us in a good position to move forward once the restrictions were lifted. Most importantly, the Company has been successful in maintaining a sufficient working capital cushion despite the setbacks that were encountered during the year.
Management now believes that these actions allow the Company to continue as a going concern for the following 12 months and will continue to grow its business and achieve profitability without the absolute requirement to raise additional capital for existing operations. Management will continue to evaluate these plans in future filings.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet contractual arrangements, as that term is defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. The most significant estimates in the accompanying consolidated financial statements include the allowance on accounts receivable, valuation of deferred tax assets, valuation of intangible and other long-lived assets, estimates of net contract revenues and the total estimated costs to determine progress toward contract completion, valuation of warrants issued with debt and valuation of stock-based awards. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We have identified the accounting policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations.
Revenue Recognition and Contract Accounting
The Company generates revenue from four sources: (1) Technology Systems; (2) Technical Support; (3) Consulting Services and (4) AI Technologies.
Technology Systems
The Company constructs intelligent technology systems consisting of materials and labor under customer contracts. Revenues and related costs on project revenue are recognized based on ASC 606-10-25-27, where control of a good or service transfers over time if the entity’s performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to the entity and the entity has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date including a profit margin or reasonable return on capital. Control is deemed to pass to the customer instantaneously as the goods are manufactured and revenue is recognized accordingly.
In addition, the Company has adopted ASC 606-10-55-21 such that if the cost incurred is not proportionate to the progress in satisfying the performance obligation, we adjust the input method to recognize revenue only to the extent of the cost incurred. Therefore, the Company will recognize revenue at an equal amount to the cost of the goods to satisfy the performance obligation. To accurately reflect revenue recognition based on the input method, the Company has adopted the implementation guidance as set out in ASC 606-10-55-187 through 192.
Under this method, contract revenues are recognized over the performance period of the contract in direct proportion to the costs incurred. Costs include direct material, direct labor, subcontract labor and other allocable indirect costs. All un-allocable indirect costs and corporate general and administrative costs are also charged to the periods as incurred. Any recognized revenues that have not been billed to a customer are recorded as an asset in “contract assets”. Any billings of customers more than recognized revenues are recorded as a liability in “contract liabilities”. However, in the event a loss on a contract is foreseen, the Company will recognize the loss when such loss is determined.
Technical Support
Maintenance and technical support services are provided on both an as-needed and extended-term basis and may include providing both parts and labor. Maintenance and technical support provided outside of a maintenance contract are on an as-requested basis, and revenue is recognized as the services are provided. Revenue for maintenance and technical support provided on an extended-term basis is recognized ratably over the term of the contract.
For sales arrangements that do not involve multiple elements such as professional services, which are of short-term duration, revenues are recognized when services are completed.
Consulting Services
The Company’s consulting services business generates revenues under contract with customers from three sources: (1) Professional Services (consulting and auditing); (2) Software licensing with optional hardware sales; and (3) Customer Service (training and maintenance support).
For sales arrangements that do not involve performance obligations:
(1)
Revenues for professional services, which are of short-term duration, are recognized when services are completed;
(2)
For all periods reflected in this report, software license sales have been one-time sales of a perpetual license to use our software product and the customer also has the option to purchase third-party manufactured handheld devices from us if they purchase our software license. Accordingly, the revenue is recognized upon delivery of the software and delivery of the hardware, as applicable, to the customer;
(3)
Training sales are one-time upfront short-term training sessions and are recognized after the service has been performed; and
(4)
Maintenance/support is an optional product sold to our software license customers under one-year contracts. Accordingly, maintenance payments received upfront are deferred and recognized over the contract term.
AI Technologies
The Company has begun to derive revenue from applications that incorporate artificial intelligence (AI) in the form of predetermined algorithms to provide important operating information to the users of our systems. The revenue generated from these applications of AI consists of an annual application maintenance fee which will be recognized ratably over the year, plus fees for the design, development, testing and incorporation of new algorithms into the system which will be recognized upon completion of each deliverable.
Multiple Elements
Arrangements with customers may involve multiple elements including project revenue and maintenance services in our Intelligent Technology Systems business. Maintenance will occur after the project is completed and may be provided on an extended-term basis or on an as-needed basis. In our consulting services business, multiple elements may include any of the above four sources. Training and maintenance on software products may occur after the software product sale while other services may occur before or after the software product sale and may not relate to the software product. Revenue recognition for a multiple element arrangement is as follows:
Each element is accounted for separately when each element has value to the customer on a standalone basis and there is Company specific objective evidence of selling price of each deliverable. For revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables, the Company allocates the total customer arrangement to the separate units of accounting based on their relative selling prices as determined by the price of the items when sold separately. Once the selling price is allocated, the revenue for each element is recognized using the applicable criteria under GAAP as discussed above for elements sold in non-multiple element arrangements. A delivered item or items that do not qualify as a separate unit of accounting within the arrangement are combined with the other applicable undelivered items within the arrangement. The allocation of arrangement consideration and the recognition of revenue is then determined for those combined deliverables as a single unit of accounting. The Company sells its various services and software and hardware products at established prices on a standalone basis which provides Company specific objective evidence of selling price for purposes of multiple element relative selling price allocation. The Company only sells maintenance services or spare parts based on its established rates after it has completed a system integration project for a customer. The customer is not required to purchase maintenance services. All elements in multiple element arrangements with Company customers qualify as separate units of account for revenue recognition purposes.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated at estimated net realizable value. Accounts receivable are comprised of balances due from customers net of estimated allowances for uncollectible accounts. In determining the collections on the account, historical trends are evaluated, and specific customer issues are reviewed to arrive at appropriate allowances. The Company reviews its accounts to estimate losses resulting from the inability of its customers to make required payments. Any required allowance is based on specific analysis of past due accounts and also considers historical trends of write-offs. Past due status is based on how recently payments have been received from customers.
Long-Lived Assets
The Company evaluates the recoverability of its property, equipment, and other long-lived assets in accordance with FASB ASC 360-10-35-15 “Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets”, which requires recognition of impairment of long-lived assets in the event the net book value of such assets exceed the estimated future undiscounted cash flows attributable to such assets or the business to which such intangible assets relate. This guidance requires that long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles be reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.