ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those indicated by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including but not limited to, the period for which we estimate our cash resources are sufficient, the availability of additional funds, as well as those set forth under “Risk Factors” and those that may be identified from time to time in our reports and registration statements filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The following discussion and analysis is intended to provide an investor with a narrative of our financial results and an evaluation of our financial condition and results of operations. The discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes thereto set forth in “Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Overview
We are a commercial stage biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing novel vaccines. Our first marketed product, HEPLISAV-B® (Hepatitis B Vaccine (Recombinant), Adjuvanted) is approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) for prevention of infection caused by all known subtypes of hepatitis B virus in adults age 18 years and older. We also manufacture and sell CpG 1018, the adjuvant used in HEPLISAV-B. We are working to develop CpG 1018 as a premier vaccine adjuvant through research collaborations and partnerships. Current collaborations are focused on adjuvanted vaccines for COVID-19, pertussis and universal influenza.
In Phase 3 trials, HEPLISAV-B demonstrated faster and higher rates of protection with two doses in one month compared to another currently approved hepatitis B vaccine which requires three doses over six months, with a similar safety profile. HEPLISAV-B is the only two-dose hepatitis B vaccine for adults approved in the U.S.
We have worldwide commercial rights to HEPLISAV-B and we market it in the United States. There are three other vaccines approved for the prevention of hepatitis B in the U.S.: Engerix-B and Twinrix® from GlaxoSmithKline plc and Recombivax-HB® from Merck & Co. In addition, we received Marketing Authorization approval of HEPLISAV-B in February 2021 from the European Commission following a positive recommendation in December 2020 from the European Medicines Agency (“EMA”) Committee for Medicinal Products (“CHMP”) for Human Use for prevention of infection caused by all known subtypes of hepatitis B virus in adults age 18 years and older. We expect to launch HEPLISAV-B in the European Union in late 2021, initially focusing on one or a few key countries where it would be commercially feasible to market HEPLISAV-B on our own or through third-parties.
All of our HEPLISAV-B sales are to certain wholesalers and specialty distributors in the U.S. whose principal customers include independent hospitals and clinics, integrated delivery networks, public health clinics and prisons, the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs and retail pharmacies. For the year ended December 31, 2020, HEPLISAV-B product revenue, net was $36.0 million.
In the third quarter of 2020, we commenced selling our novel adjuvant, CpG 1018, to certain of our collaboration partners for their use in development and/or commercialization of COVID-19 vaccines. For the year ended December 31, 2020, CpG 1018 product revenue, net was $3.3 million. In the third quarter of 2020, we also announced a commercial supply agreement with Valneva Scotland Limited (“Valneva”) to cover the supply of CpG 1018 for up to 190 million doses of their SARS-COV-2 vaccine candidate, subject to the terms of the agreement and contingencies contained therein.
In May 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 16,100,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $5.00 per share. The net proceeds from this offering were approximately $75.4 million, after deducting the underwriting discount and other offering expenses.
In August 2020, we entered into a new At Market Sales Agreement with Cowen (“2020 ATM Agreement”), which replaced the 2017 At Market Sales Agreement (“2017 ATM Agreement”). Under the 2020 ATM Agreement, we can offer and sell up to $150 million of our common stock from time to time. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net cash proceeds of $33.1 million from sales of 8,114,643 shares of our common stock under the 2017 ATM Agreement and 2020 ATM Agreement.
In July 2020, we sold assets related to our immuno-oncology compound, SD-101, to Surefire Medical Inc. d/b/a TriSalus Life Sciences (“TriSalus”). Pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement, we received $5 million upon closing of the transaction and $4 million in December 2020 as reimbursement for certain clinical trial expenses. In addition, we could receive up to an additional $250 million upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory, and commercial milestones and low double-digit royalties based on potential future net sales of product containing SD-101 compound. In the third quarter of 2020, we recognized a gain on sale of SD-101 assets of $6.9 million, net of transaction costs.
COVID-19 Update
We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the evolving effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and are taking proactive efforts designed to protect the health and safety of our workforce, patients and healthcare professionals, and to continue our business operations and advance our goal of bringing important new vaccines to patients as rapidly as possible.
Our customers’ procurement activities coupled with restrictions at healthcare facilities during the pandemic, has negatively affected our sales of HEPLISAV-B. This is consistent with reduced utilization of adult vaccines generally, because focus in healthcare has been acutely placed on the treatment and prevention of COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic continued to disrupt the adult vaccine market in the fourth quarter with market utilization shifting back to a sharp decline from the third quarter recovery trend. The total adult hepatitis B market saw a reduction in utilization of approximately 35% in the fourth quarter compared to the same period last year. In the third quarter, utilization was down approximately 24% from the same period last year. Additionally, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) guidance requiring 14-day spacing of vaccines before and after COVID-19 vaccine administration began to stall other adult vaccine utilization in the month of December and has continued to impact utilization into the first quarter which is a trend we believe will continue throughout the first half of 2021. Although utilization of vaccines generally has decreased during the pandemic, our sales efforts have continued to increase our market share.
We have also seen increased interest in our advanced adjuvant, CpG 1018, from our collaborators who are focused on developing COVID-19 vaccines of their own, as well as other potential vaccine candidates targeted at other indications. As a result, we have been working with our supplier to secure additional manufacturing capacity to help support this increased interest in CpG 1018.
Currently, our HEPLISAV-B post-marketing observational studies are fully enrolled and continuing uninterrupted. Due to the design and conduct of the studies, we do not anticipate an impact to the integrity of the studies from “shelter in place” mandates. The HEPLISAV-B dialysis study is able to continue, because the dialysis treatment is classified under “essential travel” exemptions.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our ability to generate sales and revenues, our regulatory efforts, our corporate development objectives and the value of and market for our common stock, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence at this time. Because of the above and other factors, our results of operations may vary substantially from year to year and from quarter to quarter and, as a result, we believe that period-to-period comparisons of our operating results may not be meaningful and should not be relied upon as being indicative of our future performance. For additional information on the various current and future potential risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read Item 1A. Risk Factors, included herein.
Critical Accounting Policies and the Use of Estimates
The accompanying discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements and the related disclosures, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the balance sheet dates and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses for the periods presented. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, assumptions and judgments described below that have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements, including those related to revenue recognition, research and development activities, stock-based compensation, inventories and leases. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Accounting assumptions and estimates are inherently uncertain and actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies reflect the more critical and significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when the customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations, and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Product Revenue, Net - HEPLISAV-B
We sell HEPLISAV-B to a limited number of wholesalers and specialty distributors in the U.S. (collectively, our “Customers”). Revenues from product sales are recognized when we have satisfied our performance obligation, which is the transfer of control of our product upon delivery to the Customer. The timing between the recognition of revenue for product sales and the receipt of payment is not significant. Because our standard credit terms are short-term and we expect to receive payment in less than one year, there is no significant financing component on the related receivables. Taxes collected from Customers relating to product sales and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from revenues.
Overall, product revenue, net, reflects our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contract. The amount of variable consideration is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. If our estimates differ significantly from actuals, we will record adjustments that would affect product revenue, net in the period of adjustment.
Reserves for Variable Consideration
Revenues from product sales are recorded at the net sales price, which includes estimates of variable consideration such as product returns, chargebacks, discounts, rebates and other fees that are offered within contracts between us and our Customers, healthcare providers, pharmacies and others relating to our product sales. We estimate variable consideration using either the most likely amount method or the expected value method, depending on the type of variable consideration and what method better predicts the amount of consideration we expect to receive. We take into consideration relevant factors such as industry data, current contractual terms, available information about Customers’ inventory, resale and chargeback data and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns, in estimating each variable consideration. The variable consideration is recorded at the time product sales is recognized, resulting in a reduction in product revenue and a reduction in accounts receivable (if the Customer offsets the amount against its accounts receivable) or as an accrued liability (if we pay the amount through our accounts payable process). Variable consideration requires significant estimates, judgment and information obtained from external sources. The amount of variable consideration is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. If our estimates differ significantly from actuals, we will record adjustments that would affect product revenue, net in the period of adjustment. If we were to change any of these judgments or estimates, it could cause a material increase or decrease in the amount of revenue that we report in a particular period. We evaluate our estimates of variable considerations including, but not limited to, product returns, chargebacks and rebates, periodically or when there is an event or change in circumstances that may indicate that our estimates may change. During the fourth quarter of 2020, based on an analysis of historical product returns and customer ordering patterns, we decreased our returns reserve resulting in an increase in HEPLISAV-B product revenue, net of approximately $0.8 million. There were no material adjustments to these estimates for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Product Returns: Consistent with industry practice, we offer our Customers a limited right of return based on the product’s expiration date for product that has been purchased from us. We estimate the amount of our product sales that may be returned by our Customers and record this estimate as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized. We consider several factors in the estimation of potential product returns including expiration dates of the product shipped, the limited product return rights, available information about Customers’ inventory, shelf life of the product and other relevant factors.
Chargebacks: Our Customers subsequently resell our product to healthcare providers, pharmacies and others. In addition to distribution agreements with Customers, we enter into arrangements with qualified healthcare providers that provide for chargebacks and discounts with respect to the purchase of our product. Chargebacks represent the estimated obligations resulting from contractual commitments to sell product to qualified healthcare providers at prices lower than the list prices charged to Customers who directly purchase the product from us. Customers charge us for the difference between what they pay for the product and the ultimate selling price to the qualified healthcare providers. These reserves are established in the same period that the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and accounts receivable. Chargeback amounts are determined at the time of resale to the qualified healthcare providers by Customers, and we issue credits for such amounts generally within a few weeks of the Customer’s notification to us of the resale. Reserves for chargebacks consists of credits that we expect to issue for units that remain in the distribution channel inventories at each reporting period end that we expect will be sold to the qualified healthcare providers, and chargebacks for units that our Customers have sold to the qualified healthcare providers, but for which credits have not been issued.
Trade Discounts and Allowances: We provide our Customers with discounts which include early payment incentives that are explicitly stated in our contracts and are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized.
Distribution Fees: Distribution fees include fees paid to certain Customers for sales order management, data and distribution services. Distribution fees are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized.
Rebates: Under certain contracts, customers may obtain rebates for purchasing minimum volumes of our product. We estimate these rebates based upon the expected purchases and the contractual rebate rate and record this estimate as a reduction in revenue in the period the related revenue is recognized.
Product Revenue, Net - CpG 1018
We also sell our novel adjuvant, CpG 1018, to our collaboration partners for use in their development and/or commercialization of COVID-19 vaccine. We have determined that our collaboration partners meet the definition of customers under ASC 606. Therefore, we accounted for our CpG 1018 sales under ASC 606. Revenues from product sales are recognized when we have satisfied our performance obligation, which is the transfer of control of our product to the customer. Because the timing between the recognition of revenue for product sales and the receipt of payment is less than one year, there is no significant financing component on the related receivables.
Overall, product revenue, net, reflects our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contract. The amount of consideration is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. If our estimates differ significantly from actuals, we will record adjustments that would affect product revenue, net in the period of adjustment.
Collaboration and Manufacturing Service Revenue
We have entered into collaborative arrangements and arrangements to provide manufacturing services to other companies. Such arrangements may include promises to customers which, if capable of being distinct, are accounted for as separate performance obligations. For agreements with multiple performance obligations, we allocate estimated revenue to each performance obligation at contract inception based on the estimated transaction price of each performance obligation. Revenue allocated to each performance obligation is then recognized when we satisfy the performance obligation by transferring control of the promised good or service to the customer. Collaboration and manufacturing service revenue are recorded in other revenue in the consolidated statements of operations.
Research and Development Expenses and Accruals
Research and development expenses include personnel and facility-related expenses, outside contracted services including clinical trial costs, manufacturing and process development costs, research costs and other consulting services and non-cash stock-based compensation. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Amounts due under contracts with third parties may be either fixed fee or fee for service, and may include upfront payments, monthly payments and payments upon the completion of milestones or receipt of deliverables. Non-refundable advance payments under agreements are capitalized and expensed as the related goods are delivered or services are performed.
We contract with third parties to perform various clinical trial activities in the on-going development of potential products. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows to our vendors. Payments under the contracts depend on factors such as the achievement of certain events, successful enrollment of patients, and completion of portions of the clinical trial or similar conditions. Our accrual for clinical trials is based on estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with clinical trial centers and clinical research organizations. We may terminate these contracts upon written notice and we are generally only liable for actual effort expended by the organizations to the date of termination, although in certain instances we may be further responsible for termination fees and penalties. We estimate research and development expenses and the related accrual as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. There have been no material adjustments to the prior period accrued estimates for clinical trial activities during the years presented.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense for restricted stock units and stock options is estimated at the grant date based on the award’s estimated fair value and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the award’s requisite service period, assuming estimated forfeiture rates. Fair value of restricted stock units is determined at the date of grant using the Company’s closing stock price. Our determination of the fair value of stock options on the date of grant using an option-pricing model is affected by our stock price, as well as assumptions regarding a number of subjective variables. We selected the Black-Scholes option pricing model as the most appropriate method for determining the estimated fair value-based measurement of our stock options. The Black-Scholes model requires the use of subjective assumptions which determine the fair value-based measurement of stock options. These assumptions include, but are not limited to, our expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors. In the future, as additional empirical evidence regarding these input estimates becomes available, we may change or refine our approach of deriving these input estimates. These changes could impact our fair value of stock options granted in the future. Changes in the fair value of stock awards could materially impact our operating results.
Our current estimate of volatility is based on the historical volatility of our stock price. To the extent volatility in our stock price increases in the future, our estimates of the fair value of options granted in the future could increase, thereby increasing stock-based compensation cost recognized in future periods. We derive the expected term assumption primarily based on our historical settlement experience, while giving consideration to options that have not yet completed a full life cycle. Stock-based compensation cost is recognized only for awards ultimately expected to vest. Our estimate of the forfeiture rate is based primarily on our historical experience. To the extent we revise this estimate in the future, our share-based compensation cost could be materially impacted in the period of revision. There have been no material adjustments to these estimates during the years presented.
Inventories
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value, on a first-in, first-out (“FIFO”), basis. We primarily use actual costs to determine our cost basis for inventories. Our assessment of market value requires the use of estimates regarding the net realizable value of our inventory balances, including an assessment of excess or obsolete inventory. We determine excess or obsolete inventory based on multiple factors, including an estimate of the future demand for our products, product expiration dates and current sales levels. Our assumptions of future demand for our products are inherently uncertain and if we were to change any of these judgments or estimates, it could cause a material increase or decrease in the amount of inventory reserves that we report in a particular period. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no inventory reserves recognized. During 2018, we recorded $1.0 million in inventory reserves, which is included in cost of sales - product.
We consider regulatory approval of product candidates to be uncertain and product manufactured prior to regulatory approval may not be sold unless regulatory approval is obtained. As such, the manufacturing costs for product candidates incurred prior to regulatory approval are not capitalized as inventory but are expensed as research and development costs. We begin capitalization of these inventory related costs once regulatory approval is obtained.
HEPLISAV-B was approved by the FDA on November 9, 2017, at which time we began to capitalize inventory costs associated with the vial presentation of HEPLISAV-B. In March 2018, we received regulatory approval of the pre-filled syringe (“PFS”) presentation of HEPLISAV-B. Prior to FDA approval of HEPLISAV-B, all costs related to the manufacturing of HEPLISAV-B that could potentially be available to support the commercial launch, were charged to research and development expense in the period incurred as there was no alternative future use. Prior to regulatory approval of PFS, costs associated with resuming operating activities at the Düsseldorf manufacturing facility were also included in research and development expense. Subsequent to regulatory approval of PFS, costs associated with resuming manufacturing activities at the Düsseldorf facility were included in cost of sales - product, until commercial production resumed in mid-2018 at which time these costs were recorded as raw materials inventory.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement includes a lease at inception. Operating leases are included in operating lease right-of-use assets, other current liabilities and long-term portion of lease liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. Right-of-use assets represent our right to use an underlying asset during the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease right-of-use assets and liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. In determining the net present value of lease payments, we use our incremental borrowing rate which represents an estimated rate of interest that we would have to pay to borrow equivalent funds on a collateralized basis at the lease commencement date.
The operating lease right-of-use assets also include any lease payments made and exclude any lease incentives. Our leases may include options to extend or terminate the lease which are included in the lease term when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise any such options. Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the expected lease term. We have elected not to apply the recognition requirements of ASC 842 for short-term leases. We have also elected the practical expedient to not separate lease components from non-lease components.
As lessors, we determine if an arrangement includes a lease at inception. We elected the practical expedient to not separate lease components from non-lease components. Rent revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over the expected lease term and is included in other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Accounting Standards Update 2016-13
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses of Financial Instruments. The standard changes the methodology for measuring credit losses on financial instruments and the timing of when such losses are recorded. For public business entities, excluding smaller reporting companies, this ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019. Furthermore, the one-time determination of whether an entity is eligible to be a smaller reporting company shall be based on an entity’s most recent determination as of November 15, 2019, in accordance with SEC regulations. Because we were a smaller reporting company based on the most recent determination as of November 15, 2019, this ASU and its subsequent updates, will be effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. We are currently evaluating the impact this standard will have on our consolidated financial statements.
Accounting Standards Update 2019-12
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (Topic 740). This ASU simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions and improving consistent application in certain areas of Topic 740. The ASU is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020 with early adoption permitted. We adopted this ASU on January 1, 2021 and the adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Accounting Standards Update 2020-06
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. This ASU simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments. This ASU also requires entities to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments in calculating diluted earnings-per-share. The ASU is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2021 with early adoption permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact this standard will have on our consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
Revenues
Revenues consist of amounts earned from product sales and other revenues. Product revenue, net, includes sales of HEPLISAV-B and CpG 1018 adjuvant.
Revenue from HEPLISAV-B product sales is recorded at the net sales price, which includes estimates of product returns, chargebacks, discounts, rebates and other fees. We sell our novel adjuvant, CpG 1018, to our collaboration partners for use in their development and/or commercialization of COVID-19 vaccine. Overall, product revenue, net, reflects our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contract.
Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we will adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
The following is a summary of our revenues (in thousands, except for percentages):
NM = Not meaningful
2020 versus 2019
HEPLISAV-B revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased primarily due to an increase in sales volume. Due to the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic, most medical centers restricted access to their facilities and focused on providing care to only the most severely affected patients beginning in mid-March 2020, which significantly lowered our sales volume in the second quarter. Utilization of adult vaccines, including HEPLISAV-B, improved in the second half of the year as health care providers gradually expanded their services under strict social distancing rules and our distributors replenished their inventory. Sales fluctuations during the second half of 2020 also included initial stocking orders from a large retail chain and another customer and the effect of seasonal Department of Defense purchases. During the fourth quarter of 2020, based on an analysis of historical product returns and customer ordering patterns, we decreased our returns reserve resulting in an increase in HEPLISAV-B product revenue, net of approximately $0.8 million.
Overall, vaccine utilization is expected to decline significantly in the first quarter of 2021 from the fourth quarter of 2020 to approximately 50% of pre-pandemic levels, which will result in a decrease in HEPLISAV-B revenues in the first quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020. Utilization of adult vaccines will continue to be impacted throughout the first half of 2021 but is expected to return to pre-pandemic levels in the second half of 2021.
In the third quarter of 2020, we began selling our novel adjuvant, CpG 1018, to our collaboration partners for their use in development and/or commercialization of COVID-19 vaccines.
In September 2020, we received $6.3 million from the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (“CEPI”) to scale up our CpG 1018 production and to make available certain quantities of CpG 1018 for purchases to CEPI and its partners. In October 2020, CEPI terminated the agreement and we recognized the $6.3 million in other revenue.
Other revenue also included collaboration revenue related to services performed under a collaboration agreement with Serum Institute of India Pvt. Ltd. and manufacturing service revenue.
2019 versus 2018
For the year ended December 31, 2019, product revenue, net increased due to higher volume as additional healthcare providers completed operational activities required to switch to HEPLISAV-B and existing customers placed repeat orders.
Included in other revenue was collaboration revenue related to services performed in 2019 under a collaboration agreement with Serum Institute of India Pvt. Ltd. Other revenue also included manufacturing service revenue of $0.4 million.
Cost of Sales - Product
Cost of sales - product consists primarily of raw materials, certain fill, finish and overhead costs and any inventory adjustment charges for pre-filled syringes (“PFS”) of HEPLISAV-B and inventory costs to produce CpG 1018 for our collaboration partners. Our HEPLISAV-B PFS finished goods inventory previously included components for which a portion of the manufacturing costs were expensed to research and development prior to the approval of the PFS presentation by the FDA in March 2018. Substantially all the inventory that was previously expensed to research and development has been sold to customers. The following is a summary of our cost of sales - product (in thousands, except for percentages):
2020 versus 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of sales-product increased, as compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to higher unit costs as we produce and then sell inventory that reflects the full cost of manufacturing. Cost of sales - product for the year ended December 31, 2020 also includes $1.4 million of costs to produce CpG 1018 for our collaboration partners. The increase was offset by lower overhead costs and a charge in the third quarter of 2019 related to a terminated batch.
We expect our cost of sales - product for HEPLISAV-B, as a percentage of product sales, net, to stabilize for the foreseeable future, excluding potential unknown one-time charges. We expect our cost of sales-product for CpG 1018 to increase substantially in 2021 due to increased production of CpG 1018 for Valneva and other collaborators.
2019 versus 2018
Cost of sales - product for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily included certain fill, finish and overhead costs for pre-filled syringes (“PFS”) of HEPLISAV-B and costs related to a terminated batch. Our HEPLISAV-B PFS finished goods inventory includes components for which a portion of the manufacturing costs were previously expensed to research and development prior to the approval of the PFS presentation by the FDA in March 2018.
At December 31, 2019, inventories, net increased to $41.3 million from $19.0 million at December 31, 2018 to support increased projected sales.
Cost of Sales - Amortization of Intangible Assets
The following is a summary of our cost of sales - amortization of intangible assets (in thousands, except for percentages):
2020 versus 2019
Cost of sales - amortization of intangible assets consisted of amortization of the intangible asset recorded as a result of sublicense payments to Merck, Sharpe & Dohme Corp. (“Merck”), upon FDA approval of HEPLISAV-B in November 2017. The intangible asset was fully amortized as of April 2020 when the sublicense agreement expired.
2019 versus 2018
Cost of sales - amortization of intangible assets consisted of amortization of the intangible asset recorded as a result of a regulatory milestone and sublicense fees to Coley Pharmaceutical Group, Inc. (“Coley”), Merck and GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals SA (“GSK”), upon FDA approval of HEPLISAV-B in November 2017. The intangible assets related to Coley and GSK were fully amortized in 2018.
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists, primarily, of compensation and related personnel costs (which include benefits, recruitment, travel and supply costs), outside services, allocated facility costs and non-cash stock-based compensation. Outside services consist of costs associated with clinical development, process development, preclinical discovery and development, regulatory filings and research, including fees and expenses incurred by contract research organizations, clinical study sites, and other service providers.
The following is a summary of our research and development expense (in thousands, except for percentages):
2020 versus 2019
Compensation and related personnel costs and non-cash stock-based compensation decreased due to lower research and development headcount as a result of our restructuring in May 2019. In addition, non-cash stock-based compensation included reversal of expenses related to cancellation of certain equity grants in the first quarter of 2020.
The decrease in outside services was primarily the result of winding down of our immuno-oncology programs, partially offset by an increase in outside services due to CpG 1018 development costs at our third-party manufacturing facility to support increased CpG 1018 demand from our collaboration partners for use in their development and/or commercialization of their COVID-19 vaccine candidates.
Facility costs, which are primarily comprised of occupancy and related expenses, decreased due to lower overhead allocation to research and development functions. In addition, facility costs for year ended December 31, 2019 included accelerated depreciation in connection with the restructuring in May 2019.
2019 versus 2018
Compensation and related personnel costs and non-cash stock-based compensation decreased in the 2019 periods compared to the 2018 periods due to lower research and development headcount as a result of our restructuring in May 2019. Outside services in 2019 decreased as compared to the comparable period in 2018 due to an overall reduction in costs to support the development of SD-101 and earlier stage immuno-oncology programs after the restructuring.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense consists primarily of compensation and related costs for our commercial support personnel, medical education professionals and personnel in executive and other administrative functions, including legal, finance and information technology; costs for outside services such as sales and marketing, post-marketing studies of HEPLISAV-B, accounting, commercial development, consulting, business development, investor relations and insurance; legal costs that include corporate and patent-related expenses; allocated facility costs and non-cash stock-based compensation.
The following is a summary of our selling, general and administrative expenses (in thousands, except for percentages):
2020 versus 2019
The increase in compensation and related personnel costs was due to higher headcount resulting from the conversion of the external sales force to our employees effective April 1, 2019, offset by the decrease in business travel due to COVID-19 travel restrictions.
Outside services decreased due to the conversion of the external sales force to our employees effective April 1, 2019 and decrease in costs related to HEPLISAV-B post-marketing studies due to earlier completion of certain milestones in 2019. The decrease was offset by the $2.5 million payment to Symphony Dynamo, Inc. and Symphony Dynamo Holdings LLC (“Holdings”) in connection with the sale of our immuno-oncology compound, SD-101 and an overall increase in costs for sales and marketing activities. The $2.5 million payment was required under our agreement with Holdings entered into in November 2009.
Facility costs, which are primarily comprised of occupancy and related expenses, increased primarily due to higher overhead allocation to selling, general and administrative functions.
Non-cash stock-based compensation decreased due to the retirement of our former CEO in August 2019 and included reversal of expenses related to cancellation of certain equity grants in the first quarter of 2020. The decrease was partially offset by the increase in headcount.
2019 versus 2018
The increase in compensation and related personnel costs and the related decrease in outside services was due to the conversion of the external sales force to our employees effective April 1, 2019. The corresponding decrease in outside services was partially offset by an increase in post-marketing study costs for completion of certain milestones in the HEPLISAV-B post marketing study, and costs for increased sales and marketing activities. Legal costs decreased primarily due to outside counsel costs incurred in the first quarter of 2018 in connection with the loan financing. Facility costs, which include an overhead allocation of occupancy and related expenses, increased primarily due to additional rent costs pursuant to our 5959 Horton Street lease. Non-cash stock-based compensation decreased compared to the prior period due to the timing of vesting of certain stock awards granted in 2017.
Gain on Sale of Assets
In July 2020, we sold assets related to our immuno-oncology compound, SD-101, which included intellectual property, clinical and non-clinical data, regulatory filings, clinical supply inventory and certain contracts to TriSalus. Pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement, we received $5 million upon closing of the transaction and $4 million in December 2020 as reimbursement for certain clinical trial expenses. In addition, we could receive up to an additional $250 million upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory, and commercial milestones and low double-digit royalties based on potential future net sales of product containing SD-101 compound.
In the third quarter of 2020, we recognized a gain on sale of SD-101 assets of $6.9 million, net of transaction costs.
Restructuring
On May 23, 2019, we implemented a strategic organizational restructuring, principally to align our operations around our vaccine business and significantly curtail further investment in our immuno-oncology business. In connection with the restructuring, we reduced our workforce by approximately 80 positions, or by approximately 36%, of U.S.-based personnel. We have completed our restructuring activities and recognized restructuring costs of $13.4 million in 2019.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest income is reported net of amortization of premiums and discounts on marketable securities and includes realized gains on investments. Interest expense includes the stated interest and accretion of discount and end of term fee related to our long-term debt agreement. Sublease income is recognized in connection with our sublease of office and laboratory space. Change in fair value of warrant liability reflects the changes in fair value of warrants issued in connection with equity financing in August 2019. Other includes gains and losses on foreign currency transactions and disposal of property and equipment.
The following is a summary of our other income (expense) (in thousands, except for percentages):
NM = Not meaningful
2020 versus 2019
Interest income decreased primarily due to lower yields on our marketable securities portfolio. Interest expense increased due to the borrowing of the remaining $75.0 million in March 2019 under the term loan agreement with CRG Servicing LLC (“Loan Agreement”). Sublease income increased in connection with our sublease of office and laboratory space located at 5959 Horton Street, Emeryville, California to a third party in July 2019. The change in the fair value of the warrant liability was primarily due to a decrease in our stock price. The change in other was primarily due to foreign currency transactions and related fluctuations in the value of the Euro compared to the U.S. dollar.
2019 versus 2018
Interest expense increased due to the borrowing of the remaining $75.0 million in March 2019 under the Loan Agreement. We recognized sublease income of $2.6 million in connection with our sublease of office and laboratory space located at 5959 Horton Street, Emeryville, California to a third party in July 2019. The change in the fair value of the warrant liability was primarily due to increase in our stock price. The change in other was primarily due to foreign currency transactions and related fluctuations in the value of the Euro compared to the U.S. dollar.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $165.0 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. Since our inception, we have relied primarily on the proceeds from public and private sales of our equity securities, borrowings, government grants and revenues from product sales and collaboration agreements to fund our operations. Our funds are currently invested in money market funds, U.S. treasuries, U.S. government agency securities and corporate debt securities. We currently anticipate that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities as of December 31, 2020, and anticipated revenues from HEPLISAV-B and CpG 1018 will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months from the date of this filing.
Pursuant to our supply agreement with Valneva, in the fourth quarter of 2020, we received payments from Valneva totaling $20.0 million and issued an invoice to Valneva for $17.1 million for advanced payment to purchase specified quantities of CpG 1018 adjuvant in the first half of 2021. We recorded the total amount of $37.1 million as deferred revenue in our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2020.
In February 2018, we entered into a term loan agreement with CRG Servicing LLC. At December 31, 2020, the principal amount of the term loan was $180.9 million, excluding debt discount of $1.1 million. The loan and the related unpaid interest and fees are due in December 2023.
In May 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 16,100,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $5.00 per share. The net proceeds from this offering were approximately $75.4 million, after deducting the underwriting discount and other offering expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 8,005,467 shares of our common stock and received net cash proceeds of $32.3 million pursuant to a 2017 At Market Sales Agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC (“2017 ATM Agreement”) that terminated in August 2020.
On August 6, 2020, we entered into an at-the-market Sales Agreement (the “2020 ATM Agreement”) with Cowen and Company, LLC (“Cowen”), under which we may offer and sell from time to time, at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $150 million through Cowen as our sales agent. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net cash proceeds of $0.8 million resulting from sales of 109,176 shares of our common stock pursuant to the 2020 ATM Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we had $149.1 million remaining under the 2020 ATM Agreement. Subsequent to December 31, 2020 and through February 22, 2021, we sold 2,299,952 shares of common stock for net proceeds of $22.7 million under the 2020 ATM Agreement.
We expect to incur operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in commercialization of HEPLISAV-B and CpG 1018. If we cannot generate a sufficient amount of revenue from product sales, we will need to finance our operations through strategic alliance and licensing arrangements and/or future public or private debt and equity financings. Raising additional funds through the issuance of equity or debt securities could result in dilution to our existing stockholders, increased fixed payment obligations, or both. In addition, these securities may have rights senior to those of our common stock and could include covenants that would restrict our operations.
Our ability to raise additional capital in the equity and debt markets, should we choose to do so, is dependent on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the market demand for our common stock, which itself is subject to a number of development and business risks and uncertainties, our creditworthiness and the uncertainty that we would be able to raise such additional capital at a price or on terms that are favorable to us. In addition, our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by deteriorating global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to and volatility in the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Adequate financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If adequate funds are not available when needed, we may need to significantly reduce our operations while we seek strategic alternatives, which could have an adverse impact on our ability to achieve our intended business objectives.
2020 versus 2019
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $92.3 million of cash for our operations primarily due to our net loss of $75.2 million, of which $21.6 million consisted of non-cash items which included stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, change in fair value of warrant liability, amortization of right-of-use assets, non-cash interest expense, amortization of intangible assets and accretion and amortization on marketable securities. By comparison, during the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $121.3 million of cash for our operations primarily due to our net loss of $152.6 million, of which $58.0 million consisted of non-cash charges such as stock-based compensation, amortization of intangible assets, depreciation and amortization, change in fair value of warrant liability, non-cash interest expense, amortization of right-of-use assets and accretion and amortization on marketable securities. Cash used in our operations during 2020 decreased by $29.0 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we received tenant improvement reimbursements from the landlord of 5959 Horton Street totaling $1.1 million, invested approximately $22.4 million in HEPLISAV-B inventory and approximately $30.4 million to scale up CpG 1018 production. Net cash used in operating activities is also impacted by changes in our operating assets and liabilities due to timing of cash receipts and expenditures.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $26.5 million and $42.8 million, respectively. Cash used in investing activities during 2020 included $22.3 million of net purchases of marketable securities compared to $13.4 million of net purchases of marketable securities during 2019. During each of 2020 and 2019, we paid $7.0 million of sublicense payment to Merck. Cash used in net purchases of property plant and equipment decreased by $18.3 million during 2020 compared 2019. The decrease was, primarily, due to the installation of facility improvements in 2019. In addition, in 2020, we received $6.9 million from the sale of SD-101 assets, net of transaction costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $109.5 million and $154.4 million, respectively. Cash provided by financing activities for 2020 included net proceeds of $75.4 million from our underwritten public offering in May 2020, $32.3 million from our, now terminated, 2017 ATM Agreement and $0.8 million from our 2020 ATM Agreement. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 included net proceeds of $74.3 million from the second tranche of the Loan Agreement, net proceeds of $52.0 million and $13.6 million from the issuance of common stock and Series B Convertible Preferred Stock, respectively, from our underwritten public offering in August 2019 and net proceeds of $13.9 million from the issuance of common stock under our 2017 ATM Agreement.
2019 versus 2018
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $121.3 million of cash for our operations primarily due to our net loss of $152.6 million, of which $58.0 million consisted of non-cash charges such as stock-based compensation, amortization of intangible assets, depreciation and amortization, change in fair value of warrant liability, non-cash interest expense, amortization of right-of-use assets and accretion and amortization on marketable securities. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we used $131.3 million of cash for our operations primarily due to our net loss of $158.9 million, of which $39.3 million consisted of non-cash charges such as stock-based compensation, amortization of intangible assets, depreciation and amortization, non-cash interest expense and accretion and amortization on marketable securities. Cash used in our operations during 2019 decreased by $10.0 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we received tenant improvement reimbursements from the landlord of 5959 Horton Street totaling $7.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we invested approximately $22.3 million in HEPLISAV-B inventory to support increased projected sales. Net cash used in operating activities is impacted by changes in our operating assets, and liabilities due to timing of cash receipts and expenditures.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities was $42.8 million compared to $55.5 million of cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018. Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 included $13.4 million of net purchases of marketable securities compared to $70.7 million of net proceeds from maturities of marketable securities during 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we paid $7.0 million of sublicense payment Merck compared to $11.0 million of milestone and sublicense payments to Coley, Merck and GSK during 2018. Net cash used in the purchases of property plant and equipment increased by $18.2 million from 2018 to 2019. The increase is, primarily, due to the installation of facility improvements.
During the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, net cash provided by financing activities was $154.4 million and $99.1 million, respectively. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 included net proceeds of $74.3 million from the second tranche of the Loan Agreement, net proceeds of $52.0 million and $13.6 million from the issuance of common stock and Series B Convertible Preferred Stock, respectively, from our underwritten public offering in August 2019 and net proceeds of $13.9 million from the issuance of common stock under our 2017 ATM Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we received net cash proceeds of $99.0 million from the Loan Agreement.
Contractual Obligations
The following summarizes our significant contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 and the effect those obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods (in thousands):
We lease our facilities in Emeryville, California and Düsseldorf, Germany.
In July 2019, we entered into an agreement to sublease 23,976 square feet of office space located at 2100 Powell Street, Emeryville, California for our new global headquarters. This sublease agreement will continue until June 30, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we are obligated to make lease payments totaling $1.8 million, plus any operating expenses and taxes over the lease term.
In September 2018, we entered into an agreement to lease 75,662 square feet of laboratory and office space located at 5959 Horton Street, Emeryville, California at the rate of $4.75 per square foot, paid on a monthly basis (“Horton Street Lease”). As of December 31, 2020, we are obligated to make lease payments totaling $53.6 million, plus any operating expenses and taxes over the Horton Street Lease term. In July 2019, we entered into an agreement to sublease the entire 75,662 square feet to a third party at the rate of $5.50 per square foot, paid on a monthly basis (“Horton Street Sublease”). Both the Horton Street Lease and the Horton Street Sublease will continue until March 31, 2031.
We also lease our facility in Düsseldorf, Germany (“Düsseldorf Lease”) under an operating lease that expires in March 2023 with an option to renew for two five-year term. As of December 31, 2020, we are obligated to make lease payments totaling $4.2 million, plus any operating expenses and taxes over the lease term. During 2004, we also established a letter of credit with Deutsche Bank as security for our Düsseldorf Lease in the amount of €0.2 million (Euros). The letter of credit remained outstanding through December 31, 2020 and is collateralized by a certificate of deposit for €0.2 million which has been included in restricted cash in the consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
On February 20, 2018, we entered into a $175.0 million term loan agreement (“Loan Agreement”) with CRG Servicing LLC. We borrowed $100.0 million under the Loan Agreement at closing and the remaining $75.0 million in March 2019 (collectively, “Term Loans”). At our option, until September 30, 2023, a portion of the interest payments may be paid in kind, and thereby added to the principal. Through December 31, 2020, a portion of our interest was paid in kind, which increased the principal amount of the Term Loans to $180.9 million, net of debt discount of $1.1 million. Included in our total contractual obligations of $188.1 million is the principal amount of $175.0 million, paid-in-kind interest of $5.9 million and the backend facility fee of $7.2 million. The Term Loans have a maturity date of December 31, 2023, unless earlier prepaid.
We have entered into material purchase commitments with commercial manufacturers for the supply of HEPLISAV-B, CpG 1018 adjuvant and for clinical research. As of December 31, 2020, our material non-cancelable purchase and other commitments, for the supply of HEPLISAV-B, CpG 1018 and for clinical research totaled $21.7 million.
In addition to the non-cancelable commitments included above, we have entered into contractual arrangements that obligate us to make payments to the contractual counterparties upon the occurrence of future events. In addition, in the normal course of operations, we have entered into license and other agreements and intend to continue to seek additional rights relating to compounds or technologies in connection with our discovery, manufacturing and development programs. Under the terms of the agreements, we may be required to pay future up-front fees, milestones and royalties on net sales of products originating from the licensed technologies, if any, or other payments contingent upon the occurrence of future events that cannot reasonably be estimated.
We also rely on and have entered into agreements with research institutions, contract research organizations and clinical investigators as well as clinical material manufacturers. These agreements are terminable by us upon written notice. Generally, we are liable only for actual effort expended by the organizations at any point in time during the contract through the notice period. As of December 31, 2020, our non-cancelable obligation for services and materials provided by these organizations totaled $0.3 million.
In conjunction with our agreement with Symphony Dynamo, Inc. and Symphony Dynamo Holdings LLC (“Holdings”) in November 2009, we agreed to make contingent cash payments to Holdings equal to 50% of the first $50 million from any upfront, pre-commercialization milestone or similar payments received by us from any agreement with any third party with respect to the development and/or commercialization of cancer and hepatitis C therapies originally licensed to Symphony Dynamo, Inc., including SD-101. In July 2020, we sold assets related to our SD-101 compound to TriSalus. We are obligated to pay Holdings 50% of the contingent pre-commercialization milestone payments that we may receive under the Asset Purchase Agreement. We paid $2.5 million to Holdings in August 2020. No liability has been recorded under this agreement as of December 31, 2020.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by rules enacted by the SEC and accordingly, no such arrangements are likely to have a current or future effect on our financial position.