Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This section of this report includes a number of forward-looking statements that reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. Forward looking statements are often identified by words like: believe, expect, estimate, anticipate, intend, project and similar expressions or words which, by their nature, refer to future events. You should not place undue certainty on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this report. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from historical results or our predictions.
Business
Golden Developing Solutions, Inc. (the “Company”) is developing an online retail business for CBD, hemp oil and health/wellness related products. Through our online retail business, we will offer a broad range of price-competitive products, including traditional vitamins, supplements, and CBD based tinctures, vapes, softgels, among other products.
We will sell our products and services through our Internet website (the "Website"). The Company is developing an online store whose merchandise includes hemp related products, CBD (Cannabidiol) related products and additional products focusing on health and lifestyle.
Initially, we intend to carry in excess of 10 products from two suppliers. We intend to place directed advertising throughout the online store. Advertising will originate through internet or direct-advertising sales by the Company. The company may also use social media outlets such as Facebook, Twitter and Instagram in an effort to attract customers with product specific advertisements or posts.
As an online retail store operating with distribution hub, we will be able to rapidly scale our products and services with minimal marginal costs. Each additional brand, category or product that we add to our platform adds negligible server hosting costs. It also allows us to have a virtual presence and exposure to every regulated cannabis market without establishing a costly physical presence in each state. This minimizes the costs of scaling and required capital while, at the same time, offering a direct role in the cannabis industry without ever touching the plant itself.
We are a startup company in the cannabis industry. Our focus is to create online sales and marketing initiatives to build a dominate brand. Our oil and extracts division will focus on online sales of formulated CBD / hemp oil tinctures, softgels, capsules. We have our Website under development and anticipate to be online in the next few months. We are in the process of acquiring trademarks relative to our products. Agreements with raw material suppliers and related products have been obtained. All supply will come domestically with white label agreements when needed. Online Marketing program in place to drive fast paced growth plan in line with industry. Orders will be handled online and shipped via appropriate carriers from our inventory in leased warehouse. Drop shipping may be used during initial launch phases. Customers for CBD/hemp products expect the highest of quality and consistency and pricing is based on those levels. We expect to be price and quality competitive on the higher end of that scale. All product quality is 100% customer satisfaction guaranteed and products not deemed to be of quality can be returned for a refund. Quality and consistency of quality are needed to avoid returned product issues which could result in financial liability. Online payment gateway being established with backup vendor for online payment gateway in place as well.
Results of Operations
Below is a summary of the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating expenses
Operating expenses decreased by $1,010,840 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, listed below are the major changes to operating expenses:
Professional fees decreased by $133,535 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily was due to reducing operations in the current period associated with disposing of the Company’s two previous businesses.
General and administrative expenses decreased by $877,305 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily was due to reducing operations in the current period associated with disposing of the Company’s two previous businesses.
Other income (expense)
Other income (expense) increased by $450,701 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily as a result of interest expense on the notes payable issued to finance the asset purchase agreements related to the two acquisitions during the year and other convertible notes payable and the Company’s line of credit, and due to a loss on lease settlement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following is a summary of the cash and cash equivalents as of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Summary of Cash Flows
Below is a summary of the Company’s cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $142,022 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to net cash used in operating activities of $862,239 during the same period in 2019. The current period cash outflows relate to the decrease in operations of the Company during 2020. The Company’s net loss of $1,118,444 included a total of $814,182 of non-cash items.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to net cash used in investing activities of $104,755 during the same period in 2019. The prior year cash used in investing activities related to $75,000 for purchase of equipment, and $29,755 related to discontinued operations of the two businesses disposed of.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $37,952 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $1,067,184 during the same period in 2019. The current period amounts consist of $20,792 in net proceeds from lines of credit and notes payable and $37,000 from a convertible note payable. The Company paid a total of $19,840 against its various debt instruments during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. The Company had incurred substantial losses during the year ended December 31, 2019 and as of December 31, 2019, the Company had a working capital deficit. These factors gave rise to substantial doubt that the Company would continue as a going concern. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had $0 cash and no revenue to meets its ongoing operating expenses, and liabilities of $1,143,158 all of which are due within 12 months, and as of December 31, 2020, the Company still had a working capital deficit; accordingly, the substantial doubt of the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern that existed at December 31, 2019 was not alleviated and is still outstanding at December 31, 2020 and up through the date of this report.
The financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 have been prepared on a going concern basis which assumes the Company will be able to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business for the foreseeable future. The Company anticipates future losses in the development of its business raising substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company generating profitable operations in the future and, or, obtaining the necessary financing to meet its obligations and repay its liabilities arising from normal business operations when they come due. Management intends to finance operating costs over the next twelve months with loans or contributions from related parties and, or, the sale of common stock. There is no assurance that this series of events will be satisfactorily completed.
Financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of assets and liabilities that may be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Unrecognized Tax Benefits
The Company uses the liability method, where deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial and income tax reporting purposes. The Company has incurred net losses in past years and, therefore, has no tax liability.
The Company reported no uncertain tax liability as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and expects no significant change to the uncertain tax liability over the next twelve months.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company applies Topic 718 “Share-Based Payments” (“Topic 718”) to share-based compensation, which requires the measurement of the cost of services received in exchange for an award of an equity instrument based on the grant-date fair value of the award. Compensation cost is recognized when the event occurs. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model is used to estimate the fair value of options granted.
The Company accounts for equity-based transactions with non-employees under the provisions of ASC Topic No. 505-50, “Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees” (“Topic No. 505-50”). Topic No. 505-50 establishes that equity-based payment transactions with non-employees shall be measured at the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more reliably measurable.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Prior to the disposal of the Layer Six business, the Company primarily earned revenue from subscription services for its online and mobile cannabis services hub, www.wheresweed.com. This online and mobile service hub allows marijuana business to advertise their location and services offered and allows users of the Company’s website to locate nearby cannabis businesses. As discussed in Note 3, the Company disposed of the Layer Six business in January 2020, and therefore the results of operations, including all revenue, are included in net loss from discontinued operations. With the acquisition of the Infusionz LLC assets in 2019, the Company also recognized revenue from the sales of cannabinoid-based products. The Infusionz business was disposed of in October 2019, and all revenue from the period of ownership of the business is included in net loss from discontinued operations. The Company has also developed an online retail business for CBD, hemp oil and health/wellness related products through the Pura Vida joint venture. The Company has not yet begun to sell inventory products through this online retail business as of December 31, 2020.
Revenue is recognized when control of the services is transferred to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for the services.
Revenue is recognized based on the following five step model:
- Identification of the contract with a customer
- Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
- Determination of the transaction price
- Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
- Recognition of revenue when, or as, the Company satisfies a performance obligation
Performance Obligations
The Company generates revenue from sales of cannabinoid products. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the Company allocates the total transaction price to each performance obligation in an amount based on the estimated relative standalone selling prices of the promised goods or services underlying each performance obligation. The Company uses an observable price to determine the stand-alone selling price for separate performance obligations or a cost plus margin approach when one is not available. Historically the Company’s contracts have not had multiple performance obligations. Revenue related to the sales of products are recognized at the point in time at which control transfers to the buyer.
Sales, value add, and other taxes collected concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. Incidental items that are immaterial in the context of the contract are recognized as expense. Payment terms between invoicing and when payment is due is less than one year. As of December 31, 2020, none of the Company’s contracts contained a significant financing component.
The Company elected the practical expedient to not adjust the amount of revenue to be recognized under a contract with an end user for the effects of time value of money when the timing difference between receipt of payment and recognition of revenue is less than one year.
Transaction Price Allocated to the Remaining Performance Obligations
From time to time, the Company may receive payment for sales of its products from a customer before the goods have shipped. This amount is considered a contract liability and is recorded as deferred revenue. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company had no revenue expected to be recognized in the future related to performance obligations that are unsatisfied (or partially unsatisfied) at the end of the reporting period.
Contract Costs
Costs incurred to obtain a customer contract are not material to the Company. The Company elected to apply the practical expedient to not capitalize contract costs to obtain contracts with a duration of one year or less, which are expensed and included within cost of goods and services.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Estimates are used to determine the amount of variable consideration in contracts, the standalone selling price among separate performance obligations and the measure of progress for contracts where revenue is recognized over time. The Company reviews and updates these estimates regularly.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
As defined in ASC 820” Fair Value Measurements,” fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date (exit price). The Company utilizes market data or assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, including assumptions about risk and the risks inherent in the inputs to the valuation technique. These inputs can be readily observable, market corroborated, or generally unobservable. The Company classifies fair value balances based on the observability of those inputs. ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the use of inputs used in valuation methodologies into the following three levels:
Level 1: Quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets. A quoted price in an active market provides the most reliable evidence of fair value and must be used to measure fair value whenever available.
Level 2: Significant other observable inputs other than Level 1 prices such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities; quoted prices in markets that are not active; or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data.
Level 3: Significant unobservable inputs which reflect a reporting entity’s own assumptions about the assumptions that market participants would use for pricing an asset or liability. For example, level 3 inputs would relate to forecasts of future earnings and cash flows used in a discounted future cash flows method.
The following table summarizes fair value measurements by level at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, measured at fair value on a recurring basis:
The recorded amounts of financial instruments, including cash equivalents, investments, accounts payable, accrued expenses, note payable and loan from related parties approximate their market values as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 due to the intended short-term maturities of these financial instruments.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In preparing the financial statements, management considered all new pronouncements through the date of the report.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (ASU 2016-02). Under ASU No. 2016-2, an entity is required to recognize right-of-use assets and lease liabilities on its balance sheet and disclose key information about leasing arrangements. ASU No. 2016-02 offers specific accounting guidance for a lessee, a lessor and sale and leaseback transactions. Lessees and lessors are required to disclose qualitative and quantitative information about leasing arrangements to enable a user of the financial statements to assess the amount, timing and uncertainty of cash flows arising from leases. For public companies, The Company adopted this standard on January 1, 2019 using the modified retrospective method. The new standard provides a number of optional practical expedients in transition. The Company elected the ‘package of practical expedients’, which permitted the Company not to reassess under the new standard its prior conclusions about lease identification, lease classification and initial direct costs; and all of the new standard’s available transition practical expedients.
On adoption, the Company recognized additional operating liabilities of $102,878, with corresponding Right of Use assets of the same amount based on the present value of the remaining minimum rental payments under current leasing standards for its existing operating leases. Company does not have any leases classified as a finance lease under ASC 842. See Note 7 for additional information on leases.
The new standard also provides practical expedients for a company’s ongoing accounting. The Company elected the short-term lease recognition exemption for its leases. For those leases with a lease term of 12 months or less, the Company will not recognize ROU assets or lease liabilities. The Company also made an accounting policy election to combine lease and non-lease components of operating leases for all asset classes.
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-07, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718) - Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, which aligns the accounting for share-based payment awards issued to employees and nonemployees. Under ASU No. 2018-07, the existing employee guidance will apply to nonemployee share-based transactions (as long as the transaction is not effectively a form of financing), with the exception of specific guidance related to the attribution of compensation cost. The cost of nonemployee awards will continue to be recorded as if the grantor had paid cash for the goods or services. In addition, the contractual term will be able to be used in lieu of an expected term in the option-pricing model for nonemployee awards. The Company adopted the provisions of the guidance on January 1, 2019 with no material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and disclosures.
The Company does not believe that any other recently issued effective pronouncements, or pronouncements issued but not yet effective, if adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.