ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors including, but not limited to, those disclosed in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in other documents filed with the SEC and otherwise publicly disclosed. Please refer to “Forward-Looking Statements” contained within this Item 7 for additional information. This discussion also contains non-GAAP financial measures, which are discussed further below in the section “Non-GAAP Financial Measures”.
For a complete description of our business including our operating policies, investment philosophy and strategy, financing and hedging strategies, and other important information, please refer to Item 1 of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Though 2020 began with an improved interest rate environment for our business and industry as a whole, the impact of the global response to the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic on the financial markets resulted in unprecedented market disruption. Treasury yields moved sharply lower during the first quarter, a trend which continued throughout 2020 until moving higher later in the year as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s approvals of coronavirus vaccines were announced. During the first and second quarters of 2020, economic conditions contracted sharply, and the prices of risk assets declined dramatically as market participants sought liquidity to protect their capital and meet margin calls. In response, the Federal Reserve rapidly reduced the targeted Federal Funds rate and expanded its holdings of U.S. Treasuries and Agency RMBS to support the normal functioning of those markets while other central banks around the globe added liquidity to financial markets. In addition, the U.S. Congress passed the CARES Act to provide economic relief to individuals, businesses, state and local governments, and the health care system. The combination of market interventions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks and the passing of the CARES Act helped to stabilize markets over the balance of the year. Credit spreads and pricing on risk assets also improved throughout the year.
The table below shows examples of credit spreads in basis points for certain investment types in our MBS portfolio as of the end of each quarter since December 31, 2019:
(1) Option adjusted spreads for RMBS are Company estimates using third-party models and market data. UMBS 2.0% coupon was not available in the model until the first quarter of 2020.
(2) Data represents the spread to swap rate on newly issued securities and is sourced from JP Morgan.
The charts below show the highest and lowest U.S. Treasury and swap rates during the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as the rates as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
Our 2020 Performance
For 2020, we generated a total economic return of 15.2% for our common shareholders, which consisted of $1.66 in common dividends declared and an increase of $1.07 in book value per common share to $19.08 as of December 31, 2020. The increase in book value and our comprehensive income of $66.5 million, or $2.88 per common share, for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily driven by improving asset valuations as a result of the credit spread tightening and declining funding costs as a result of the reduction in the targeted Federal Funds rate mentioned above. Realized and unrealized gains from MBS and TBA securities, net of hedges were approximately $1.83 per common share, driving a large part of our comprehensive income and total economic return for the year. Our net interest income increased 14% from the year ended December 31, 2019 despite a 29% decline in the average balance of interest earning assets and a 66 basis point decline in effective yield on our assets. The increase in net interest income is due to a smaller average balance of borrowings at a lower cost of financing for 2020 versus 2019. Despite the increase in net interest income, our core net operating income to common shareholders, a non-GAAP measure, declined 9% versus 2019 primarily due to higher general and administrative and other operating expenses. In addition, though our drop income for 2020 increased $8.8 million compared to 2019, it was outpaced by a decline of $(14.5) million in net periodic interest benefit from interest rate swaps.
Dynex’s results for 2020 reflect how actively we managed our portfolio and risk position as well as the strategic allocation of our capital, which enabled us to take advantage of opportunities that arose during the evolving economic conditions discussed above. As we indicated at the beginning of 2020, we foresaw a higher risk environment building in the global financial markets, so we prepared Dynex to weather increased volatility by increasing liquidity and decreasing leverage. In early March, we strategically timed the sale of approximately 38% of our portfolio, primarily Agency RMBS, monetizing gains of $84.8 million before asset prices began to fall during the market’s initial response to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S. In April, we monetized additional gains of $193.1 million from sales of Agency CMBS as credit spreads on those assets had tightened relative to spreads at the time of purchase. Beginning in May, we doubled the investment portfolio balance to capture wider spreads and returns in Agency RMBS just prior to credit spread tightening in the latter half of the second quarter. These purchases combined with the sales of Agency CMBS in April shifted our asset allocation back to predominantly Agency RMBS and TBA securities. Throughout the remainder of 2020, we maintained a diversified investment portfolio, positioning the balance sheet to reap the benefit of recovering asset prices through year-end. We shifted into lower coupon specified pools of Agency RMBS in order to mitigate the impact of prepayment risk on our earnings, realizing an additional gain of $9.4 million from sales of a portion of our higher coupon Agency RMBS. We also invested in lower coupon TBA securities in order to take advantage of dollar roll specialness. As credit spreads tightened further toward the end of the year, we realized gains of $20.8 million through sales of additional Agency CMBS whose asset prices we believed were not reflecting potential cash flow disruptions that may occur over time.
The changes made to the size and composition of our investment portfolio during 2020 warranted continuous risk management, and, as a result, our portfolio of hedging instruments as of December 31, 2020 is substantially different from
that of December 31, 2019. As interest rates rallied in the first quarter of 2020 and we sold assets, and because margin requirements increased substantially on interest rate swaps, we either terminated our interest rate swap agreements or chose not to replace these agreements upon expiration. The termination of the majority of our interest rate swaps during the first quarter comprised the majority of our net loss of $182.9 million on those instruments during 2020 with those losses being more than offset by gains on the investments being hedged. Because we anticipate funding costs to remain low in the near-term due to the Federal Reserve’s indication that it will maintain the targeted Federal Funds Rate at 0% to 0.25% for an extended period of time, we have shifted our interest rate hedging strategy to focus on capital preservation. As we re-invested our capital over the balance of the year, we began using interest rate swaptions, U.S. Treasury futures, and options on U.S. Treasury futures because we believe these hedging instruments have better liquidity and more favorable margin requirements than interest rate swaps. We believe U.S. Treasury futures and options on U.S. Treasury futures protect book value from rising interest rates but minimize risk of liquidity loss if interest rates fall better than interest rate swaps. Interest rate swaptions also mitigate interest rate volatility and convexity risk, but over a longer term versus U.S. Treasury options.
Current Outlook
We believe the current investment environment is favorable, and there is potential for continuing improvement in the second half of 2021. Borrowing rates remain very low with short-term interest rates near 0% and market volatility remains somewhat muted given the historic monetary stimulus measures of the Federal Reserve. Nonetheless, we continue to maintain our discipline of planning for future economic or market surprises. The global economy is largely supported by central banks and global debt continues to increase excessively, which pushes against lower interest rates and makes markets more vulnerable to exogenous shocks. Though fiscal stimulus in the U.S. as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic has helped bolster economic activity, the efficacy and outcome of these actions are unknown, and the risk for policy mistakes remains high.
In the near term, uncertainty remains as to how quickly and efficiently the current vaccines will positively offset the negative impacts of the pandemic. In the medium term, we believe the stimulus coupled with the impact of more vaccinations will eventually lead to a period of higher growth as more of our services-driven economy is able to reboot. Longer-term, we believe the world has been permanently reshaped by the global pandemic, and its impact will continue for years across broad segments of our economy, and therefore we continue to factor its lasting impact in shaping our macroeconomic view.
Currently, we believe one of the more probable scenarios for 2021 is a steepening yield curve, which typically offers better opportunities to invest at higher yields, especially as prepayments slow. While financing costs are expected to remain at close to 0% through 2023, we believe longer-term interest rates will likely face pressure from the increased supply of U.S. Treasuries as well as possible increases in real and expected inflation as the economy begins recovery. We expect this will likely result is higher long-term Treasury yields. In addition to slower prepayments, Agency RMBS spreads typically widen in a steeper yield curve environment because of increased competition with other assets, such as higher yielding Treasuries. Furthermore, we believe realized volatility is usually higher in a steeper yield curve environment, which has the potential to further increase our rate of return.
While we believe a steepening yield curve is probable in 2021, we have planned for other potential scenarios that may unfold, including the risk of an exogenous event which we believe remains high. As a result, we continue to focus on maintaining a highly liquid position and investing in Agency MBS where the Federal Reserve is providing material support. Also, though we do not expect dollar roll specialness to continue at the same level as what we experienced in the latter half of 2020, we do expect our 2021 results to benefit from our continued investment in TBA securities, but to a lesser degree. Our leverage targets, including TBA securities, remain between 6-9 times shareholders’ equity, and we will actively increase or decrease leverage based on the risk environment and the expected rate of return on available assets. Longer term, we maintain our belief that the demographics behind the housing sector continue to support our investment thesis of investing in high quality, highly liquid U.S.-based housing assets, and we maintain our focus on capital preservation while generating returns over the long term.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to the Company's operating results presented in accordance with GAAP, the information presented above and within Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains the following non-GAAP financial measures: core net operating income to common shareholders (including per common share), adjusted net interest income and the related metric adjusted net interest spread.
Because these measures are used in the Company's internal analysis of financial and operating performance, management believes that they provide greater transparency to our investors of management's view of our economic performance. Management also believes the presentation of these measures, when analyzed in conjunction with the Company's GAAP operating results, allows investors to more effectively evaluate and compare the performance of the Company to that of its peers, although the Company's presentation of its non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to other similarly-titled measures of other companies. Reconciliations of core net operating income to common shareholders and adjusted net interest income to the related GAAP financial measures are provided below and within “Results of Operations”.
Management views core net operating income to common shareholders as an estimate of the Company’s financial performance based on the effective yield of its investments, net of financing costs and other normal recurring operating income/expense, net. In addition to the non-GAAP reconciliation set forth below, which derives core net operating income to common shareholders from GAAP comprehensive income (loss) to common shareholders, core net operating income to common shareholders can also be determined by adjusting net interest income to include interest rate swap periodic interest benefit/cost, drop income on TBA securities, general and administrative expenses, and preferred dividends. Drop income generated by TBA dollar roll positions, which is included in "gain (loss) on derivatives instruments, net" on the Company's consolidated statements of comprehensive income, is included in core net operating income and in adjusted net interest income because management views drop income as the economic equivalent of net interest income (interest income less implied financing cost) on the underlying Agency security from trade date to settlement date. Management also includes interest rate swap periodic interest benefit/cost, which is also included in "gain (loss) on derivatives instruments, net", in adjusted net interest income because interest rate swaps are used by the Company to economically hedge the impact of changing interest rates on its borrowing costs from repurchase agreements, and therefore represent a cost of financing in addition to GAAP interest expense. However, these non-GAAP measures do not provide a full perspective on our results of operations, and therefore, their usefulness is limited. For example, these non-GAAP measures do not include gains or losses from available-for-sale investments, changes in fair value of and costs of terminating interest rate swaps, as well as realized and unrealized gains or losses from other instruments used by management to economically hedge the impact of changing interest rates on the fair value of the Company’s portfolio and book value per common share. As a result, these non-GAAP measures should be considered as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for, the Company's GAAP results as reported on its consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
(1) Amount includes unrealized gains and losses from changes in fair value of derivatives and realized gains and losses on terminated derivatives and excludes net periodic interest benefit/cost incurred on effective interest rate swaps outstanding during the period and TBA drop income.
(2) Amounts have been adjusted to reflect the effect of the 1-for-3 reverse stock split.
(3) TBA drop income is calculated by multiplying the notional amount of the TBA dollar roll positions by the difference in price between two TBA securities with the same terms but different settlement dates. The impact of TBA drop income on adjusted net interest spread includes the implied average funding cost of TBA dollar roll transactions during the periods indicated.
(4) Amount recorded as a portion of "interest expense" in accordance with GAAP related to the amortization/accretion of the balance remaining in accumulated other comprehensive loss as a result of the Company's discontinuation of cash flow hedge accounting effective June 30, 2013.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Investment Portfolio
As of December 31, 2020, our investment portfolio is comprised mostly of Agency fixed-rate investments. Since December 31, 2019, we have shifted our investment portfolio away from Agency CMBS and as of December 31, 2020, our portfolio is predominantly comprised of Agency RMBS which offers more liquidity and in our view a more attractive risk/return profile versus Agency CMBS in the current market environment. We sold the majority of our Agency CMBS in 2020 as risk spreads declined sharply, leading to higher prices and diminishing returns on this type of investment. The following chart compares the composition of our MBS portfolio including TBA securities as of the dates indicated:
(1) Includes TBA positions at their implied market value as if settled which are accounted for as “derivative assets (liabilities)” on our consolidated balance sheet.
(2) Total includes other non-Agency MBS investments of $1.3 million and $1.7 million for the respective periods shown.
RMBS. As noted in the table below, as of December 31, 2020, we are invested in lower coupon investments to mitigate the risk of loss of premiums due to early prepayment given the lower interest rate environment in 2020 while keeping a modest allocation to specified pools of 4.0% coupon as protection in case interest rates rise. Our lower coupon investments also have lower premiums relative to higher coupon assets which further protects our earnings when prepayments occur. Additionally, since December 31, 2019, we have increased our investment in TBA securities, including 15-year fixed-rate TBA, as implied financing rates for dollar roll transactions have been lower than the financing rates for
repurchase agreement borrowings we typically use to finance specified pools. Because TBA securities have higher relative liquidity, these transactions allow more flexibility should we decide or find it necessary to reduce leverage.
The following tables compare our fixed-rate Agency RMBS investments including TBA dollar roll positions as of the dates indicated:
(1) Implied cost basis of TBAs represents the forward price to be paid (received) for the underlying Agency MBS.
(2) Fair value of TBAs is the implied market value of the underlying Agency security as of the end of the period.
(3) TBAs are included on the consolidated balance sheet within “derivative assets/liabilities” at their net carrying value which is the difference between their implied market value and implied cost basis. Please refer to Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(4) TBAs are excluded from this calculation as they do not have a defined weighted-average loan balance or age until mortgages have been assigned to the pool.
(5) Constant prepayment rate (“CPR”) represents the 3-month CPR of Agency RMBS held as of date indicated. Securities with no prepayment history are excluded from this calculation.
(6) Duration measures the sensitivity of a security's price to the change in interest rates and represents the percent change in price of a security for a 100-basis point increase in interest rates. We calculate duration using third-party financial
models and empirical data. Different models and methodologies can produce different estimates of duration for the same securities.
CMBS. During the second and third quarters of 2020, we sold a substantial portion of our Agency CMBS, realizing gains on investments on which credit spreads had tightened and for which we believed risks of continued investment outweighed potential returns. The overall composition of the CMBS in our investment portfolio has shifted to more seasoned investments with a higher probability of appreciation in the underlying collateral versus newer issue bonds.
The following table presents information about our CMBS investments by year of origination as of the dates indicated:
(1) Months to estimated maturity is an average weighted by the amortized cost of the investment.
(2) The weighted average coupon (“WAC”) is the gross interest rate of the security weighted by the outstanding principal balance.
CMBS IO. The following table presents our CMBS IO investments by year of origination as of the periods indicated:
(1) Remaining weighted average life (“WAL”) represents an estimate of the number of months of contractual cash flows remaining for the investments by year of origination.
The weighted average interest rate for our CMBS IO was 0.56% as of December 31, 2020 and 0.65% as of December 31, 2019.
Effective yields on CMBS IO securities are dependent upon the performance of the underlying loans. Our return on these investments may be negatively impacted if the loans default, resulting in foreclosures, or liquidations of the loan collateral. Non-Agency-issued securities are generally expected to have a higher risk of default than Agency CMBS IO. We are mostly invested in senior tranches of these securities where we have evaluated the credit profile of the underlying loan pool and can monitor credit performance in order to mitigate our exposure to losses. The majority of our non-Agency CMBS IO investments are investment grade-rated with the majority rated ‘AAA’ by at least one of the nationally recognized statistical rating organizations. All of our non-Agency CMBS IO were originated prior to 2017, the majority of which we believe have had underlying property value appreciation.
Since the economic impacts of COVID-19 began in March, servicers are reporting an increase in delinquencies on loans underlying our non-Agency CMBS IO and have taken loss mitigation actions including loan forbearance or allowing the borrower to make loan payments using replacement reserve or similar property related funds. Most of the increases in delinquencies thus far have been in the retail and hotel sectors and have nominally impacted cash flows and yields on the securities. Considering the characteristics of our non-Agency CMBS IO and the actions taken by servicers so far to work with borrowers through various relief measures, we have not seen evidence of and do not currently expect a material adverse effect on our future cash flows for non-Agency CMBS IO. However, the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on the global economy and on the loans underlying any of our securities remains uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time.
Non-Agency issued CMBS IO are backed by loans secured by a number of different property types which are shown in the table below as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Other property types collateralizing non-Agency CMBS IO do not comprise more than 5% individually.
Repurchase Agreements
We use leverage to enhance the returns on our invested capital by pledging our investments as collateral for borrowings primarily through the use of uncommitted repurchase agreements with major financial institutions and broker-dealers. Repurchase agreements generally have original terms to maturity of overnight to six months, though in some instances we may enter into longer-dated maturities depending on market conditions. We pay interest on our repurchase agreement borrowings based on short-term rate indices that historically closely track LIBOR and are fixed for the term of the borrowing.
Please refer to Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained within this Annual Report on Form 10-K as well as “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” contained within this Item 7 for additional information relating to our repurchase agreement borrowings.
Derivative Assets and Liabilities
We use derivative instruments to economically hedge our exposure to adverse changes in interest rates resulting from our ownership of primarily fixed-rate investments financed with short-term repurchase agreements. Changes in interest rates can impact net interest income, the market value of our investments, and book value per common share. We regularly monitor and frequently adjust our hedging portfolio in response to many factors including, but not limited to, changes in our investment portfolio as well as our expectation of future interest rates, including the absolute level of rates and the slope of the yield curve versus market expectations. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 62% of our MBS portfolio including TBA securities were hedged with these interest rate derivatives. Please refer to Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for details on our interest rate derivative instruments as well as “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk” in