ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS ("MD&A") OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
The purpose of the MD&A is to present information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and cash flows for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 and our financial condition as of March 31, 2021. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our financial statements and notes.
The MD&A is organized in the following sections:
•Background
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
•Contractual Obligations
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion includes a comparison of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020. A comparison of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 may be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” on Form 10-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on June 1, 2020.
Background
DXC helps global companies across the entire Enterprise Technology Stack, running their mission critical systems and operations while modernizing IT, optimizing data architectures, and ensuring security and scalability across public, private and hybrid clouds.
We generate revenue by offering a wide range of information technology services and solutions primarily in North America, Europe, Asia, and Australia. We operate through two segments: Global Business Services ("GBS") and Global Infrastructure Services ("GIS"). We market and sell our services directly to customers through our direct sales offices around the world. Our customers include commercial businesses of many sizes and in many industries and public sector enterprises.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain financial data for fiscal 2021 and 2020:
Fiscal 2021 Highlights
Fiscal 2021 financial highlights include the following:
•Fiscal 2021 revenues were $17,729 million, a decrease of 9.4% as compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily due to project terminations, the disposition of the U.S. State and Local Health and Human Services business ("HHS") business at the beginning of the third quarter of fiscal 2021, decrease in run-rate project volume, and project completions, offset by contributions from our Luxoft acquisition which was executed during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 and additional services provided to new and existing customers. Refer to the section below captioned "Revenues."
•Fiscal 2021 net loss and diluted loss per share were $146 million and $0.59, respectively. Net loss decreased by $5,212 million during fiscal 2021 as compared to the prior fiscal year. The decrease was primarily due to goodwill impairment offset by a gain on arbitration recognized in the prior year with fiscal 2021 benefiting from a gain on disposition of the HHS business, cost optimization realized in the current year and a reduction in revenue in the current year previously mentioned. Refer to the section below captioned "Cost and Expenses." Net loss included the cumulative impact of certain items of $773 million during fiscal 2021, reflecting restructuring costs, transaction, separation and integration-related costs, amortization of acquired intangible assets, impairment losses, gains on dispositions, pension and other post-retirement benefit ("OPEB") actuarial and settlement losses, debt extinguishment costs, and tax adjustment. This compares with net loss and diluted loss per share of $5,358 million and $20.76, respectively, for fiscal 2020.
•Fiscal 2021 income tax expense increased significantly over fiscal 2020 as a result of the gain on disposition of the HHS business, which included the impact of non-tax deductible goodwill. Fiscal 2020 income tax expense also reflected the impact of non-tax deductible goodwill impairments.
•Our cash and cash equivalents were $2,968 million at March 31, 2021.
•We generated $124 million of cash from operations during fiscal 2021, as compared to $2,350 million during fiscal 2020.
Revenues
During fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, the distribution of our revenues across geographies was as follows:
The decrease in revenues for fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020 reflects project terminations, the disposition of the HHS business at the beginning of the third quarter of fiscal 2021, decrease in run-rate project volume, and project completions offset by contributions from our Luxoft acquisition which was executed during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 and additional services provided to new and existing customers. Fiscal 2021 revenues included a favorable foreign currency exchange rate impact of 1.7%, primarily driven by the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Australian Dollar, Euro, and British Pound.
For a discussion of risks associated with our foreign operations, see Part I, Item 1A "Risk Factors" of this Annual Report.
As a global company, over 66% of our fiscal 2021 revenues were earned internationally. As a result, the comparison of revenues denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, from period to period, is impacted by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Constant currency revenues are a non-GAAP measure calculated by translating current period activity into U.S. dollars using the comparable prior period’s currency conversion rates. This information is consistent with how management views our revenues and evaluates our operating performance and trends. The table below summarizes our constant currency revenues:
Global Business Services
Our GBS revenues were $8.3 billion for fiscal 2021, a decrease of 8.5% compared to fiscal 2020. GBS revenue in constant currency decreased 10.1% compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease in GBS revenues was primarily due to the disposition of the HHS business at the beginning of the third quarter of fiscal 2021, project completions, and decrease in run-rate project volume. The decrease in revenue for fiscal 2021 was partially offset by contributions from our Luxoft acquisition which was executed during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 and additional services provided to existing customers.
Global Infrastructure Services
Our GIS revenues were $9.4 billion for fiscal 2021, a decrease of 10.3% compared to fiscal 2020. GIS revenue in constant currency decreased 11.9% compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease in GIS revenues reflects project completions, terminations, and decrease in run-rate project volume. The decrease in revenue for fiscal 2021 was partially offset by additional services provided to new and existing customers.
During fiscal 2021, GBS and GIS had contract awards of $11.0 billion and $8.8 billion, respectively, compared with $9.0 billion and $8.7 billion, respectively, during fiscal 2020.
Costs and Expenses
Our total costs and expenses were as follows:
The 30.4 point decrease in total costs and expenses as a percentage of revenue for fiscal 2021 primarily reflects gains net of losses on dispositions in the current year and our fiscal 2020 goodwill impairment losses, partially offset by the gain on arbitration award that didn’t occur in fiscal 2021.
Costs of Services
Cost of services, excluding depreciation and amortization and restructuring costs ("COS"), was $14.1 billion for fiscal 2021, as compared to $14.9 billion in fiscal 2020. COS decreased $0.8 billion compared to the prior fiscal year. The decrease was primarily due to cost optimization savings partially offset by $190 million in impairments realized during fiscal 2021. The majority of impairments were on assets pre-purchased through preferred vendor agreements, which are scheduled to expire in fiscal 2022. The remainder of impairments primarily relate to software. COS as a percentage of revenue increased 3.5% as compared to the prior fiscal year. The increase was driven by a decline in revenue exceeding associated cost reductions that were further impacted by asset impairment during the current fiscal year.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense, excluding depreciation and amortization and restructuring costs ("SG&A"), was $2.1 billion for fiscal 2021, consistent with fiscal 2020. SG&A as a percentage of revenue increased 1.2%, compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was driven by a reduction in revenue during the current fiscal year.
Transaction, separation and integration-related costs, included in SG&A, were $358 million during fiscal 2021, as compared to $318 million during fiscal 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation expense was $754 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to $643 million in fiscal 2020. Depreciation expense increased $111 million due to an increase in newly capitalized assets and assets placed into service.
Amortization expense was $1,216 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to $1,299 million in fiscal 2020. Amortization expense decreased $83 million primarily due to a decrease in customer related intangibles related to the disposition of the HHS business at the beginning of the third quarter of fiscal 2021. See Note 3 - "Divestitures" for additional information.
Goodwill Impairment Losses
DXC recognized goodwill impairment charges totaling $6,794 million during fiscal 2020. The impairment charges were primarily the result of a sustained decline in market capitalization during the fiscal 2020. See Note 12 - "Goodwill" for additional information.
Restructuring Costs
Restructuring costs represent severance related to workforce optimization programs and expense associated with facilities and data center rationalization.
During fiscal 2021, management approved global cost savings initiatives designed to better align our workforce and facility structures. Total restructuring costs recorded, net of reversals, during fiscal 2021 and 2020 were $551 million and $252 million, respectively. The net amounts recorded included $13 million and $10 million of pension benefit augmentations for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, owed to certain employees under legal or contractual obligations. These augmentations will be paid as part of normal pension distributions over several years.
See Note 22 - "Restructuring Costs" for additional information about our restructuring actions.
Interest Expense and Interest Income
Interest expense for fiscal 2021 was $361 million, as compared to $383 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to lower interest rates on finance leases, a reduction in interest charges within our multicurrency cash pools, and retirement of debt instruments. The decrease in interest expense for fiscal 2021 was partially offset by increased amounts drawn on our revolving credit facility.
Interest income for fiscal 2021 was $98 million, as compared to $165 million in fiscal 2020. The year-over-year decrease in interest income was primarily driven by interest income in the second quarter of fiscal year 2020 related to arbitration discussed below under the caption “Gain on Arbitration Award" and lower income from our multicurrency cash pools and money market accounts.
Debt Extinguishment Costs
During fiscal 2021, we recorded $41 million of debt extinguishment costs within the consolidated statement of operations, which consists primarily of costs related to the redemption of 4.00% Senior Notes due fiscal 2024. There were no debt extinguishment costs recorded in fiscal 2020.
Gain on Dispositions
During fiscal 2021, DXC sold its HHS business for $5.0 billion which resulted in an estimated pre-tax gain on sale of $2,014 million, net of closing costs. Insignificant businesses were also sold during fiscal 2021 that resulted in a loss of $10 million.
Gain on Arbitration Award
During the second quarter of fiscal 2020, DXC received final arbitration award proceeds of $666 million related to the HPE Enterprise Services merger completed in fiscal 2018. The arbitration award included $632 million in damages that were recorded as a gain. The remaining $34 million of the award related to pre-award interest. Dispute details are subject to confidentiality obligations.
Other Expense (Income), Net
Other expense (income), net comprises non-service cost components of net periodic pension income, movement in foreign currency exchange rates on our foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities and the related economic hedges, equity earnings of unconsolidated affiliates and other miscellaneous gains and losses.
The components of other expense (income), net for fiscal 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
The $822 million decrease in other income for fiscal 2021, as compared to the prior fiscal year, was due to a year-over-year decrease of $768 million in non-service components of net periodic pension income attributable to changes in mark-to-market actuarial assumptions and asset valuations, a year-over-year unfavorable foreign currency impact of $39 million, and a $15 million decrease in other gains related to sales of non-operating assets.
Taxes
Our effective tax rate ("ETR") on income (loss) from continuing operations, before taxes, for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019 was 122.3%, 2.5% and 19% respectively. A reconciliation of the differences between the U.S. federal statutory rate and the ETR, as well as other information about our income tax provision, is provided in Note 13 - "Income Taxes."
In fiscal 2021, the ETR was primarily impacted by:
•Impact of the HHS and other business divestitures, which increased tax expense and increased the ETR $344 million and 52.6%, respectively. The HHS tax gain increased tax expense and the ETR as the tax basis of assets sold, primarily goodwill, was lower than the book basis.
•Continued losses in countries where we are recording a valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets, primarily in Belgium, Denmark, Italy, France, Luxembourg, and U.S., and an impairment of the full German deferred tax asset, which increased income tax expense and increased the ETR by $1,565 million and 239.3%, respectively.
•An increase in Income Tax and Foreign Tax Credits, which decreased income tax expense and decreased the ETR by $319 million and 48.7%, respectively.
•Local losses on investments in Luxembourg that increased the foreign rate differential and decreased the ETR by $1,226 million and 187.5%, respectively, with an offsetting increase in the ETR due to an increase in the valuation allowance of the same amount.
•The Company recognized adjustments to uncertain tax positions that increased the overall income tax expense and the ETR by $112 million and 17.2% respectively.
In fiscal 2020, the ETR was primarily impacted by:
•Non-deductible goodwill impairment charge, which increased income tax expense and increased the ETR by $1,482 million and 28.3%, respectively.
•Non-taxable gain on the arbitration award, which decreased income tax expense and decreased the ETR by $186 million and 3.6%, respectively
•A change in the net valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets, primarily in Australia, Brazil, China, Luxembourg, and Singapore, which increased income tax expense and increased the ETR by $631 million and 12.1% respectively.
•An increase in Income Tax and Foreign Tax Credits, primarily relating to research and development credits recognized for prior years, which decreased income tax expense and decreased the ETR by $135 million and 2.6%, respectively.
•Local losses on investments in Luxembourg that increased the foreign rate differential and decreased the ETR by $637 million and 12.2%, respectively, with an offsetting increase in the ETR due to an increase in the valuation allowance of the same amount.
In fiscal 2019, the ETR was primarily impacted by:
•Local tax losses on investments in Luxembourg that decreased the foreign tax rate differential and decreased the ETR by $360 million and 23.7%, respectively, with an offsetting increase in the ETR due to an increase in the valuation allowance of the same amount.
•A change in the net valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets, primarily in Luxembourg, Germany, Spain, U.K., and Switzerland, which increased income tax expense and increased the ETR by $256 million and 16.9%, respectively.
•A decrease in the transition tax liability and a change in tax accounting method for deferred revenue, which decreased income tax expense and decreased the ETR by $66 million and 4.3%, respectively.
The IRS is examining the Company's federal income tax returns for fiscal 2008 through the tax year ended October 31, 2018. With respect to CSC's fiscal 2008 through 2017 federal tax returns, the Company has entered into negotiations for a resolution on the years under audit through settlement with the IRS Office of Appeals. The IRS examined several issues for these years that resulted in various audit adjustments. The Company and the IRS Office of Appeals have an agreement in principle as to some of these adjustments, and we disagree with the IRS’ disallowance of certain losses and deductions resulting from restructuring costs and tax planning strategies in previous years. As we believe we will ultimately prevail on the technical merits of the disagreed items and intend to challenge them in the IRS Office of Appeals or Tax Court, these matters are not fully reserved and would result in a federal and state tax expense of $405 million (including estimated interest and penalties) and related cash cost for the unreserved portion of the these items if we do not prevail in Tax Court. We do not expect these matters that proceed to tax court to be resolved in the next 12 months. We have received a notice of deficiency with respect to fiscal 2011 and 2013, and have filed a petition in Tax Court with respect to fiscal 2013 and expect to file in Tax Court with respect to fiscal 2011 in the first quarter of fiscal 2022. We also expect fiscal 2010 to proceed to Tax Court.
The Company has agreed to extend the statute of limitations for fiscal years 2008 through 2012 through August 31, 2021 to provide for IRS completion of their review. The Company has agreed to extend the statute of limitations for fiscal years 2014 through fiscal 2017 through October 31, 2021 to provide for IRS completion of their review.
The Company expects to reach a resolution for all years no earlier than the first quarter of fiscal 2023 except for agreed issues related to fiscal 2008 through 2010 and fiscal 2011 through 2017 federal tax returns, which are expected to be resolved within twelve months.
In addition, the Company may settle certain other tax examinations, have lapses in statutes of limitations, or voluntarily settle income tax positions in negotiated settlements for different amounts than we have accrued as uncertain tax positions. The Company may need to accrue and ultimately pay additional amounts for tax positions that previously met a more likely than not standard if such positions are not upheld. Conversely, the Company could settle positions by payment with the tax authorities for amounts lower than those that have been accrued or extinguish a position through less payment than previously estimated. We believe the outcomes that are reasonably possible within the next twelve months may result in a reduction in liability for uncertain tax positions of $52 million, excluding interest, penalties, and tax carryforwards.
Loss Per Share
Diluted loss per share for fiscal 2021 was $0.59, as compared to $20.76 in fiscal 2020. The loss per share decrease was due to a decrease of $5,212 million in net loss.
Diluted loss per share for fiscal 2021 includes $1.79 per share of restructuring costs, $1.06 per share of transaction, separation and integration-related costs, $1.59 per share of amortization of acquired intangible assets, $0.55 per share of impairment losses, $(4.22) per share of net gains on dispositions, $1.57 per share of pension and OPEB actuarial and settlement losses, $0.12 per share of debt extinguishment costs, and $0.55 per share of tax adjustment relating to a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets offset by changes in outside basis related to held for sale classification of the HPS business.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We present non-GAAP financial measures of performance which are derived from the statements of operations of DXC. These non-GAAP financial measures include earnings before interest and taxes ("EBIT"), adjusted EBIT, non-GAAP income from continuing operations before income taxes, non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP EPS, constant currency revenues, net debt and net debt-to-total capitalization.
We believe EBIT, adjusted EBIT, non-GAAP income before income taxes, non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP EPS provide investors with useful supplemental information about our operating performance after excluding certain categories of expenses.
We believe constant currency revenues provides investors with useful supplemental information about our revenues after excluding the effect of currency exchange rate fluctuations for currencies other than U.S. dollars in the periods presented. See below for a description of the methodology we use to present constant currency revenues. We believe net debt and net debt-to-total capitalization provide investors with useful supplemental information about DXC’s net leverage and capitalization.
One category of expenses excluded from adjusted EBIT, non-GAAP income from continuing operations before tax, non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP EPS, incremental amortization of intangible assets acquired through business combinations, may result in a significant difference in period over period amortization expense on a GAAP basis. We exclude amortization of certain acquired intangible assets as these non-cash amounts are inconsistent in amount and frequency and are significantly impacted by the timing and/or size of acquisitions. Although DXC management excludes amortization of acquired intangible assets primarily customer-related intangible assets, from its non-GAAP expenses, we believe that it is important for investors to understand that such intangible assets were recorded as part of purchase accounting and support revenue generation. Any future transactions may result in a change to the acquired intangible asset balances and associated amortization expense.
Another category of expenses excluded from adjusted EBIT, non-GAAP income from continuing operations before tax, non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP EPS, impairment losses, may result in a significant difference in period over period expense on a GAAP basis. We exclude impairment losses as these non-cash amounts, generally an acceleration of what would be multiple periods of expense and do not expect to occur frequently. Further assets such as goodwill may be significantly impacted by market conditions outside of management’s control.
There are limitations to the use of the non-GAAP financial measures presented in this report. One of the limitations is that they do not reflect complete financial results. We compensate for this limitation by providing a reconciliation between our non-GAAP financial measures and the respective most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes between companies.
Selected references are made on a “constant currency basis” so that certain financial results can be viewed without the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates, thereby providing comparisons of operating performance from period to period. Financial results on a “constant currency basis” are non-GAAP measures calculated by translating current period activity into U.S. dollars using the comparable prior period’s currency conversion rates. This approach is used for all results where the functional currency is not the U.S. dollar. Please see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-Fiscal 2021 Highlights.”
Certain non-GAAP financial measures and the respective most directly comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP include:
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our non-GAAP adjustments include:
•Restructuring costs - includes costs, net of reversals, related to workforce and real estate optimization and other similar charges.
•Transaction, separation and integration-related (“TSI”) costs - includes costs related to integration, planning, financing and advisory fees and other similar charges associated with mergers, acquisitions, strategic investments, joint ventures, and dispositions and other similar transactions.(1)
•Amortization of acquired intangible assets - includes amortization of intangible assets acquired through business combinations.
•Gains and losses on dispositions - gains and losses related to dispositions of businesses, strategic assets and interests in less than wholly-owned entities.(2)
•Pension and OPEB actuarial and settlement gains and losses - pension and OPEB actuarial mark to market adjustments and settlement gains and losses.
•Debt extinguishment costs - costs associated with early retirement, redemption, repayment or repurchase of debt and debt-like items including any breakage, make-whole premium, prepayment penalty or similar costs as well as solicitation and other legal and advisory expenses.(3)
•Impairment losses - impairment losses on assets classified as long-term on the balance sheet.(4)
•Gain on arbitration award - reflects a gain related to the HPES merger arbitration award.
•Tax adjustments - adjustments to impair tax assets, merger and divestiture related tax matters, restructuring charges and income tax expense of non-GAAP adjustments. Income tax expense of other non-GAAP adjustments is computed by applying the jurisdictional tax rate to the pre-tax adjustments on a jurisdictional basis.(5)
(1) TSI-Related Costs for all periods presented include fees and other internal and external expenses associated with legal, accounting, consulting, due diligence, investment banking advisory, and other services, as well as financing fees, retention incentives, and resolution of transaction related claims in connection with, or resulting from, exploring or executing potential acquisitions, dispositions and strategic investments, whether or not announced or consummated.
(2) Gains and losses on dispositions for fiscal 2021 includes a $2,014 million gain on sale of the HHS business, a gain of $5 million on sales of other insignificant businesses, and a $15 million loss on equity securities without readily determinable fair value, which were adjusted to fair value following receipt of a bona fide offer to purchase. We expect to close the sale of the equity securities during fiscal 2022.
(3) Debt extinguishment costs adjustments for all periods presented includes $34 million to fully redeem our 4.00% senior notes due fiscal 2024 and $7 million to partially redeem two series of our 4.45% senior notes due fiscal 2023 via tender offer.
(4) Impairment losses for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 of $190 million relate to the impairment of undeployable assets, software, and capitalized transition and transformation costs. In fiscal 2020 goodwill was impaired following a sustained decline in market capitalization.
Impairment losses for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 were $190 million. This includes $165 million impairment for assets pre-purchased through preferred vendor agreements and determined undeployable, $12 million partial impairment of acquired software, $7 million partial impairment of internally developed software intended for internal use and external sale, and $6 million of capitalized transition and transformation contract costs.
(5) Tax adjustment for fiscal 2021 includes $175 million for the impairment of the German deferred tax asset via a valuation allowance, $9 million for tax expense relating to the USPS spin-off, offset by $35 million tax benefit related to the held for sale classification of the Healthcare Provider Software business, and $7 million tax benefit related to prior restructuring charges. The German tax asset was created from multiple periods of losses in Germany that, if not for certain non-GAAP adjustments of restructurings, pension mark to market loss, and impairments, would not have required the asset to be impaired and a valuation allowance established. Tax adjustments for fiscal 2020 includes tax expense related to prior restructuring charges.
A reconciliation of reported results to non-GAAP results is as follows:
* The net periodic pension cost within net loss includes $1,401 million of actual return on plan assets, whereas the net periodic pension cost within non-GAAP net income includes $659 million of expected long-term return on pension assets of defined benefit plans subject to interim remeasurement.
* The net periodic pension cost within net loss includes $526 million of actual return on plan assets, whereas the net periodic pension cost within non-GAAP net income includes $651 million of expected long-term return on pension assets of defined benefit plans subject to interim remeasurement.
Reconciliations of net income to adjusted EBIT are as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalents and Cash Flows
As of March 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents ("cash") was $3.0 billion, of which $1.3 billion was held outside of the U.S. We maintain various multi-currency, multi-entity, cross-border, physical and notional cash and pool arrangements with various counterparties to manage liquidity efficiently that enable participating subsidiaries to draw on the Company’s pooled resources to meet liquidity needs.
A significant portion of the cash held by our foreign subsidiaries is not expected to be impacted by U.S. federal income tax upon repatriation. However, a portion of this cash may still be subject to foreign and U.S. state income tax consequences upon future remittance. Therefore, if additional funds held outside the U.S. are needed for our operations in the U.S., we plan to repatriate these funds not designated as indefinitely reinvested.
We have $0.2 billion in cash held by foreign subsidiaries used for local operations that is subject to country-specific limitations which may restrict or result in increased costs in the repatriation of these funds. In addition, other practical considerations may limit our use of consolidated cash. This includes cash of $0.6 billion held in a German financial services subsidiary subject to regulatory requirements, and $0.1 billion held by majority owned consolidated subsidiaries where third-parties or public shareholders hold minority interests.
Cash was $3.0 billion and $3.7 billion as of March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020, respectively. The following table summarizes our cash flow activity:
Operating cash flow
Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2021 was $124 million as compared to $2,350 million during fiscal 2020. The decrease of $2,226 million was due to a decrease in net income, net of adjustments of $2,923 million. The net decrease in cash provided by operating activities was partially offset by a $697 million favorable change in working capital due to lower working capital outflows during fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
The following table contains certain key working capital metrics:
Investing cash flow
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities during fiscal 2021 was $4,665 million as compared to $(2,137) million during fiscal 2020. The increase of $6,802 million was primarily due to cash proceeds received from business divestitures of $4,947 million in fiscal 2021, a decrease in cash paid for acquisitions of $2,181 million, an increase in proceeds from sale of assets of $91 million, a decrease in purchases of property and equipment of $89 million, and the absence of short-term investing, net of proceeds, of $37 million in fiscal 2020. This was partially offset by a decrease in cash collections related to deferred purchase price receivable of $512 million and a $48 million increase in payments for software licenses related to the divestitures of the HHS business.
Financing cash flow
Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities during fiscal 2021 was $(5,476) million, as compared to $657 million during fiscal 2020. The $6,133 million increase in cash used was primarily due to an increase in repayments, net of borrowings, of $3,718 million on term loans and other long-term debt, $3,000 million on lines of credit, and $229 million on commercial paper. In total, we used $3.5 billion of the net proceeds from the sale of the HHS business to repay debt during the fiscal year. We also had an increase in payments on finance leases and borrowings for asset financing of $65 million and payments of debt extinguishment costs of $41 million in fiscal 2021. This was partially offset by elimination of stock repurchases during fiscal 2021 while common stock repurchases totaled $736 million in fiscal 2020 and a decrease in dividend payments of $161 million from fiscal 2020.
Capital Resources
See Note 23 - "Commitments and Contingencies" for a discussion of the general purpose of guarantees and commitments. The anticipated sources of funds to fulfill such commitments are listed below and under the subheading "Liquidity."
The following table summarizes our total debt:
The $4.4 billion decrease in total debt during fiscal 2021 was primarily attributed to the prepayment of $1.5 billion of Revolver Credit Facility outstanding at fiscal year-end March 31, 2020, €312 million of Euro commercial paper, and the following term loan facilities: €750 million of Euro Term Loan due fiscal 2022 and 2023, A$800 million of AUD Term Loan due fiscal 2022, £450 million of GBP Term Loan due fiscal 2022, $481 million of USD Term Loan due fiscal 2025, €350 million of Euro Term Loan due fiscal 2024 and the retirement of $127 million principal amount of 4.45% Senior Notes due fiscal 2023 via tender offer. (See Note 14 - "Debt - Tender Offers.") In addition, we issued irrevocable redemption notice to retire all the remaining two series of 4.45% Senior Notes (approximately $319 million) due fiscal 2023. These were partially offset by the issuance of $500 million of 4.13% Senior Notes due fiscal 2026.
During the first quarter of fiscal 2021, we applied for and were confirmed eligible to participate in the Bank of England’s (“BOE”) COVID Corporate Funding Facility, a BOE program that provides term liquidity funding to investment grade corporate issuers with significant operations in the U.K., in order to stabilize and facilitate continued access to sterling commercial paper markets. At our option, we can borrow up to a maximum of €1.0 billion or its equivalent in Euro, British Pound and U.S. dollar. On June 15, 2020, DXC Capital Funding DAC (previously named DXC Capital Funding Limited), an indirect subsidiary of the Company, issued £600 million in commercial paper maturing May 2021 under its existing €1.0 billion commercial paper program via direct sale to the BOE. The issued £600 million in commercial paper was subsequently prepaid as discussed below.
In October 2020, we sold the HHS business and used approximately $3.5 billion of the proceeds to prepay $1,250 million of Revolver Credit Facility, £600 million of GBP commercial paper (approximately $772 million), €350 million of Euro Term Loan due fiscal 2024 (approximately $410 million), $381 million of USD Term loan due fiscal 2025, A$500 million of AUD Term Loan due fiscal 2022 (approximately $358 million), and €250 million of Euro Term Loan due fiscal 2022 and 2023 (approximately $292 million).
During fiscal 2021, we borrowed the remaining $2.5 billion under the $4.0 billion credit facility agreement and repaid the full $4.0 billion on the same. The purpose of the borrowing was to mitigate our reliance on volatile short-term commercial paper markets and to strengthen our cash and liquidity position given the uncertainties related to the COVID-19 crisis and its potential impact on our customers and our business. The credit facility repayment resulted from the availability of other liquidity resources. The entire $4.0 billion credit facility is available for redraw at our request.
In March 2021, we used cash on hand and redeemed the entire issue of $500 million of 4.00% Senior Notes due fiscal 2024 in anticipation of divestiture proceeds from the sale of our HPS business that was completed on April 1, 2021. We also commenced in March 2021 a concurrent tender offer and issued irrevocable redemption notice that resulted in the retirement of $127 million principal amount 4.45% Notes due fiscal 2023.
Subsequent to the fiscal year, we used the proceeds from the sale of our HPS business to complete the retirement of all remaining $319 million of the two series of 4.45% Senior Notes due fiscal 2023. We also repurchased $33 million of the 4.125% Senior Notes due fiscal 2026 and took measures to retire and prepay certain capital leases and equipment related financing whose balance was about $300 million as of fiscal 2021 using the proceeds from the divestitures of other businesses and existing cash on hand.
We were in compliance with all financial covenants associated with our borrowings as of March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020.
The debt maturity chart below summarizes the future maturities of long-term debt principal for fiscal years subsequent to March 31, 2021 and excludes maturities of borrowings for assets acquired under long-term financing and finance lease liabilities. The chart does not reflect the redemption of the remaining $319 million in Notes due fiscal 2023 that were initiated via redemption notice in March 2021, which was completely retired in April 2021. See Note 14 - "Debt" for more information.
The following table summarizes our capitalization ratios:
(1) Cash and cash equivalents includes previously described cash held outside of the U.S., at a German financial services subsidiary and at majority owned consolidated subsidiaries.
(2) Net debt and Net debt-to-total capitalization are non-GAAP measures used by management to assess our ability to service our debts using our cash and cash equivalents, including cash subject to limitations, as previously described in Cash and Cash Equivalents and Cash Flows. We present these non-GAAP measures to assist investors in analyzing our capital structure in a more comprehensive way compared to gross debt based ratios alone.
Net debt-to-total capitalization as of March 31, 2021 decreased as compared to March 31, 2020, primarily due to the decrease in total debt attributed to the prepayment of the credit facility agreement and various term loans, bonds and commercial papers during the fiscal year as mentioned above, and by the increase in equity primarily attributed to the gain on disposition of businesses during fiscal 2021.
As of March 31, 2021, our credit ratings were as follows:
For information on the risks of ratings downgrades, see Item 1A - Risk Factors subsection titled, "Our credit rating and ability to manage working capital, refinance and raise additional capital for future needs, could adversely affect our liquidity, capital position, borrowing, cost, and access to capital markets."
See Note 23 - "Commitments and Contingencies" for a discussion of the general purpose of guarantees and commitments. The anticipated sources of funds to fulfill such commitments are listed below.
Liquidity
We expect our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to meet our normal operating requirements for the next 12 months. We expect to continue using cash generated by operations as a primary source of liquidity; however, should we require funds greater than that generated from our operations to fund discretionary investment activities, such as business acquisitions, we have the ability to raise capital through debt financing, including the issuance of capital market debt instruments such as commercial paper and bonds. In addition, we currently utilize and will further utilize our cross-currency cash pool for liquidity needs. However, there is no guarantee that we will be able to obtain debt financing, if required, on terms and conditions acceptable to us, if at all, in the future.
Our exposure to operational liquidity risk is primarily from long-term contracts which require significant investment of cash during the initial phases of the contracts. The recovery of these investments is over the life of the contract and is dependent upon our performance as well as customer acceptance.
The following table summarizes our total liquidity:
During March 2020 as the evolving global COVID-19 crisis resulted in increasing government actions to shut down economic activity and enforce stay-at-home orders, global capital markets were disrupted and became tumultuous, including the near shut down of commercial paper markets for issuers such as the Company as short-term fixed income investors prepared for potential redemptions. On March 24, 2020, the Company announced the draw-down of $1.5 billion from its Revolving Credit Facility due 2025 in order to increase cash on hand and eliminate the reliance on commercial paper markets along with the suspension of the Company’s Euro and USD commercial paper program until the Company deems such capital markets stabilized and reliable. As a result, the Company’s commercial paper outstanding was reduced from $863 million to $542 million as of March 31, 2020, and further reduced to $213 million as of March 31, 2021. During fiscal 2021, capital markets have stabilized and central bank actions have improved liquidity in commercial paper markets and our access to such commercial paper markets have normalized.
On April 6, 2020, the Company drew the entire $2.5 billion remaining availability under its Revolving Credit Facilities, in order to secure liquidity as additional cash on hand to support the Company’s liquidity resources during the COVID-19 crisis and to mitigate the uncertainties caused by volatile capital markets, changing governmental policies, and evolving impact on world economies.
In May 2020, the Company issued $1.0 billion in principal amount of Senior Notes in the form of $500 million principal amount of 4.00% Senior Notes due fiscal 2024 and $500 million principal amount of 4.13% Senior Notes due fiscal 2026. All the net proceeds from the Notes offerings were applied towards the early prepayment of the Company’s term loan facilities, including prepayment of €500 million of Euro Term Loan due fiscal 2022, £150 million of GBP Term Loan due fiscal 2022, A$300 million of AUD Term Loan due fiscal 2022, and $100 million of USD Term Loan due fiscal 2025.
In March 2021, the Company retired $500 million principal amount of 4.0% Senior Notes due fiscal 2024.
The Company retired via tender offer $127 million principal amount of its 4.45% Senior Notes due fiscal 2023 across two series in March 2021 and issued irrevocable redemption notice for the remaining amounts outstanding. In April 2021, the Company retired the remaining $319 million principal amount across two series through redemption. There is no amount outstanding under either series of the 4.45% Notes due fiscal 2023 after the completion of these two actions.
On May 15, 2020, the Company agreed with its lenders and modified the definition of Leverage Ratio to be measured on a “net of cash” basis across all of the Company’s bank credit and term loan facilities, and for such newly defined Leverage Ratio limitation of Total Consolidated Net Indebtedness to Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization, as defined in such credit and term loan facilities, currently at 3.0x, to be reduced to 2.25x thereafter beginning the fiscal year ending March 31, 2022 (with the first quarterly measurement date as of June 30, 2021). The net effect of such adjustment to the Leverage Ratio definition in the Company’s credit and term loan facilities is to allow the Company the flexibility to maintain elevated cash balances going forward both during current circumstances and thereafter, without constraining the Company’s strategy of maintaining strong access to liquidity during the COVID crisis. The Company’s credit and term loan facilities that were modified include: $4.0 billion Revolving Credit Facilities due fiscal year 2025, €250 million Euro Term Loan due fiscal year 2022 (a substantial portion was extended to mature in fiscal year 2023 pursuant to the Euro Term Loan Extension, see below), €750 million Euro Term Loan due fiscal year 2023 (a substantial portion was extended to mature in fiscal year 2024 pursuant to the Euro Term Loan Extension, see below), £300 million in GBP Term Loan due fiscal year 2022, A$500 million in AUD Term Loan due fiscal year 2022, and approximately $382 million in outstanding USD Term Loan due fiscal year 2025. As of fiscal 2021, only $4.0 billion Revolving Credit Facilities due fiscal year 2026 (including a $390 million sub-tranche due fiscal 2025) and €400 million Euro Term Loan due fiscal year 2024 (including a small €27 million sub-tranche due fiscal 2023) remain outstanding and are subject to such amended Leverage Ratio limitations in the Company’s credit and term loan facilities.
On May 15, 2020, the Company initiated elective extension amendments in accordance with the terms of the aggregate €1.0 billion principal amount of Euro Term Loans outstanding. Accordingly, €216.7 million out of €250 million Euro Term Loan due fiscal year 2022 agreed to extend maturity 12-months to mature fiscal year 2023, and €700 million out of total €750 million Euro Term Loan due fiscal year 2023 agreed to extend maturity 12-months to mature fiscal year 2024. Margin would increase during the 12-month extension terms to Euribor + 125bps and Euribor + 175bps respectively, for the Euro Term Loans originally due fiscal years 2022 and 2023, which would be an increase from the current applicable margin of Euribor + 65bps, and Euribor + 80 bps, respectively. There is no change to current margin or terms through the original maturity term of the Euro Term Loans.
Share Repurchases
During fiscal 2018, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $2.0 billion of our common stock and during fiscal 2019, our Board of Directors had approved an incremental $2.0 billion share repurchase. This program became effective on April 3, 2017 with no end date established. There were no share repurchases during fiscal 2021. See Note 16 - "Stockholders' Equity" for more information.
Dividends
To maintain our financial flexibility we continue to suspend payment of quarterly dividends for fiscal 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we are a party to arrangements that include guarantees, the receivables securitization facility and certain other financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk, such as letters of credit and surety bonds. We also use performance letters of credit to support various risk management insurance policies. No liabilities related to these arrangements are reflected in balance sheets. See Note 6 - "Receivables" and Note 23 - "Commitments and Contingencies" for additional information regarding these off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of March 31, 2021, were as follows:
(1) Amounts represent scheduled principal payments of long-term debt and mandatory redemption of preferred stock of a consolidated subsidiary.
(2) Amounts represent present value of operating leases including imputed interests. See Note 7 - "Leases" for more information.
(3) Includes long-term purchase agreements with certain software, hardware, telecommunication and other service providers and exclude agreements that are cancellable without penalty. If we do not meet the specified service minimums, we may have an obligation to pay the service provider a portion of or the entire shortfall. See Note 23 - "Commitments and Contingencies" for more information.
(4) The transition tax resulted in recording a total transition tax obligation of $237 million, of which $243 million was recorded as income tax liability and $6 million recorded as a reduction in our unrecognized tax benefits, which has been omitted from this table. The transition tax is payable over eight years; 8% of net tax liability in each of years 1-5, 15% in year 6, 20% in year 7, and 25% in year 8. We have made our first three payments.
(5) Amounts represent scheduled interest payments on long-term debt and scheduled dividend payments associated with the mandatorily redeemable preferred stock of a consolidated subsidiary excluding contingent dividends associated with the participation and variable appreciation premium features.
(6) See Note 13 - "Income Taxes" for additional information about the estimated liability related to unrecognized tax benefits, which has been omitted from this table. See Note 15 - "Pension and Other Benefit Plans" for the estimated liability related to estimated future benefit payments under our Pension and OPEB plans that have been omitted from this table.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements, in accordance with GAAP, requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. These estimates may change in the future if underlying assumptions or factors change. Accordingly, actual results could differ materially from our estimates under different assumptions, judgments or conditions. We consider the following policies to be critical because of their complexity and the high degree of judgment involved in implementing them: revenue recognition, income taxes, business combinations, defined benefit plans and valuation of assets. We have discussed the selection of our critical accounting policies and the effect of estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors.
Revenue Recognition
Most of our revenues are recognized based on objective criteria and do not require significant estimates that may change over time. However, some arrangements may require significant estimates, including contracts which include multiple performance obligations.
Contracts with multiple performance obligations
Many of our contracts require us to provide a range of services or performance obligations to our customers, which may include a combination of services, products or both and may also contain leases embedded in those arrangements. As a result, significant judgment may be required to determine the appropriate accounting, including whether the elements specified in contracts with multiple performance obligations should be treated as separate performance obligations for revenue recognition purposes, and, when considered appropriate, how the total transaction price should be allocated among the performance obligations and any lease components and the timing of revenue recognition for each. For contracts with multiple performance obligations and lease components, we allocate the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation and lease component based on the relative standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. Other than software sales involving multiple performance obligations, the primary method used to estimate standalone selling price is the expected cost plus a margin approach, under which we forecast our expected costs of satisfying a performance obligation and then add an appropriate margin for that distinct good or service. Certain of our contracts involve the sale of DXC proprietary software, post contract customer support and other software-related services. The standalone selling price generally is determined for each performance obligation using an adjusted market assessment approach based on the price charged where each deliverable is sold separately. In certain limited cases (typically for software licenses) when the historical selling price is highly variable, the residual approach is used. This approach allocates revenue to the performance obligation equal to the difference between the total transaction price and the observable standalone selling prices for the other performance obligations. These methods involve significant judgments and estimates that we assess periodically by considering market and entity-specific factors, such as type of customer, features of the products or services and market conditions.
Once the total revenues have been allocated to the various performance obligations and lease components, revenues for each are recognized based on the relevant revenue recognition method for each. Estimates of total revenues at contract inception often differ materially from actual revenues due to volume differences, changes in technology or other factors which may not be foreseen at inception.
Contract modifications
A contract modification is a legally binding change to the scope, price, or both of an existing contract. Contract modifications are reviewed to determine whether they should be accounted for as part of the original contract, the termination of an existing contract and the creation of a new contract, or as a separate contract, and whether they modify an embedded lease. This determination requires significant judgment, which could impact the timing of revenue recognition.
Costs to obtain contracts with customers
Accounting for the costs to obtain contracts with customers requires significant judgments and estimates with regards to the determination of sales commission payments that qualify for deferral of costs and the related amortization period. Most of our sales commission plans are quota-based and payments are made by achieving targets related to a large number of new and renewed contracts. Certain sales commissions earned by our sales force are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. We defer and amortize these costs on a straight-line basis over an average period of benefit of five years, which is determined and regularly assessed by considering the length of our customer contracts, our technology and other factors. Significant changes in these estimates or impairment may result if material contracts terminate earlier than the expected benefit period, or if there are material changes in the average contract period.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States (federal and state) and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, analyzing our income tax reserves, the determination of the likelihood of recoverability of deferred tax assets and any corresponding adjustment of valuation allowances. In addition, our tax returns are routinely audited, and settlements of issues raised in these audits sometimes affect our tax provisions.
As a global enterprise, our ETR is affected by many factors, including our global mix of earnings among countries with differing statutory tax rates, the extent to which our non-U.S. earnings are indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S., changes in the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, changes in tax regulations, acquisitions, dispositions and the tax characteristics of our income. We cannot predict what our ETR will be in the future because there is uncertainty regarding these factors.
With the following exceptions, the majority of our global unremitted foreign earnings have been taxed or would be exempt from tax upon repatriation, except for the following earnings which are considered indefinitely reinvested: approximately $522 million that could be taxable when repatriated to the U.S. under section 1.245A-5(b) of the final Treasury regulations issued during fiscal 2021; and our accumulated earnings in India. A portion of these indefinitely reinvested earnings may be subject to foreign and U.S. state tax consequences when remitted. The Company will continue to evaluate its position in the future based on its future strategy and cash needs.
Considerations impacting the recoverability of deferred tax assets include the period of expiration of the tax asset, planned use of the tax asset and historical and projected taxable income as well as tax liabilities for the tax jurisdiction to which the tax asset relates. In determining whether the deferred tax assets are realizable, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, taxable income in prior carryback years, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations. We recorded a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets of approximately $3.9 billion as of March 31, 2021 due to uncertainties related to the ability to utilize these assets. However, valuation allowances are subject to change in future reporting periods due to changes in various factors.
We determine whether it is more likely than not a tax position will be sustained upon examination by the appropriate taxing authorities before any part of the benefit is recorded in our financial statements. A tax position is measured as the portion of the tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely to be realized upon settlement with a taxing authority (that has full knowledge of all relevant information). We may be required to change our provision for income taxes when the ultimate treatment of certain items is challenged or agreed to by taxing authorities, when estimates used in determining valuation allowances on deferred tax assets significantly change, or when receipt of new information indicates the need for adjustment in valuation allowances. Future events, such as changes in tax laws, tax regulations, or interpretations of such laws or regulations, could have an impact on the provision for income tax and the effective tax rate. Any such changes could significantly affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements in the year these changes occur.
Recent enactment of the tax laws or changes in tax laws resulting from the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development’s multi-jurisdictional plan of action to address “base erosion and profit shifting” could impact our effective tax rate. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves uncertainties in the application of complex changing tax regulations.
The India Finance Bill 2021 was enacted on March 28, 2021 after receiving approval of both houses of Parliament and assent of the President of India. The key provision of this bill disallows depreciation on goodwill in case of merger/demerger/slump sale, but permits a deduction for the amount paid for acquired goodwill at time of sale. The disallowance of tax depreciation on goodwill has been factored in the calculation of our tax liabilities.
The U.K. Finance Bill 2021 (“Finance Bill”), which will become Finance Act 2021 after Royal Assent was published in March 2021. The Finance Bill included increases in the corporation tax and diverted profits tax rates from April 1, 2023, the new temporary 130% super deduction first year capital allowances and the temporary extension to the carry-back of trading losses. As the detail of the legislation has yet to be finalized or enacted, it is difficult at this stage to determine the impact of the Finance Bill on our future financial results in the U.K.
Business Combinations
We account for the acquisition of a business using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires us to estimate the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. This includes acquired intangible assets such as customer-related intangibles, the liabilities assumed and contingent consideration, if any. Liabilities assumed may include litigation and other contingency reserves existing at the time of acquisition and require judgment in ascertaining the related fair values. Independent appraisals may be used to assist in the determination of the fair value of certain assets and liabilities. Such appraisals are based on significant estimates provided by us, such as forecasted revenues or profits utilized in determining the fair value of contract-related acquired intangible assets or liabilities. Significant changes in assumptions and estimates subsequent to completing the allocation of the purchase price to the assets and liabilities acquired, as well as differences in actual and estimated results, could result in material impacts to our financial results. Adjustments to the fair value of contingent consideration are recorded in earnings. Additional information related to the acquisition date fair value of acquired assets and liabilities obtained during the allocation period, not to exceed one year, may result in changes to the recorded values of acquired assets and liabilities, resulting in an offsetting adjustment to the goodwill associated with the business acquired.
Defined Benefit Plans
The computation of our pension and other post-retirement benefit costs and obligations is dependent on various assumptions. Inherent in the application of the actuarial methods are key assumptions, including discount rates, expected long-term rates of return on plan assets, mortality rates, rates of compensation increases and medical cost trend rates. Our management evaluates these assumptions annually and updates assumptions as necessary. The fair value of assets is determined based on observable inputs for similar assets or on significant unobservable inputs if not available. Two of the most significant assumptions are the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets and the discount rate.
Our weighted average rates used were:
The assumption for the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is impacted by the expected asset mix of the plan; judgments regarding the correlation between historical excess returns and future excess returns and expected investment expenses. The discount rate assumption is based on current market rates for high-quality, fixed income debt instruments with maturities similar to the expected duration of the benefit payment period. The following table provides the impact changes in the weighted-average assumptions would have had on our net periodic pension benefits and settlement and contractual termination charges for fiscal 2021:
Valuation of Assets
We review long-lived ("assets, intangible assets, and goodwill") for impairment in accordance with our accounting policy disclosed in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. Assessing the fair value of assets involves significant estimates and assumptions including estimation of future cash flows, the timing of such cash flows, and discount rates reflecting the risk inherent in projecting future cash flows. The valuation of long-lived and intangible assets involves management estimates about future values and remaining useful lives of assets, particularly purchased intangible assets. These estimates are subjective and can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and forecasts.
Evaluation of goodwill for impairment requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assignment of assets, liabilities, and goodwill to reporting units and determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. The identification of reporting units involves consideration of components of the operating segments and whether or not there is discrete financial information available that is regularly reviewed by management. Additionally, we consider whether or not it is reasonable to aggregate any of the identified components that have similar economic characteristics. The estimates used to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit change from year to year based on operating results, market conditions, and other factors. Changes in these estimates and assumptions include a significant change in the business climate, established business plans, operating performance indicators or competition which could materially affect the determination of fair value for each reporting unit.
We estimate the fair value of our reporting units using a combination of an income approach, utilizing a discounted cash flow analysis, and a market approach, using performance-metric market multiples. The discount rate used in an income approach is based on our weighted-average cost of capital and may be adjusted for the relevant risks associated with business-specific characteristics and any uncertainty related to a reporting unit's ability to execute on the projected future cash flows.