Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
As noted above in Part 1, this Annual Report, including, without limitation, this Item 7, contains “forward-looking statements,” including forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Actual results or developments could differ materially from those projected in such statements because of numerous factors, including, without limitation those risks and uncertainties set forth in Item 1A, Risk Factors, which you are encouraged to read. These forward-looking statements generally relate to plans and objectives for future operations and are based upon management’s reasonable estimates of future results or trends. Such statements include our financial outlook for fiscal 2021 with respect to sales, comparable sales, adjusted EBITDA and free cash flows, statements regarding our ability to withstand the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, our efforts to restructure and reduce costs and right size our lease structure, expected annualized savings from restructuring actions taken in fiscal 2020, expected additional borrowing capacity under our new FILO loan, and our expected liquidity for the next 12 months. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in light of those risks and uncertainties and in conjunction with our accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto.
All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or to persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing. These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of the document in which they are made. We disclaim any obligation or undertaking to provide any updates or revisions to any forward-looking statement to reflect any change in our expectations or any change in events, conditions or circumstances in which the forward-looking statement is based.
Certain figures discussed below may not foot due to rounding.
Segment Reporting
We have three principal operating segments: our stores, direct business and our wholesale business. We consider our stores and direct business segments to be similar in terms of economic characteristics, production processes and operations, and have therefore aggregated them into one reportable segment, retail segment, consistent with our omni-channel business approach. Due to the immateriality of the wholesale segment’s revenues, profits and assets, its operating results have been aggregated with the retail segment for all periods.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected the global economy, disrupted global supply chains, and created significant disruption of the financial and retail markets, including a disruption in consumer demand for men’s clothing and accessories. While the pandemic has had, and will likely continue to have, a significant adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations, we moved early and decisively throughout fiscal 2020 to preserve our financial flexibility and position ourselves to withstand the short-term impact of the pandemic.
We closed all of our retail stores on March 17, 2020 and, beginning at the end of April 2020 and continuing into the second quarter of fiscal 2020, we started to gradually reopen stores. As of the end of June, all stores had been reopened but have been operating at reduced hours. Since the reopening, some stores have had to close for periods of time. Our direct business continues to play a vital role as we are seeing our customer’s shopping preference shift to online. Given the increased demand in our direct business, we have been very fortunate that our distribution center was able to operate without any business disruption during fiscal 2020.
The unrelenting impact of COVID-19 on the apparel industry continues to be a challenge. At DXL, we experienced a shift among our customers away from event-driven shopping and into need-based shopping. Our customers spent less time this year at large social gathering events such as parties, graduations, and sporting events which negatively impacted demand for apparel. We saw improvements in many of our core and basic categories which have been driven by this change in lifestyle of staying close to home. We expect this trend to continue for the early part of fiscal 2021, and we expect our customers’ shopping behaviors to significantly change when vaccines are widely distributed and our customer is in a need to replenish his wardrobe over time.
Comparable Sales and E-Commerce (Direct) Sales Definition
Our customer’s shopping experience continues to evolve across multiple channels and we are continually adapting to meet the guest’s needs. The majority of our stores have the capability of fulfilling online orders if merchandise is not available in the warehouse. As a result, we continue to see more transactions that begin online but are ultimately completed at the store level. Similarly, if a customer visits a store and the item is out of stock, the associate can order the item through our website. A customer also has the ability to order online and pick-up in a store and, more recently due to the COVID-19 pandemic, pick-up at curbside. We define store sales as sales
that originate and are fulfilled directly at the store level. E-commerce sales, which we also refer to as direct sales, are defined as sales that originate online, whether through our website, at the store level or through a third-party marketplace.
Stores that have been open for 13 months are included in comparable sales. The Company has not carved-out prior year sales for periods where the stores were temporarily closed in fiscal 2020 due to the pandemic. Stores that have been remodeled or re-located during the period are also included in our determination of comparable stores sales. Stores that have been expanded by more than 25% are considered non-comparable for the first 13 months. If a store becomes a clearance center, it is also removed from the calculation of comparable sales. The method of calculating comparable sales varies across the retail industry and, as a result, our calculation of comparable sales is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other retailers.
Non-GAAP Measures
We monitor certain non-GAAP financial measures on a regular basis in order to track the progress of our business. These measures include adjusted net loss, adjusted net loss per diluted share, free cash flow, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA. We believe these measures provide helpful information with respect to the Company’s operating performance and that the inclusion of these non-GAAP measures is important to assist investors in comparing our performance in fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018. We also provide certain forward-looking information with respect to certain of these non-GAAP financial measures. However, these measures may not be comparable to similar measures used by other companies and should not be considered superior to or as a substitute for net loss, net loss per diluted share or cash flow from operating activities in accordance with GAAP. See “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” below for additional information on these non-GAAP financial measures and reconciliations to comparable GAAP measures.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
(1)
Adjusted net loss and adjusted EBITDA exclude asset impairment charges, exit costs associated with London operations, corporate restructuring and CEO transition costs. Adjusted net loss, for all periods, assumes a normalized tax benefit of 26%. See “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” below.
The COVID-19 pandemic had an adverse impact on our revenues and, in turn our earnings in fiscal 2020. In response, we took decisive steps early in fiscal 2020 to pivot our business model and position ourselves for recovery, and emerge with significantly more operating leverage as we head into fiscal 2021. While fiscal 2020 was a challenging year for us, we navigated those challenges and maintained our solvency through one of the most difficult years in the history of our Company.
Managing our liquidity to help us weather the impact of the pandemic was our primary objective, which we believe we successfully accomplished. In those initial few weeks in March 2020, we took several immediate and proactive steps, including: drawing down $30.0 million from our credit facility, furloughing the majority of our organization, cancelling inventory orders, eliminating capital spending except where necessary, instituting a temporary reduction in pay for management (director-level and above) until the start of the third quarter, suspending the directors second quarter compensation, working with landlords on rent deferments and abatements during those temporary closures, negotiating extended payment terms with our suppliers and vendors, and amending our credit facility
to provide additional borrowing capacity. As our stores began to open, we continued to focus on liquidity. We took several cost-reduction measures to realign our cost structure with our current sales trends. These steps have been difficult and included reducing our field organization by approximately 54% and our corporate workforce by 29%. In November 2020, we also terminated certain service agreements and eliminated certain professional services, much of the benefit of which will not be realized until fiscal 2021. As a result of these efforts, we not only preserved liquidity, but we also have substantially reduced our operating cost structure.
From a liquidity perspective, at January 30, 2021, our total debt, net of cash, increased only $5.6 million to the prior year despite the significant loss in revenues. We decreased inventory levels by $17.4 million, or 17%, and our year-end inventory is current with clearance inventory down $1.4 million from February 1, 2020. In addition, we were able to work with our landlord community to renegotiate much of our lease portfolio given current sales trends, which benefited our cash flows in fiscal 2020 by approximately $10.0 million and will benefit fiscal 2021 as well. We also restructured 91 individual store leases in fiscal 2020 which we expect to deliver over $13.5 million in savings over the life of the leases, including approximately $5.2 million in fiscal 2021. As discussed below, subsequent to the end of fiscal 2020, we also raised $5 million, before offering costs, from the sale of 11.1 million shares of common stock through a registered direct offering and also entered into a new first-in, last out term loan “FILO” loan which replaced our existing FILO loan, both of which added further flexibility to our liquidity as we head into 2021.
While our stores were adversely affected by the pandemic, with comparable store sales down 47.1% to last year, our digital growth was a bright spot for us this year. We had started transforming our digital presence in fiscal 2019 in order to grow our digital business, and in response to the pandemic we accelerated those efforts during fiscal 2020 as our customers migrated to online shopping. Our e-commerce site, DXL.com, was instrumental to our business, enabling us to continue to serve our customers. As our customers increasingly migrated to online shopping, our DXL.com site and distribution center were able to successfully meet the increased demand. Sales from our DXL.com site increased 38.6% over the prior year. This is an exciting opportunity for us and we are hoping we are able to build on this growth into fiscal 2021.
The loss of revenues in fiscal 2020, resulted in a net loss for fiscal 2020 of $(1.26) per diluted share as compared to a net loss of $(0.16) per diluted share in fiscal 2019. On a non-GAAP basis, adjusted net loss was $(0.72) per diluted share in fiscal 2020 as compared to $(0.06) per diluted share in fiscal 2019.
The loss in store sales from the temporary store closures and reduced demand for in-person shopping resulted in our having to take significant impairment charges against our long-lived assets, especially in the first quarter of fiscal 2020. Our results for fiscal 2020 include a total impairment charge of $14.8 million, or $0.29 per diluted share, primarily related to the write-down of our operating lease right-of-use assets and, to a lesser extent, store assets. This compares to a total impairment charge of $0.9 million, or $0.02 per diluted share, in fiscal 2019.
Subsequent Events
Registered Direct Offering of Common Stock
On February 5, 2021, we sold, pursuant to a definitive stock purchase agreement in a registered direct offering, an aggregate of 11,111,111 shares of our common stock, for a gross purchase price of $5.0 million, before payment of offering costs. We intend to use the net proceeds from the offering for working capital and other general corporate purpose.
New FILO Loan
On March 16, 2021, we refinanced our existing $15.0 million first-in, last-out term loan under our credit agreement with Bank of America and entered into a new, $17.5 million senior secured first-in, last-out term loan facility (the “new FILO Loan”). Pursuant to the Fourth Amendment to its Seventh Amended and Restated Credit Facility with Bank of America, N.A. (as amended, the “Credit Facility”), PathLight Capital Fund II LP was added as the FILO lender to the Credit Facility. Proceeds from the new FILO Loan were used to repay in full the Company’s existing FILO loan with the balance of the proceeds to be used for working capital.
The borrowing base for the new FILO Loan is determined based on a percentage of eligible inventory, receivables and intellectual property. We expect the new FILO Loan to provide us additional borrowing capacity of approximately $5.0 to $10.0 million. Interest rates under the new FILO Loan will be higher than the existing FILO loan by approximately 250 to 300 basis points. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for a more detailed description of the new FILO Loan.
Financial Outlook
Our plans for fiscal 2021 include expected sales of approximately $385.0 million to $402.0 million, adjusted EBITDA of approximately $11.0 to $18.0 million and positive free cash flow, which we expect to use to pay-down debt. Our financial projections assume that vaccines against the COVID-19 virus are widely available and administered by the end of Spring 2021. We believe that demand for apparel will gradually improve in fiscal 2021 as our customers begin to return to pre-COVID-19 activities. We expect a 10.8% to 14.8% decline in comparable sales from fiscal 2019 levels, with comparable store sales down 23.8% to 27.8% and our direct
business up 26.9% to 30.7% to fiscal 2019. We expect to achieve these results through continued penetration of our direct business and a modest recovery in store traffic during the course of the year.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our fiscal year is a 52- or 53-week period ending on the Saturday closest to January 31. Fiscal 2020, fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018 were all 52-week periods.
Below is a discussion of our results of operations for fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019.
Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended February 1, 2020 (fiscal 2019) includes a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations comparing fiscal 2019 to fiscal 2018 in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
SALES
For fiscal 2020, total sales decreased 32.7% to $318.9 million from $474.0 million in fiscal 2019. Comparable sales for the full year decreased 32.6%, primarily due to a comparable sales decrease in stores of 47.1%, partially offset by an increase in our direct business of 14.9%. All of our stores were temporarily closed on March 17, 2020 and, at the end of April 2020, we started to gradually reopen them. By the end of June 2020, all stores had reopened, but with reduced operating hours. Stores sales gradually improved through the remainder of fiscal 2020, but comparable store sales were still below fiscal 2019 levels with the fourth quarter comparable store sales down 37.3%. Until vaccines are widely administered and customers gain some comfort that enables them to begin socializing, we expect to continue to see similar sales trends for at least the early part of fiscal 2021.
The increase in our direct business was driven by our DXL.com e-commerce site, which had a sales increase of 38.6% and was partially offset by a 50.4% decrease in universe sales, which are online sales that are initiated at the store level. The decrease in our universe sales is directly attributable to store closures and the decrease in store traffic once the stores reopened. The strong growth in our direct business was a direct outcome of the digital strategies we implemented and the customers’ shift in shopping preferences in response to COVID-19.
Wholesale revenues for fiscal 2020 increased $4.1 million to $16.6 million. The increase is primarily due to the sale of masks during the second quarter of fiscal 2020.
GROSS MARGIN
Gross margin rate for fiscal 2020 was 32.9% compared to 43.1% in fiscal 2019. The decrease of 10.2% was due to a decrease in merchandise margin of 5.6% and a decrease of 4.6% due to the deleveraging of occupancy costs. On a dollar basis, occupancy costs decreased $8.3 million, or 11.8% largely due to our efforts to restructure our lease agreements due to the impact of the pandemic on our retail stores, as well as due to closed stores.
The decrease in merchandise margin reflects the increased promotional posture we took in response to COVID-19, especially during the second quarter, where we were highly promotional in our effort to drive sales and reduce inventories. For the second half of fiscal 2020, we focused on more targeted promotions with a greater gross margin impact, which improved our merchandise margins in the third and fourth quarter. Because of the growth in our direct channel and free shipping promotions during fiscal 2020, our shipping costs increased over the prior year.
While our gross margin was negatively impacted by the deleveraging of occupancy costs against the lower sales base, we worked throughout fiscal 2020 with our landlord community to restructure our existing lease agreements. In the first half of fiscal 2020, we negotiated $10.0 million of favorable rent abatements and deferments with our landlords for the months that our stores were temporarily closed. In addition, to date, we have also restructured 91 individual store leases which will deliver over $13.5 million in savings over the life of the leases, including $5.2 million of savings projected in fiscal 2021.
By its nature, gross margin rates for wholesale are lower than gross margin rates for the Company’s retail segment. During fiscal 2020, margins in our wholesale business improved, primarily driven by our sales of masks in the second quarter of fiscal 2020.
SELLING, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
SG&A expenses for fiscal 2020 decreased $51.6 million, or 28.6%, to $129.1 million as compared to $180.7 million in fiscal 2019. SG&A expenses as a percentage of sales for fiscal 2020 were 40.5% as compared to 38.1% for fiscal 2019.
The decrease in SG&A expenses for the year was due to the decrease in variable-based costs such as store payroll, supplies, travel and other supporting expenses, a decrease in advertising costs, corporate payroll, professional services and director compensation. Performance-based incentives and insurance costs increased over the prior year. Included in SG&A costs for fiscal 2020 is an earned tax credit of approximately $1.3 million that the Company realized as part of the CARES Act.
We took several steps throughout fiscal 2020 to reduce our operating costs, including the furlough of both our store associates and certain corporate associates while our stores were closed, a reduction in marketing costs, a temporary salary reduction of 10-20% for management levels director and above, and the suspension of non-employee director compensation for the second quarter. We also implemented several cost savings initiatives to realign our operating costs with expected sales levels, which resulted in the termination of certain service agreements and professional services, a reduction in our field organization by approximately 54% and in our corporate workforce by 29%. With the reduced sales levels and store traffic, our stores are operating at minimal staffing levels and reduced operating hours.
The expected annualized savings from the action taken in November 2020 are expected to result in annualized savings of $9.7 million, the majority of which will be realized in fiscal 2021. These savings will be in addition to the previous cost-saving measures we took during the first three quarters of fiscal 2020.
SG&A expenses are managed through two primary cost centers: Customer Facing Costs and Corporate Support Costs. Customer Facing Costs, which include store payroll, marketing, and other store operating costs, represented 20.2% of sales in fiscal 2020 compared to 22.6% of sales in fiscal 2019. Corporate Support Costs, which include the distribution center and corporate overhead costs, represented 20.3% of sales in fiscal 2020 compared to 15.5% of sales in fiscal 2019 and reflects the impact of the deleveraging of sales.
IMPAIRMENT OF ASSETS
We regularly review assets for impairment indicators at the individual store level, as this represents the lowest level of identifiable cash flows. Store assets include property and equipment as well as operating lease right-of-use assets. When indicators of impairment are present, a recoverability analysis is performed.
As a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on store operations, we have taken significant impairment charges in fiscal 2020, primarily related to our right-of-use assets. Our determination of impairment was based on multiple probability-weighted scenarios as to the recoverability of each individual store assuming that consumer retail spending would remain curtailed for a period of time.
In addition, the asset impairment charges for fiscal 2020 were partially offset by non-cash gains related to the Company’s decision to close certain retail stores, which resulted in a revaluation of the existing lease liabilities. To the extent that such gain related to previously recorded impairment charges for operating right-of-use assets, the gain was included as an offset to impairment charges, with the remainder of the gain included as a reduction in store occupancy costs. For fiscal 2020, the Company recognized a non-cash gain of $3.1 million, of which $2.6 million was included as an offset to the asset impairment charges.
For fiscal 2020, the asset impairment charge was $14.8 million, which included $13.3 for the write-down of operating lease right-of-use assets and $4.1 million for the write-down of store assets, partially offset by a non-cash gain of $2.6 million. The asset impairment charge for fiscal 2019 was $0.9 million, which included $0.7 million for the write-down of right-of-use assets and $0.2 million for the write-down of store assets.
DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
Depreciation and amortization expense was $21.5 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $24.6 million for fiscal 2019. With the majority of our new store growth complete, our depreciation expense has been decreasing over the past few years.
INTEREST EXPENSE, NET
Net interest expense for fiscal 2020 was $3.9 million as compared to $3.3 million for fiscal 2019. The increase in interest expense is due to an increase in average borrowings and an increase in the effective borrowing rates. As a result of our amendment to our credit facility in April 2020, interest rates under our Credit Facility, which includes our FILO loan, increased by approximately 150 basis points. In addition, as discussed above, on March 20, 2020, we drew approximately $30.0 million against our revolving credit facility, which increased our average borrowings. This action was taken to provide the Company with flexibility to manage its cash flow due to the uncertainty of the pandemic.
See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for more discussion regarding our credit facility and term loan as well as our future liquidity needs.
INCOME TAXES
Realization of our deferred tax assets, which relate principally to federal net operating loss carryforwards, of which approximately $158.2 million will expire from fiscal 2022 through fiscal 2037, is dependent on generating sufficient taxable income in the near term. In addition, there are $43.1 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards that do not expire.
At the end of fiscal 2013, we entered a three-year cumulative loss and based on all positive and negative evidence at February 1, 2014, we established a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets. While we expect to return to profitability, generate taxable income and ultimately emerge from a three-year cumulative loss, based on our results for fiscal 2020 and our forecast for fiscal 2021, we believe that a full valuation allowance remains appropriate at this time.
Due to current period losses, our current tax provision for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 was primarily due to current state margin tax, based on gross receipts less certain deductions. See Note F of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
NET LOSS
Net loss for fiscal 2020 was $(64.5) million, or $(1.26) per diluted share, as compared to $(7.8) million, or $(0.16) per diluted share, in fiscal 2019.
Included in our results for fiscal 2020 were asset impairment charges of $14.8 million, or $0.29 per diluted share. Included in our results for fiscal 2019 were charges of $1.7 million, or $0.03 per diluted share, for the exit costs associated with our London operations, $0.7 million, or $0.01 per diluted share, in CEO transition costs and $0.9 million, or $0.02 per diluted share in impairment charges.
On a non-GAAP basis, before asset impairments, exit costs associated with our London operations, CEO transition costs and assuming a normalized tax rate of 26% for both years, adjusted net loss per share for fiscal 2020 was $(0.72) per diluted share, compared to $(0.06) per diluted share for fiscal 2019. See “Non-GAAP Reconciliation” below.
SEASONALITY
A comparison of sales in each quarter of the past three fiscal years is presented below. The sales results for fiscal 2020 reflect the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic had on the Company’s business, especially in the first and second quarters when we temporarily closed all of our stores in response to the pandemic. The amounts shown are also not necessarily indicative of actual trends, because such amounts also reflect the addition of new stores and the remodeling and closing of other stores during these periods. Consistent with the retail apparel industry, our business is seasonal. Generally, the majority of our operating income is generated in the fourth quarter as a result of the impact of the holiday selling season. A comparison of quarterly sales, gross profit, and net loss per share for the past two fiscal years is presented in Note O of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
EFFECTS OF INFLATION
Although our operations are influenced by general economic trends, we do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on the results of our operations in the last three fiscal years.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash generated from operations and availability under our credit facility with Bank of America, N.A., which was most recently amended in April 2020 (“Credit Facility”). Although our cash flow from operations has been significantly impacted by the lost revenue as of result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe that we have taken sufficient steps to manage our available cash flow for the foreseeable future. During fiscal 2020, we amended our Credit Facility to increase our borrowing base, negotiated extended payment terms with vendors, restructured lease agreements, cancelled inventory purchase orders, reduced operating costs and reduced capital spending. Subsequent to year end, in February 2021, we raised $5 million, before offering costs, through the sale of 11.1 million shares in a direct registered offering, the proceeds of which will be used for working capital in fiscal 2021. Also in March 2021, the Company entered into a new $17.5 million FILO loan to replace the Company’s existing $15.0 million FILO loan. Based on our current projections, we believe our cash on hand, including the proceeds from the equity offering, availability under our amended Credit Facility, the new FILO loan, and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to cover our working capital requirements and limited capital expenditures for the next 12 months. However, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business in fiscal 2021 will depend on the swiftness and effectiveness of the vaccine roll-out and our customers returning to pre-COVID activities, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time.
Managing our business, while preserving our liquidity was our primarily objective in fiscal 2020. Our total debt, net of cash, at the end of fiscal 2020 was $55.4 million, as compared to $49.8 million in fiscal 2019. Our ability to borrow under the credit facility is largely dependent on our inventory levels, which we have intentionally reduced to realign with current expectations of sales. Accordingly, the decrease in the unused excess availability under our credit facility at year-end is due to the $17.4 million decrease in inventory and the $14.7 million increase in cash on hand.
The following table sets forth financial data regarding our liquidity position at the end of the past two fiscal years:
The following is a summary of our total debt outstanding at January 30, 2021, with the associated unamortized debt issuance costs:
Credit Facility
Our Credit Facility provides for a maximum committed borrowing of $125.0 million, which, pursuant to an accordion feature, may be increased to $175.0 million upon our request and the agreement of the lender(s) participating in the increase (the “Revolving Facility”). The Credit Facility includes a sublimit of $20.0 million for commercial and standby letters of credit and a sublimit of up to $15.0 million for swingline loans. Borrowings made pursuant to the Revolving Facility under the Credit Facility bear interest, calculated under either the Federal Funds rate or the LIBOR rate, at a rate equal to the following: (a) the Federal Funds rate plus a varying percentage based on the Company’s excess availability, of either 1.75% or 2.00%, or (b) the LIBOR rate (the Company being able to select interest periods of 1 week, 1 month, 2 months, 3 months or 6 months) plus a varying percentage based on the Company’s excess availability, of either 2.75% or 3.00%. The current maturity date is May 24, 2023. The Credit Facility was amended in March 2021, subsequent to fiscal 2020, to accommodate the new FILO loan agreement and the repayment of the existing FILO loan.
Our Credit Facility is described in more detail in Note D to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We had outstanding borrowings of $59.7 million under the Revolving Facility at January 30, 2021. Outstanding standby letters of credit were $2.8 million and outstanding documentary letters of credit were $0.1 million. The average monthly borrowing outstanding under the Revolving Facility during fiscal 2020 was approximately $67.6 million, resulting in an average unused excess availability of approximately $17.9 million. Unused excess availability at January 30, 2021 was $11.5 million. Our obligations under the Credit Facility are secured by a lien on substantially all of our assets.
FILO Loan
The Credit Facility also includes a FILO loan for $15.0 million. The total borrowing capacity under the FILO loan is based on a borrowing base, generally defined as a specified percentage of the value of eligible assets, including certain trade names, that amortizes over time, plus a specified percentage of the value of eligible inventory that amortizes over time. During the first quarter of fiscal 2020, we entered into an amendment that extended these advance rates to December 2020 before they began to step down.
As a result of extending the advance rates under the FILO loan, the applicable margin rates for borrowings were increased by approximately 150 basis points. Accordingly, current borrowings made under the FILO loan bear interest, calculated under either the Federal Funds rate or the LIBOR rate, at a rate equal to the following: (a) the Federal Funds rate plus a varying percentage based on the Company’s excess availability, of either 3.75% or 4.00% or (b) the LIBOR rate (the Company being able to select interest periods of 1 week, 1 month, 2 months, 3 months or 6 months) plus a varying percentage based on the Company’s excess availability, of either 4.75% or 5.00%. At January 30, 2021, the outstanding balance of $15.0 million was in a 1-week LIBOR-based contract with an interest rate of 6.00%. As discussed above, under “Subsequent Events”, on March 16, 2021 the FILO was repaid in full in connection with the Company’s new FILO loan.
INVENTORY
At January 30, 2021, total inventories decreased to $85.0 million from $102.4 million at February 1, 2020. The $17.4 million decrease in inventory is the result of our managing inventory very conservatively, slowing replenishment and reducing receipts to align with the reduced sales volumes as a result of the pandemic. We have narrowed our assortment of merchandise in our efforts to maintain a healthy inventory and manage clearance levels. At January 30, 2021, our clearance inventory decreased by $1.4 million, or 13.6% from the prior year, and represented 10.4% of our inventory as compared to 10.0% at February 1, 2020.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at January 30, 2021, and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
(1)
Includes amounts due on our lease agreement for our corporate headquarters and distribution center, operating leases for all of our current store locations, certain equipment leases and auto leases.
(2)
Represents the outstanding balance of the FILO loan. The maturity date for the FILO loan was not until May 2023, however, in connection with the Company’s new FILO loan entered into subsequent to the end of fiscal 2021, the FILO was repaid in full on March 16, 2021. At January 30, 2021, we had $59.7 million outstanding under our credit facility, which is excluded from the above table.
(3)
Interest on long-term obligations is estimated using LIBOR rate at January 30, 2021 for the FILO loan, assuming no principal payment until maturity of the FILO loan.
(4)
Merchandise Purchase Obligations include amounts for which we are contractually committed to meet certain minimum purchases. These commitments are contingent on the supplier meeting its obligations under the contract. Excluded from Merchandise Purchase Obligations in the table above are our outstanding obligations pursuant to open purchase orders. At January 30, 2021, we had approximately $62.4 million in open purchase orders. We estimate that approximately 95% of these purchase orders may be considered non-cancelable.
(5)
At January 30, 2021, we had an unfunded Pension Obligation of $4.5 million and obligations under our Supplemental Employee Retirement Plan of $0.6 million, which are not included in the table because of uncertainty over whether or when further contributions will be required.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
The following table sets forth the open stores and related square footage at January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020 respectively:
In response to the pandemic, we did not rebrand any of our Casual Male XL stores or open any new DXL locations during fiscal 2020. In total, we closed 12 stores during the year. Below is a summary of those store closings from February 1, 2020 to January 30, 2021:
Our capital expenditures for fiscal 2020 were $4.2 million, as compared to $13.4 million in fiscal 2019. Early in fiscal 2020, we eliminated all non-essential capital projects for fiscal 2020 in our efforts to preserve liquidity. The capital expenditures for fiscal 2020 primarily related to management information projects to support our distribution center and marketing, including our CRM platform.
In fiscal 2019, in addition to our management information projects, we also rebranded 14 Casual Male XL stores to DXL stores and opened two DXL retail stores. During fiscal 2021, we do not plan to open any new stores or rebrand any of our Casual Male XL stores. As mentioned above, during fiscal 2020, we have been proactively working with our landlord community to renegotiate our existing leases given the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our retail store sales. We have 131 stores that have leases with either a natural lease expiration or a kick-out option within the next two years. This provides us an opportunity to right-size our store portfolio, through ongoing lease renegotiations or lease-term expirations, to ensure that we are optimizing our store profitability and omni-channel distribution.
Non-GAAP Reconciliations
We monitor certain non-GAAP financial measures on a regular basis in order to track the progress of our business, including the measures below. We believe these measures provide helpful information with respect to the Company’s operating performance to shareholders, investors and analysts, and that the inclusion of these non-GAAP measures is important to assist investors in comparing our performance in fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018, on a comparable basis. However, these measures may not be comparable to similar measures used by other companies and should not be considered superior to or as a substitute for operating net loss, net loss per diluted share or cash flows from operating activities in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted Net Loss and Adjusted Net Loss Per Diluted Share
Adjusted net loss reflects an adjustment assuming a normal tax rate of 26% and the add-back of asset impairment charges, exit costs associated with London operations, CEO transition costs and corporate restructuring. We have fully reserved against our deferred tax assets and, therefore, net loss is not reflective of earnings assuming a “normal” tax position. Adjusted net loss provides investors with a useful indication of the financial performance of the business, on a comparative basis, assuming a normalized tax rate of 26%.
The following table is a reconciliation of net loss and net loss per diluted share (on a GAAP basis) to adjusted net loss and adjusted net loss per diluted share (on a non-GAAP basis) (certain amounts may not foot due to rounding):
Free Cash Flow
We calculate free cash flow as cash flow provided by operating activities less capital expenditures. Free cash flow excludes the mandatory and discretionary repayment of debt. The following table provides a reconciliation of free cash flow (certain amounts may not foot due to rounding):
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are presented because we believe that these measures are useful to investors in evaluating our performance. Management uses EBITDA as a key metric to measure profitability and economic productivity. EBITDA is calculated as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is calculated as EBITDA before asset impairment charges, exit costs associated with London operations, CEO transition costs and corporate restructuring.
The Company is unable to reconcile the adjusted EBITDA guidance for fiscal 2021 to net loss, because certain information necessary for the reconciliation is not available without unreasonable efforts. Such information is difficult to predict and/or is dependent on future events that are outside of our control. In particular, we are unable to reasonably predict potential asset impairments, because of the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our retail stores.
The following table is a reconciliation of net loss on a GAAP basis to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, on a non-GAAP basis, for each fiscal year. (Certain amounts in the following table do not foot due to rounding):
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES; USE OF ESTIMATES
Our financial statements are based on the application of significant accounting policies, many of which require our management to make significant estimates and assumptions (see Note A to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). We believe that the following items involve some of the more critical judgments in the application of accounting policies that currently affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Long-Term Incentive Plans
Stock awards are primarily granted pursuant to our Long-Term Incentive Plans (“LTIPs”). During fiscal 2020, we had three active LTIPs: the 2018-2020 LTIP, the 2019-2021 LTIP and the 2020-2022 LTIP. See Note H to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of our LTIPs. Awards under each LTIP consist of 50% time-based awards and 50% performance-based awards. All time-based awards granted pursuant are amortized over each LTIP’s respective vesting periods.
The performance-based component of each LTIP is a dollar-denominated award. Equity awards will only be granted if such performance targets are achieved. Accordingly, each quarter the Company reviews its expected achievement against such performance targets to assess whether an accrual is necessary. The performance metrics are for three-year performance periods and may include metrics such as total shareholder return against peers, 3-year stacked comparable sales or Adjusted EBITDA. As such, the accruals are based on projections that may extend beyond a year and are subject to change quarter to quarter based on actual performance. All accruals are recorded as a liability. If performance targets are achieved and equity awards are granted, the related cost of those awards will be reclassified from the accrual to stock-based compensation on grant date.
The performance targets under the 2018-2020 LTIP were not achieved, therefore, there were no awards earned in fiscal 2020. With respect to the performance-based component of the 2019-2021 LTIP and the 2020-2022 LTIP, which each approximate $1.9 million, at target, awards will be granted at the end of the respective performance period if the performance targets are achieved. Through the end of fiscal 2020, we have accrued approximately $0.2 million for performance under the 2020-2022 LTIP. There is no accrual at the end of fiscal 2020 for the 2019-2021 LTIP.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate property, plant and equipment and operating lease right-of-use assets for impairment when facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying values of such assets may not be recoverable. We evaluate these assets for impairment at a store level for all our retail locations and will recognize an impairment when the undiscounted cash flow estimated to be generated by those assets is less than the assets’ carrying amount. If actual market conditions are less favorable than management’s projections, future write-offs may be necessary. The model for undiscounted future cash flows includes assumptions, at the individual store level, with respect to expectations for future sales and gross margin rates as well as an estimate for occupancy costs used to estimate the fair value of the respective store’s operating lease right-of-use asset. The amount of impairment, if any, is measured based on projected discounted future cash flows using a discount rate reflecting the Company’s average cost of funds. Due to uncertainty around the duration and extent of the pandemic’s impact on future cash flows, the Company’s projections were based on multiple probability-weighted scenarios and assumed that consumer retail spending would remain substantially curtailed for a period of time.
For fiscal 2020, fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018, we recorded asset impairment charges of $14.8 million, $0.9 million and $4.6 million, respectively.
Leases
In accordance with ASU 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)” our leases are reported as right-of-use assets with corresponding lease liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheet. As discussed above, we evaluate, at the individual store level, the right-of-use assets for impairment at least annually but also when facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Furthermore as the interest rate implicit in the Company’s leases is not readily determinable, the Company utilizes its incremental borrowing rate, based on information available at the lease measurement date to determine the present value of future payments. See Note A to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
We have reviewed accounting pronouncements and interpretations thereof that have effective dates during the periods reported and in future periods. See Note A to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for information on recent accounting pronouncements and the impact of impending standards on our future filings.