ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes contained within Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data and the other financial information found elsewhere in this Report. Management’s Discussion and Analysis uses forward-looking statements that involve certain risks and uncertainties as described previously in our Disclosure Regarding Forward-looking Statements and Item 1A. Risk Factors.
General Overview
DXP Enterprises, Inc. is a leading North American distributor of technical products and services. Our comprehensive knowledge, specialized services and leading brands serve MRO, OEM and capital equipment end users in virtually all industrial markets through our multi-channel capabilities that provide choice, convenience, expertise, timely response and an overall ease of doing business.
DXP's products are marketed in the United States, Canada and Dubai to customers that are engaged in a variety of industries, many of which may be counter cyclical to each other. Demand for our products generally is subject to changes in the United States and Canada, and global and macro-economic trends affecting our customers and the industries in which they compete in particular. Certain of these industries, such as the oil and gas industry, are subject to volatility driven by a variety of factors, while others, such as the petrochemical industry and the construction industry, are cyclical and materially affected by changes in the United States and global economy. As a result, we may experience changes in demand within particular markets, segments and product categories as changes occur in our customers' respective markets.
CURRENT MARKET CONDITIONS AND OUTLOOK
General
In December 2019, the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus and associated COVID 19 disease (“COVID-19”) were reported in China, and in March 2020 the World Health Organization declared a pandemic. The pandemic had a significant impact on our business during 2020. The marketplace broadly, and the Company specifically, throughout the year operated with certain modifications to balance re-opening with employee and customer safety. However, most of the markets in which we operate began to normalize during the second half of 2020. This improved the outlook of the manufacturing and construction customers that support our traditional branch and onsite business. Although the rate of improvement remains gradual and the overall activity level remains below pre-pandemic levels, DXP saw a modest improvement from monthly lows experienced in July.
Consistent with broader social trends, we took steps to safeguard the health of our employees. This included closing branch and corporate facilities to outside personnel, enabled through technology, significant work from home capabilities for many employees, and where employees remained in the workplace, created space between work areas, provided ample personal protective equipment and cleaning supplies, and instituting formal policies for mitigation in the event of cases of illness. Due to these precautions, our operations continued to function effectively, including internal controls over financial reporting.
As restrictions ease and the roll out of various vaccines continue, we will actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers, and shareholders. While we are unable to determine or predict the nature, duration, or scope of the overall impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources, we believe that it is important to share where the Company stands today, how our response to the COVID-19 pandemic has progressed, and how our operations and financial condition may change as the fight against COVID-19 progresses.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the widely publicized and discussed coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak rapidly spread across the world, driving a sharp erosion in demand for crude oil and other products and services, as whole economies ordered curtailed activity. In response to declining demand for crude oil, members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and other producing countries (OPEC+), including Russia, met in early March to discuss additional production cuts to help stabilize prices. The group failed to reach an agreement, and production was instead increased into the already oversupplied market, decimating oil prices and rapidly filling worldwide oil storage facilities. OPEC+ eventually reached an agreement in April 2020 to reduce production, which had a muted effect on oil prices due to the belief that the cuts were significantly less than the demand destruction caused by COVID-19. As a result, companies across the oil and gas industry responded with severe capital spending budget cuts, cost cuts, personnel layoffs, facility closures and bankruptcy filings.
We made a number of mitigation decisions and took proactive steps in response to the issues presented by the COVID-19 pandemic and ongoing uncertainties related to the oil and gas industry. We moved forward with our plans to increase our ABL revolver facility from $85 million to $135 million. In addition, we reduced certain discretionary expenditures and suspended the Company’s matching contributions to retirement plans. Some of these measures may have an adverse impact on our businesses, but we believe we took the necessary steps to stabilize the business in unprecedented times.
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic crisis, we continued to operate our business despite the challenges that arose from closing offices and operating our branch locations. Our use of technology and third party conferencing platforms enabled our office employees to work from home, performing their job functions with little to no loss of productivity. We required our employees to work from home as a result of governmental isolation orders and, in many cases, in advance of those orders for the health and safety of our employees. For the most part, our warehouses and regional distribution centers remained open. Under
various isolation orders by national, state, provincial and local governments, we were exempted as an “essential” business as the products we sell are necessary for the maintenance and functioning of many industries including energy infrastructure. We took measures to safeguard the health and welfare of our employees, including social distancing measures while at work, certain screening, providing personal protection equipment such as gloves, face masks and hand sanitizer and sterilizing cleaning services at Company facilities. As various governmental restrictions continue to be lifted or phased out, we will review our operational plans to continue operating our business while addressing the health and safety of our employees and those with whom our business comes into contact.
As a distribution business, we continue to closely monitor the ability of our suppliers and transportation providers to continue the functioning of our supply chain. We have not experienced significant delays by transportation providers or significant delays in our supply chains. Our inventory position for most products has allowed us to continue supply to most customers with little interruption. In those instances where there was interruption, we worked with our customers to discuss the impact of the delay. We will continue to monitor the situation and have ongoing dialogue with our vendors and customers regarding the status of impacted orders.
Management expects industry activity levels and spending by customers to remain volatile in the near term, but we do expect some increased activity as the nation and the world become vaccinated and the oil and gas demand destruction from COVID-19 begins to subside. DXP remains committed to streamlining operations and improving organizational efficiencies while continuing to focus on delivering the products and services that remain in the Company’s backlog. We believe this strategy has further advanced the Company’s competitive position, regardless of the market environment.
DXP monitors several economic indices that have been key indicators for industrial and oil & gas economic activity in the United States. These include the Industrial Production (IP) and Manufacturing Capacity Utilization (MCU) indices published by the Federal Reserve Board and the Purchasing Managers Index (PMI) published by the Institute for Supply Management (ISM). Additionally, we track the Metalworking Business Index ("MBI"). A reading above 50 generally indicates expansion.
Below are readings for the fourth quarter versus the full year average:
* The information contained in this table has been obtained from third party publicly available sources.
DXP also monitors various oil & gas indicators including active drilling rigs, gross U.S. domestic production and the West Texas Intermediate ("WTI") price of oil. Below are readings for the last three years:
* The information contained in this table has been obtained from third party publicly available sources.
** Averages for the years indicated.
During 2019, the growth rate of the general economy improved from 2018 while the rig count decreased, but remained higher than 2016 peaks. Sales for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $51.0 million, or 4.2%, to approximately $1.3 billion from $1.2 billion for the prior corresponding period. The majority of the 2019 sales increase is the result of increased sales of pumps, bearings, industrial supplies, metal working and safety services to customers engaged in oilfield service, oil and gas exploration and production, mining, manufacturing and petrochemical processing.
During 2020, the growth rate of the general economy declined from 2019 as well as the rig count. Sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $261.9 million, or 20.7%, to approximately $1.0 billion from $1.3 billion for the prior corresponding period. The majority of the 2020 sales decrease is the result of a decrease in the capital spending by oil and gas producers and related businesses stemming from a decrease in U.S. crude oil production due to low crude prices and the negative economic impacts of COVID-19.
Our sales growth strategy in recent years has focused on internal growth and acquisitions. Key elements of our sales strategy include leveraging existing customer relationships by cross-selling new products, expanding product offerings to new and existing customers, and increasing business-to-business solutions using system agreements and supply chain solutions for our integrated supply customers. We will continue to review opportunities to grow through the acquisition of distributors and other businesses that would expand our geographic reach and/or add additional products and services. Our results will depend on our success in executing our internal growth strategy and, to the extent we complete any acquisitions, our ability to integrate such acquisitions effectively.
Our strategies to increase productivity include consolidated purchasing programs, centralizing product distribution, customer service and inside sales functions, and using information technology to increase employee productivity.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
SALES. Sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $261.9 million, or 20.7%, to approximately $1.0 billion from $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. Sales from businesses acquired accounted for $19.6 million of the sales for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Excluding the 2020 sales of the business acquired, sales for the year decreased by $281.5 million, or 22.2% from the prior year's corresponding period. This sales decrease is the result of a decrease in sales in our SC, IPS and SCS segments of $99.6 million, $115.7 million and $46.6 million, respectively. The fluctuations in sales is further explained in our business segment discussions below.
Service Centers Segment. Sales for the Service Centers segment decreased by $99.6 million, or 13.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding $19.6 million of 2020 Service Centers segment sales from businesses acquired, Service Centers segment sales decreased $119.2 million, or 15.6% from the prior year's corresponding period. This sales decrease is primarily the result of decreased sales of metal working, safety supply products and bearings to customers engaged in the OEM oil and gas markets in connection with decreased capital spending by oil and gas producers as well as the negative economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect that this level of sales to the oil and gas industry will likely continue to decline if U.S. crude oil production remains at levels experienced during the year.
Innovative Pumping Solutions Segment. Sales for the IPS segment decreased by $115.7 million, or 38.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily the result of a decrease in the capital spending by oil and gas producers and related businesses stemming from a decrease in U.S. crude oil production due to low crude prices and the negative economic impacts of COVID-19. With a prolonged economic recession related to COVID-19, we will likely experience a further decline in overall segment sales.
Supply Chain Services Segment. Sales for the SCS segment decreased by $46.6 million, or 23.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decline in sales is primarily related to decreased sales to customers in the aerospace and oil and gas industries due to the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
GROSS PROFIT. Gross profit as a percentage of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by approximately 38 basis points from the prior year's corresponding period. Excluding the impact of the businesses acquired, gross profit as a percentage of sales increased by approximately 35 basis points. The increase in the gross profit percentage excluding the businesses acquired is primarily the result of an approximate 79 basis point increase in the gross profit percentage in our IPS segment and a 164 basis point increase in the gross profit percentage in our SCS segment partially offset by a 40 basis point decrease in the gross profit percentage in our SC segment.
Service Centers Segment. The gross profit percentage for the Service Centers decreased approximately 40 basis points and approximately 41 basis points, adjusting for the businesses acquired, from the prior year's corresponding period. This was primarily the result of decreased sales of metal working, safety services and bearings to customers engaged in the OEM oil and gas markets in connection with decreased capital spending by oil and gas producers as well as the negative economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Innovative Pumping Solutions Segment. The 2020 gross profit percentage for the IPS segment increased approximately 79 basis points from the prior year's corresponding period. The decrease in gross profit is primarily the result of a decrease in the capital spending by oil and gas producers and related businesses stemming from a decrease in U.S. crude oil production due to low crude prices and the economic impacts of COVID-19.
Supply Chain Services Segment. Gross profit as a percentage of sales increased approximately 164 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year's corresponding period. This was primarily as a result of costs associated with new customer implementation in 2019 with no comparable activity in 2020.
SELLING, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ("SG&A"). SG&A for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by approximately $34.8 million, or 12.4%, to $246.3 million from $281.1 million for prior year's corresponding period. SG&A expense from businesses acquired accounted for $4.9 million. Excluding expenses from businesses acquired, SG&A for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $39.7 million, or 14.1 percent. The overall decrease in SG&A is the result of decreased payroll, incentive compensation and related taxes and 401(k) expenses as a result of decreased business activity and cost reduction actions associated with COVID-19 and depressed demand in oil and gas markets.
IMPAIRMENT AND OTHER CHARGES. Due to circumstances discussed above, during twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we evaluated our goodwill, certain long-lived assets and other assets for impairment and recoverability. Based on the results, we recorded the following impairment and other charges:
Service Centers segment. In 2020, we recorded $1.8 million of noncash impairment charges related primarily to certain long-lived assets that were not recoverable and $20.5 million of non-cash impairment charges related to goodwill associated with our operations in Canada.
Innovative Pumping Solutions segment. In 2020, we recorded $21.7 million of non-cash impairment charges related to certain inactive assets and inventory and a $16.0 million non-cash impairment charge related to goodwill.
For additional information on our impairment charges, see Note 4 - Impairments and Other Charges of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.
OPERATING INCOME. Operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $93.0 million, or 140.6%, to a loss of $26.9 million from income of $66.1 million in the prior year's corresponding period. This decrease in operating income is primarily related to the decrease in sales discussed above and the impact of impairment and other charges.
INTEREST EXPENSE. Interest expense for year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $1.1 million, or 5.5%, from the prior year's corresponding period primarily due to refinancing costs incurred in connection with the modification and extinguishment of debt, partially offset by lower LIBOR rates and a reduction in the principal balance through voluntary pay-downs until the Company's refinancing in December.
INCOME TAXES. Our effective tax rate was a tax benefit of 38.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a tax expense of 23.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company reported a loss before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result, items that ordinarily increase or decrease the tax rate will have the opposite effect. Compared
to the U.S. statutory rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, the effective tax rate was increased by state taxes, foreign taxes, research and development tax credits and other tax credits. This was partially offset by nondeductible expenses and reserve for uncertain tax positions. Compared to the U.S. statutory rate for the year ended December 31, 2019, the effective tax rate was increased by state taxes, foreign taxes, and non-deductible expenses and partially offset by research and development tax credits and other tax credits.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
For the full year 2019 to 2018 comparative discussion, see Item 7: Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in DXP’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Inflation
We do not believe the effects of inflation have any material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition. We attempt to minimize inflationary trends by passing manufacturer price increases on to the customer whenever practicable.
The rate of inflation, as measured by changes in the producer price index, affects different commodities, the cost of products purchased and ultimately the pricing of our different products and product classes to our customers. Our pricing related to inflation did not have a measurable impact on our sales revenue for the year. Historically, price changes from suppliers have been consistent with inflation and have not had a material impact on the results of our operations.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliations
In an effort to provide investors with additional information regarding our results of operations as determined by GAAP, we disclose non-GAAP financial measures. The non-GAAP financial measures we provide in this report should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, results prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”).
Our primary non-GAAP financial measures are organic sales (Organic Sales), sales per business day ("Sales per Business Day"), free cash flow ("Free Cash Flow"), earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("EBITDA") and adjusted EBITDA ("Adjusted EBITDA"). The non-GAAP financial measures presented may differ from similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures presented by other companies, and other companies may not define these non-GAAP financial measures in the same way. These measures are not substitutes for their comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures, such as net sales, net income/(loss), diluted earnings per common share (“EPS”), or other measures prescribed by U.S. GAAP, and there are limitations to using non-GAAP financial measures.
Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures to assist in comparing our performance on a consistent basis for purposes of business decision making by removing the impact of certain items that management believes do not directly reflect our underlying operations. Management believes that presenting our non-GAAP financial measures (i.e., Organic Sales, Sales per Business Day, Free Cash Flow, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA) are useful to investors because it (i) provides investors with meaningful supplemental information regarding financial performance by excluding certain items, (ii) permits investors to view performance using the same tools that management uses to budget, make operating and strategic decisions, and evaluate historical performance, and (iii) otherwise provides supplemental information that may be useful to investors in evaluating our results. We believe that the presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures, when considered together with the corresponding U.S. GAAP financial measures and the reconciliations to those measures, provides investors with additional understanding of the factors and trends affecting our business than could be obtained absent these disclosures.
Organic Sales is defined as net sales excluding, when they occur, the impact of acquisitions and divestitures. Organic Sales is a tool that can assist management and investors in comparing our performance on a consistent basis by removing the impact of certain items that management believes do not directly reflect our underlying operations.
Sales per Business Day is defined as total net sales divided by business days for the period. Sales per Business Day assists management and investors in evaluating the Company's historical performance.
Free Cash Flow is defined cash provided by operations less net purchase of property and equipment. We believe Free Cash Flow is an important liquidity metric because it measures, during a given period, the amount of cash generated that is available to fund acquisitions, make investments, repay debt obligations, repurchase company shares, and for certain other activities.
EBITDA is defined as the sum of consolidated net income in such period, plus to the extent deducted from consolidated net income: (i) income tax expense, (ii) franchise tax expense, (iii) consolidated interest expense, (iv) amortization and depreciation
during such period, (v) all non-cash charges and adjustments, and (vi) non-recurring cash expenses related to the Term Loan; in addition to these adjustments, we exclude, when they occur, the impacts of impairment losses and losses/(gains) on the sale of a business. EBITDA is a tool that can assist management and investors in comparing our performance on a consistent basis by removing the impact of certain items that management believes do not directly reflect our underlying operations.
From time to time, due to accounting guidance and rules, the Company incurs non-cash, unique or one-time items. As such, the Company will add these items back to determine an Adjusted EBITDA.
We use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA internally to evaluate and manage the Company's operations because we believe it provides useful supplemental information regarding the Company's ongoing economic performance. We have chosen to provide this information to investors to enable them to perform more meaningful comparisons of operating results.
A reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures, to its most comparable GAAP financial measure is included below.
The following table sets forth the reconciliation of net sales to organic net sales (in millions):
Reconciliation of Net Sales to Organic Net Sales
The sales per business day were as follows (in thousands):
We use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA internally to evaluate and manage the Company's operations because we believe it provides useful supplemental information regarding the Company's ongoing economic performance. We have chosen to provide this information to investors to enable them to perform more meaningful comparisons of operating results.
For further discussion regarding free cash flow as a management metric see the "Liquidity and Capital Resources - Free Cash Flow" below.
The following table sets forth the reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to the most comparable GAAP financial measure (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General Overview
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $117.4 million and bank and other borrowings of $320.4 million. We have a $135 million asset-based Loan facility that is due to mature in August 2022, under which we had no borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and a Term Loan B with $330 million in borrowings.
Our primary source of capital is cash flow from operations, supplemented as necessary by company shares, bank borrowings or other sources of debt. As a distributor of MRO products and services, we require significant amounts of working capital to fund inventories and accounts receivables. Additional cash is required for capital items for information technology, warehouse equipment, leasehold improvements, pump manufacturing equipment and safety services equipment. We also require cash to pay our lease obligations, fund project work-in-process and to service our debt.
The following table summarizes our net cash flows used in and provided by operating activities, net cash used in investing activities and net cash (used in) provided by financing activities for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
The Company generated $107.7 million of cash in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to generating $41.3 million of cash during the prior year's corresponding period. The $66.4 million increase in the amount of cash generated between the two periods was primarily driven by the collections of receivables associated with trade accounts receivables and decreased inventory purchases.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $121.8 million compared to $22.1 million in the corresponding period in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by acquisitions during the year of $115.2 million. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, purchases of property and equipment decreased to approximately $6.7 million compared to $22.1 million in 2019 primarily due to leasehold improvements and software upgrades in 2019 with no comparable activity in 2020. The maintenance capital expenditures for 2021 are expected to be within the range of $4 million to $10 million.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash generated in financing activities was $77.4 million, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $6.1 million for the corresponding period in 2019. The activity in the period was primarily attributed to the Company refinancing our Term Loan raising $330 million partially offset by the extinguishment of our previous term loan and higher principal repayments of debt in 2019.
On December 23, 2020, DXP entered into a new seven year, $330 million Senior Secured Term Loan (the “Term Loan Agreement”), which replaced DXP’s previously existing Senior Secured Term Loan.
On May 11, 2020, the Company entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “Equity Distribution Agreement”) with BMO Capital Markets Corp. (the “Distribution Agent”) pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $37.5 million from time to time through the Distribution Agent. Sales of the Company’s common stock pursuant to the Equity Distribution Agreement are made in “at the market offerings” as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued and sold 46 thousand shares of common stock under the Equity Distribution Agreement, with net proceeds totaling approximately $1.1 million less Agent’s commission.
On March 17, 2020, the Company entered into an Increase Agreement (the "Increase Agreement") which provides for a $135 million asset-backed revolving line of credit (the "ABL Revolver"), a $50 million increase from the $85.0 million available under the original revolver. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the amount available to be borrowed under our credit facility increased to $131.9 million compared to $81.6 million at December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of the above mentioned Increase Agreement offset by outstanding letters of credit.
We believe this is adequate funding to support working capital needs within the business.
At December 31, 2020, our total long-term debt, including the current portion, less principal repayments, was $330.0 million, or 48.7% of total capitalization (total long-term debt including current portion plus shareholders’ equity) of $677.9 million. Approximately $330.0 million of this outstanding debt bears interest at various floating rates. See