Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this report.
OVERVIEW
Our business consists principally of marketing, manufacturing and selling floorcovering products to high-end residential and commercial customers through our various sales forces and brands. We focus primarily on the upper end of the floorcovering market where we believe we have strong brands and competitive advantages with our style and design capabilities and customer relationships. Our Fabrica, Masland, and Dixie Home brands have a significant presence in the high-end residential floorcovering markets. Our AtlasMasland brand participates in the upper end specified commercial marketplace. Dixie International sells all of our brands outside of the North American market.
Our business is primarily concentrated in areas of the soft floorcovering markets which include broadloom carpet, carpet tiles and rugs. However, in response to a significant shift in the flooring marketplace toward hard surface products, we have launched multiple hard surface initiatives in both our residential and commercial brands over the last few years. Our commercial brands offer Luxury Vinyl Flooring (“LVF”) products under the Calibré brand in the commercial markets. Our residential brands, Dixie Home and Masland Residential, offer Stainmaster® TRUCOR™ Luxury Vinyl Flooring and our premium residential brand, Fabrica, offers a high-end engineered wood line.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
Beginning with the second week of March 2020, we started experiencing reduced volume as the result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related government restrictions. The sales decline continued into the second quarter through the third week of April after which we started to see a gradual and consistent improvement in sales through the end of the the year. Once the extent of the pandemic became apparent, we implemented our continuity plan to maintain the health and safety of our associates, preserve cash, and minimize the impact on our customers. We implemented cost reductions including cutting nonessential expenditures, reducing capital expenditures, rotating layoffs and furloughs, select job eliminations and temporary salary reductions. We also deferred new product introductions and reduced our sample and marketing expenses for 2020. We pursued and closed on financing initiatives that increased our borrowing availability and strengthened our financial position.
The recovery of sales in the residential markets, that began in the second quarter of 2020, continued through the end of the year. Sales volume in the commercial markets have continued to be at lower levels. Many of the cost reductions implemented in the second quarter as part of our COVID-19 recovery plan have been made permanent even as sales volumes improve. As allowed under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, we deferred payment of certain payroll related taxes over the second and third quarter in the total amount of $1.8 million. We also recognized a credit of $2.1 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to certain employee retention credits as defined in the CARES Act. Despite the improvement in sales activity, as cases of COVID-19 continue to be reported and as government authorities consider necessary safety measures, we cannot be certain as to any additional future impact of the COVID-19 crisis.
During 2020, our net sales decreased 15.7% compared with net sales in 2019. Sales of residential products decreased 7.0% in 2020 versus 2019. Residential soft surface sales were down 13.6% in 2020 as compared to 2019, while, we estimate, the industry was down in the mid single digits. Our residential soft surface sales in 2020 were negatively impacted by a change in emphasis to hard surfaces by certain mass merchant customers. Residential hard surface sales increased by 77% in 2020 relative to sales in 2019. Despite recent slow activity, we anticipate the residential housing market will have steady but moderate growth over the next several years. Commercial product sales decreased 37.0% during 2020. Soft surface sales of commercial products were down 37.5%, while, we believe, the industry was down in the low twenty percentile. Commercial markets did not recover from the impact of the pandemic as many customers in the hospitality and restaurant industries continue to be severely impacted. Customers in corporate environments where many employees are working remotely have delayed projects. We anticipate the commercial market to remain relatively flat in 2021.
For the year ended December 26, 2020, we had an operating loss of $2.9 million compared with an operating income of $21.3 million in 2019. In 2019, we recorded a $25.1 million gain on the sale of our building in Santa Ana, California. Without this gain on sale we had an operating loss of $3.8 million. Gross profit as a percent of sales improved year over year despite the reduced sales volume in 2020 and the resulting under absorbed manufacturing costs. This was primarily the result of operating improvements related to the Profit Improvement Plan (the "Plan") that was fully implemented in 2019. We also reduced plant running schedules in 2020 to reduce inventories to a more appropriate level and implemented temporary and permanent cost reductions in response to the COVID 19 pandemic and the resulting reduction in volume.
Table of Contents 18
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal Year Ended December 26, 2020 Compared with Fiscal Year Ended December 28, 2019
Net Sales. Net sales for the year ended December 26, 2020 were $315.9 million compared with $374.6 in the year-earlier period, a decrease of 15.7% for the year-over-year comparison. Sales of residential floorcovering products were down 7.0% and sales of commercial floorcovering products decreased 37.0%. Net sales in our residential markets have begun to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic but our commercial markets continue to experience reduced sales activity.
Gross Profit. Gross profit, as a percentage of net sales, increased 1.2 percentage points in 2020 compared with 2019. Cost reductions resulting from our Profit Improvement Plan, which was implemented in the prior year, and net expense reductions from the implementation of our COVID-19 Continuity Plan contributed to the improved gross profit margin. These cost savings were partially offset by under absorbed fixed costs due to reduced sales volume after the first quarter and costs related to the COVID-19 Recovery Plan.
Selling and Administrative Expenses. Selling and administrative expenses were $75.7 million in 2020 compared with $83.8 million in 2019, but higher as a percentage of the lower sales volume. Selling and administrative expenses as a percent of the net sales for 2020 and 2019 were 24.0% and 22.4% respectively. The reduction in expenses for selling and administrative expenses in 2020 was the result of cost cuts in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and cost reductions in place from the Profit Improvement Plan implemented in previous years.
Other Operating (Income) Expense, Net. Net other operating (income) expense was income of $108 thousand in 2020 compared with income of $24.0 million in 2019. In 2020, the income was primarily the result of net gains on currency exchange rate adjustments. In 2019, we recognized a $25.1 million gain on the sale of our facility in Santa Ana, California.
Facility Consolidation and Severance Expenses, Net. Facility consolidation expenses were $3.8 million in 2020 compared with $5.0 million in the year-earlier period. The facility consolidation expenses incurred during 2020 were primarily related to our COVID-19 Continuity Plan including severance and financing related charges, as well as residual costs from our Profit Improvement Plan including adjustments for workers' compensation related charges. The expenses in 2019 were primarily related to the Profit Improvement Plan.
Operating Income (Loss). The operating loss in 2020 was $2.9 million compared to income of $21.3 million in 2019. The 2019 income was heavily driven by the gain of $25.1 million on the sale of our Santa Ana facility. Adjusted for this transaction, the 2019 operating loss would have been $3.8 million. The 2020 operating loss was the result of lower sales volume and the related under absorbed fixed costs as well as $3.8 million in restructuring expenses primarily related to COVID recovery. These negative impacts were mitigated by higher gross profit margins as a result of cost reductions related to our Profit Improvement Plan from prior years and our current year COVID recovery initiatives.
Interest Expense. Interest expense of $5.8 million in 2020 was a reduction of $641 thousand from $6.4 million incurred in 2019. The reduction is the result of generally lower interest rates and lower levels of debt in 2020 offset by financing costs and
Table of Contents 19
adjustments to other comprehensive income as a result of financing initiatives in the fourth quarter and elimination of related swap agreements.
Income Tax Benefit. Our effective income tax rate was a benefit of 3.32% in 2020. The benefit relates to certain federal and state credits and also includes a benefit for the termination of certain derivative contracts for which there existed stranded tax effects within other comprehensive income (loss). In 2020, we increased our valuation allowance by $2.1 million related to our net deferred tax asset and specific state net operating loss and state tax credit carryforwards.
Our effective income tax rate was a benefit of 4.39% in 2019. The benefit relates to certain federal and state credits and also includes a benefit for the reduction of certain indefinite lived assets not covered by our valuation allowance. In 2019, we decreased our valuation allowance by $3.7 million related to our net deferred tax asset and specific state net operating loss and state credit carryforwards.
Net (Income) Loss. Continuing operations reflected a loss of $9.1 million, or $0.59 per diluted share in 2020, compared with income from continuing operations of $15.6 million, or $0.95 per diluted share in 2019. Our discontinued operations reflected a loss of $120 thousand, or $0.01 per diluted share in 2020 compared with a loss of $348 thousand, or $0.02 per diluted share in 2019. Including discontinued operations, we had a net loss of $9.2 million, or $0.60 per diluted share, in 2020 compared with a net income of $15.3 million, or $0.93 per diluted share, in 2019.
Fiscal Year Ended December 28, 2019 Compared with Fiscal Year Ended December 29, 2018
Net Sales. Net sales for the year ended December 28, 2019 were $374.6 million compared with $405.0 million in the year-earlier period, a decrease of 7.5% for the year-over-year comparison. Sales of residential floorcovering products were down 7.2% primarily due to our mass merchant customers shifting their emphasis from soft surface to hard surface floor coverings. Sales of commercial floorcovering products decreased 9.4%. The decrease in commercial net sales was due to distractions caused by the restructuring of our commercial operations and sales force during the first half of 2019.
Gross Profit. Gross profit, as a percentage of net sales, increased 1.5 percentage points in 2019 compared with 2018. Gross profit in 2019 was favorably impacted by savings from our Profit Improvement Plan. Gross profit in 2018 was negatively impacted by inventory write downs related to the Profit Improvement Plan.
Selling and Administrative Expenses. Selling and administrative expenses were $83.8 million in 2019 compared with $92.5 million in 2018, a decrease of .4% as a percentage of sales. The improved results in the 2019 selling expenses are the result of changes made as part of our Profit Improvement Plan.
Other Operating (Income) Expense, Net. Net other operating (income) expense was income of $24.0 million in 2019 compared with expense of $458 thousand in 2018. In 2019 we recognized a gain of $25.1 million for the sale of our Susan Street manufacturing facility in Santa Ana, California.
Facility Consolidation and Severance Expenses, Net. Facility consolidation expenses were $5.0 million in 2019 compared with $3.2 million in the year-earlier period. Facility consolidation expenses increased in 2019 as we completed our Profit
Table of Contents 20
Improvement Plan, announced in 2017, which included the consolidation of our two commercial brands, consolidation of commercial manufacturing operations and sales forces, and an overall review of corporate wide operations and functions. As a result of this plan, we incurred expenses of $5.0 million during 2019 primarily related to facility consolidation expenses and severance costs.
Asset Impairments. There were no expenses related to asset impairments recorded in 2019. The asset impairments recorded in 2018 were $6.7 million. The asset impairments incurred in 2018 included the impairment of fixed assets as part of our Profit Improvement Plan ($1.2 million). We also incurred intangible asset impairments ($2.1 million) and goodwill impairment ($3.4 million).
Operating Income (Loss). Operations reflected operating income of $21.3 million in 2019 compared with an operating loss of $15.8 million in 2018. The operating results for 2019 were heavily impacted by the $25.1 million gain on the sale of our building in Santa Ana, California. This gain was partially offset by lower gross profit as a result of lower sales volume and expenses related to the Profit Improvement Plan.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $47 thousand in 2019 as compared to 2018 principally due to lower levels of debt in the last quarter of the year as a result of the sale of our building in Santa Ana, California.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit). Our effective income tax rate was a benefit of 4.39% in 2019. The benefit relates to certain federal and state credits and also includes a benefit for the reduction of certain indefinite lived assets not covered by our valuation allowance. In 2019, we decreased our valuation allowance by $3.7 million related to our net deferred tax asset and specific state net operating loss and state credit carryforwards.
Our effective income tax rate was a benefit of 3.72% in 2018. The benefit relates to certain federal and state credits and also includes a benefit for the reduction of certain indefinite lived assets not covered by our valuation allowance. In 2018, we increased our valuation allowance by $4 million related to our net deferred tax asset and specific state net operating loss and state credit carryforwards.
Net (Income) Loss. Continuing operations reflected income of $15.6 million, or $.95 per diluted share in 2019, compared with a loss from continuing operations of $21.5 million, or $1.36 per diluted share in 2018. Our discontinued operations reflected a loss of $348 thousand, or $0.02 per diluted share in 2019 compared with income of $95 thousand, or $0.01 per diluted share in 2018. Including discontinued operations, we had a net income of $15.3 million, or $0.96 per diluted share, in 2019 compared with a net loss of $21.4 million, or $1.35 per diluted share, in 2018.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
During the year ended December 26, 2020, cash provided by operations was $13.5 million driven by reductions in inventory of $10.1 million and increases in accounts payable and other accrued expenses of $1.4 million. The reduction in inventories was the result of operational efficiencies. The increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses was primarily driven by accruals for raw material purchases in order to replenish inventory to meet the growing demand.
Capital expenditures were eliminated or postponed after the onset of the COVID 19 pandemic. Capital asset acquisitions for the year ended December 26, 2020 were $1.8 million. Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 26, 2020 were $10.7 million. We expect capital expenditures to be approximately $5.0 million in 2021 while depreciation and amortization is expected to be approximately $10.1 million. Planned capital expenditures in 2021 are primarily for new equipment.
During the year ended December 26, 2020, cash used in financing activities was $10.7 million. We had net payments of $31.3 million on the revolving credit facility. Borrowings on notes payable net of payments increased cash by $23.7 million and finance leases were reduced by payments, net of borrowings, of $2.5 million. The balance in amount of checks outstanding in excess of cash at year end 2020 increased from prior year resulting in a cash inflow of $2.1 million.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company replaced its senior credit facility with Wells Fargo Capital Finance with a $75 million, senior secured Revolving Credit Facility with Fifth Third Bank National Association. As of December 26, 2020, availability under the new senior secured facility was $43.3 million. Additionally, the Company entered into two fixed asset loans in the combined principal amount of $25 million.
We believe our operating cash flows, credit availability under our revolving credit facility and other sources of financing are adequate to finance our anticipated liquidity requirements under current operating conditions. We cannot predict, and are unable to know, the long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related economic consequences or how these events may affect our future liquidity. As noted above and in Footnote 10, availability under the new Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility on December 26, 2020 was $43.3 million. Significant additional cash expenditures above our normal liquidity requirements, significant deterioration in economic conditions or continued operating losses could affect our business and require supplemental financing or other funding sources. There can be no assurance that such supplemental financing or other sources of funding can be obtained or will be obtained on terms favorable to us.
Table of Contents 21
Debt Facilities
Revolving Credit Facility. During the fourth quarter, we entered into a $75.0 million Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility with Fifth Third Bank National Association as lender. The loan is secured by a first priority security interest on all accounts receivable, cash, and inventory, and provides for borrowing limited by certain percentages of values of the accounts receivable and inventory. The revolving credit facility matures on October 30, 2025.
At our election, advances of the revolving credit facility bear interest at annual rates equal to either (a) LIBOR for 1, 2, or 3 month periods, as defined with a floor or 0.75% or published LIBOR, plus an applicable margin ranging between 1.50% and 2.00%, or (b) the higher of the prime rate plus an applicable margin ranging between 0.50% and 1.00%. The applicable margin is determined based on availability under the revolving credit facility with margins increasing as availability decreases. As of December 26, 2020, the applicable margin on our revolving credit facility was 1.75%. We pay an unused line fee on the average amount by which the aggregate commitments exceed utilization of the revolving credit facility equal to 0.25% per annum. The weighted-average interest rate on borrowings outstanding under the revolving credit facility was 2.68% at December 26, 2020 and 4.79% at December 28, 2019.
The agreement is subject to customary terms and conditions and annual administrative fees with pricing varying on excess availability and a fixed charge coverage ratio. The agreement is also subject to certain compliance, affirmative, and financial covenants. We are only subject to the financial covenants if borrowing availability is less than 12.5% of the availability, and remains until the availability is greater than 12.5% for thirty consecutive days. As of December 26, 2020, the unused borrowing availability under the revolving credit facility was $43,344.
Effective October 30, 2020, our previous Senior Secured Credit Facility with Wells Fargo Capital Finance, LLC was terminated and repaid, with the subsequent new loans, by us upon notice to the lender in accordance with the terms of the facility.
Term Loans. Effective October 28, 2020, we entered into a $10.0 million principal amount USDA Guaranteed term loan with AmeriState Bank as lender. The term of the loan is 25 years and bears interest at a minimum 5.00% rate or 4.00% above 5-year treasury, to be reset every 5 years at 3.5% above 5-year treasury. The loan is secured by a first mortgage on our Atmore, Alabama and Roanoke, Alabama facilities and requires certain compliance, affirmative, and financial covenants.
Effective October 29, 2020, we entered into a $15.0 million principal amount USDA Guaranteed term loan with the Greater Nevada Credit Union as lender. The term of the loan is 10 years and bears interest at a minimum 5.00% rate or 4.00% above 5- year treasury, to be reset after 5 years at 3.5% above 5-year treasury. The loan is secured by a first lien on a substantial portion of the Company’s machinery and equipment and a second lien on our Atmore and Roanoke facilities. Payments on the loan are interest only over the first three years and principal and interest over the remaining seven years.
Notes Payable - Buildings. On November 7, 2014, we entered into a ten-year $8.3 million note payable to purchase a previously leased distribution center in Adairsville, Georgia. The note payable is scheduled to mature on November 7, 2024 and is secured by the distribution center. The note payable bears interest at a variable rate equal to one-month LIBOR plus 2.0% and is payable in equal monthly installments of principal of $35 thousand, plus interest calculated on the declining balance of the note, with a final payment of $4.2 million due on maturity. In addition, we entered into an interest rate swap with an amortizing notional amount effective November 7, 2014 which effectively fixes the interest rate at 4.50%.
Notes Payable - Equipment and Other. Our equipment financing notes have terms ranging from 1 to 7 years, bear interest ranging from 1.60% to 7.00% and are due in monthly installments through their maturity dates. Our equipment financing notes are secured by the specific equipment financed and do not contain any financial covenants.
Finance Lease - Buildings. On January 14, 2019, we entered into a purchase and sale agreement (the “Purchase and Sale Agreement”) with Saraland Industrial, LLC, an Alabama limited liability company (the “Purchaser”). Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase and Sale Agreement, we sold our Saraland facility, and approximately 17.12 acres of surrounding property located in Saraland, Alabama (the “Property”) to the Purchaser for a purchase price of $11,500. Concurrent with the sale of the Property, we and the Purchaser entered into a twenty-year lease agreement (the “Lease Agreement”), whereby we will lease back the Property at an annual rental rate of $977, subject to annual rent increases of 1.25%. Under the Lease Agreement, we have two (2) consecutive options to extend the term of the Lease by ten years for each such option. This transaction was recorded as a failed sale and leaseback as the present value of lease payments exceeded 90% of its fair value. We recorded a liability for the amounts received, will continue to depreciate the asset, and have imputed an interest rate so that the net carrying amount of the financial liability and remaining assets will be zero at the end of the lease term. Concurrently with the sale, we paid off the approximately $5,000 mortgage on the property to First Tennessee Bank National Association and terminated the related fixed interest rate swap agreement.
Finance Lease Obligations. Our finance lease obligations have terms ranging from 3 to 6 years and are due in monthly or quarterly installments through their maturity dates. Our finance lease obligations are secured by the specific equipment leased. (See Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements).
Table of Contents 22
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our future minimum payments under contractual obligations as of December 26, 2020:
(1) Interest rates used for variable rate debt were those in effect at December 26, 2020.
Stock-Based Awards
We recognize compensation expense related to share-based stock awards based on the fair value of the equity instrument over the period of vesting for the individual stock awards that were granted. At December 26, 2020, the total unrecognized compensation expense related to unvested restricted stock awards was $705 thousand with a weighted-average vesting period of 10.3 years. At December 26, 2020, the total unrecognized compensation expense related to Directors' Stock Performance Units was $5 thousand with a weighted-average vesting period of 0.3 years. At December 26, 2020, there was no unrecognized compensation expense related to unvested stock options.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements at December 26, 2020 or December 28, 2019.
Income Tax Considerations
In the tax year ended December 26, 2020 we increased our valuation allowances by $2.1 million related to our net deferred tax asset and specific state net operating loss and state credit carryforwards.
During 2021 and 2022, we do not anticipate any cash outlays for income taxes to exceed $500 thousand. This is due to tax loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards that will be used to partially offset taxable income. At December 26, 2020, we were in a net deferred tax liability position of $91 thousand.
Discontinued Operations - Environmental Contingencies
We have reserves for environmental obligations established at five previously owned sites that were associated with our discontinued textile businesses. We have a reserve of $1.9 million for environmental liabilities at these sites as of December 26, 2020. The liability established represents our best estimate of loss and is the reasonable amount to which there is any meaningful degree of certainty given the periods of estimated remediation and the dollars applicable to such remediation for those periods. The actual timeline to remediate, and thus, the ultimate cost to complete such remediation through these remediation efforts, may differ significantly from our estimates. Pre-tax cost for environmental remediation obligations classified as discontinued operations were primarily a result of specific events requiring action and additional expense in each period.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
At December 26, 2020, we had no assets or liabilities measured at fair value that fall under a level 3 classification in the hierarchy (those subject to significant management judgment or estimation).
Certain Related Party Transactions
We were a party to a 5-year lease with the seller of Atlas Carpet Mills, Inc. to lease three manufacturing facilities as part of the acquisition in 2014. The lessor was controlled by an associate of our Company. Rent paid to the lessor during 2019 and 2018 was $497 thousand and $1.0 million, respectively. The lease was based on current market values for similar facilities. These leases terminated as of September, 2019.
Table of Contents 23
We purchase a portion of our product needs in the form of fiber, yarn and carpet from Engineered Floors, an entity substantially controlled by Robert E. Shaw, a shareholder of our Company. An affiliate of Mr. Shaw holds approximately 7.7% of our Common Stock, which represents approximately 3.5% of the total vote of all classes of our Common Stock. Engineered Floors is one of several suppliers of such materials to us. Total purchases from Engineered Floors for 2020, 2019, and 2018 were approximately $4.5 million, $5.9 million and $8.2 million, respectively; or approximately 1.9%, 2.1%, and 2.6% of our cost of goods sold in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Purchases from Engineered Floors are based on market value, negotiated prices. We have no contractual commitments with Mr. Shaw associated with our business relationship with Engineered Floors. Transactions with Engineered Floors are reviewed annually by our board of directors.
We are a party to a ten-year lease with the Rothman Family Partnership to lease a facility as part of the Robertex acquisition in 2013. The controlling principal of the lessor was an associate of our Company until June 30, 2018. Rent paid to the lessor during 2020, 2019, and 2018 was $289 thousand, $284 thousand, and $278 thousand, respectively. The lease was based on current market values for similar facilities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K for a discussion of new accounting pronouncements which is incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Policies
Certain estimates and assumptions are made when preparing our financial statements. Estimates involve judgments with respect to, among other things, future economic factors that are difficult to predict. As a result, actual amounts could differ from estimates made when our financial statements are prepared.
The Securities and Exchange Commission requires management to identify its most critical accounting policies, defined as those that are both most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and operating results and the application of which requires our most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments. Although our estimates have not differed materially from our experience, such estimates pertain to inherently uncertain matters that could result in material differences in subsequent periods.
We believe application of the following accounting policies require significant judgments and estimates and represent our critical accounting policies. Other significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
•Revenue recognition. We derive our revenues primarily from the sale of floorcovering products and processing services. Revenues are recognized when control of these products or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those products and services. Sales, value add, and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. Shipping and handling fees charged to customers are reported within revenue. Incidental items that are immaterial in the context of the contract are recognized as expense. We do not have any significant financing components as payment is received at or shortly after the point of sale. We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
▪Identification of the contract with a customer
▪Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
▪Determination of the transaction price
▪Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
▪Recognition of revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied
•Variable Consideration. The nature of our business gives rise to variable consideration, including rebates, allowances, and returns that generally decrease the transaction price, which reduces revenue. These variable amounts are generally credited to the customer, based on achieving certain levels of sales activity, product returns, or price concessions.
Variable consideration is estimated at the most likely amount that is expected to be earned. Estimated amounts are included in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Estimates of variable consideration are estimated based upon historical experience and known trends.
•Customer claims and product warranties. We generally provide product warranties related to manufacturing defects and specific performance standards for our products for a period of up to two years. We accrue for estimated future assurance warranty costs in the period in which the sale is recorded. The costs are included in Cost of Sales in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and the product warranty reserve is included in accrued expenses in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We calculate our accrual using the portfolio approach based upon historical experience and known trends. We do not provide an additional service-type warranty.
Table of Contents 24
•Inventories. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost is determined using the last-in, first-out method (LIFO), which generally matches current costs of inventory sold with current revenues, for substantially all inventories. Reserves are also established to adjust inventories that are off-quality, aged or obsolete to their estimated net realizable value. Additionally, rates of recoverability per unit of off-quality, aged or obsolete inventory are estimated based on historical rates of recoverability and other known conditions or circumstances that may affect future recoverability. Actual results could differ from assumptions used to value our inventory.
•Goodwill. Goodwill is tested annually for impairment during the fourth quarter or earlier if significant events or substantive changes in circumstances occur that may indicate that goodwill may not be recoverable. The goodwill impairment tests are based on determining the fair value of the specified reporting units based on management judgments and assumptions using the discounted cash flows and comparable company market valuation approaches. We have identified our reporting unit as our floorcovering business for the purposes of allocating goodwill and assessing impairments. The valuation approaches are subject to key judgments and assumptions that are sensitive to change such as judgments and assumptions about sales growth rates, operating margins, the weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”), synergies from the viewpoint of a market participant and comparable company market multiples. When developing these key judgments and assumptions, we consider economic, operational and market conditions that could impact the fair value of the reporting unit. However, estimates are inherently uncertain and represent only management’s reasonable expectations regarding future developments. These estimates and the judgments and assumptions upon which the estimates are based will, in all likelihood, differ in some respects from actual future results. We performed our annual assessment of goodwill in the fourth quarter of 2018 and an impairment was indicated. In accordance with the results of our testing, the goodwill was considered impaired and the asset was removed and a corresponding expense was recorded for asset impairment on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. (See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements)
•Self-insured accruals. We estimate costs required to settle claims related to our self-insured medical, dental and workers' compensation plans. These estimates include costs to settle known claims, as well as incurred and unreported claims. The estimated costs of known and unreported claims are based on historical experience. Actual results could differ from assumptions used to estimate these accruals.
•Income taxes. Our effective tax rate is based on income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available in the jurisdictions in which we operate. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Deferred tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in a future period. We evaluate the recoverability of these future tax benefits by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. These sources of income inherently rely on estimates, including business forecasts and other projections of financial results over an extended period of time. In the event that we are not able to realize all or a portion of our deferred tax assets in the future, a valuation allowance is provided. We recognize such amounts through a charge to income in the period in which that determination is made or when tax law changes are enacted. We had valuation allowances of $15.4 million at December 26, 2020 and $13.3 million at December 28, 2019. At December 26, 2020, we were in a net deferred tax liability position of $91 thousand. For further information regarding our valuation allowances, see Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
•Loss contingencies. We routinely assess our exposure related to legal matters, environmental matters, product liabilities or any other claims against our assets that may arise in the normal course of business. If we determine that it is probable a loss has been incurred, the amount of the loss, or an amount within the range of loss, that can be reasonably estimated will be recorded.