ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a global provider of ultra-broadband network access solutions and communications platforms deployed by advanced Tier I, national, and regional service providers and enterprise customers. We research, develop, test, sell, manufacture and support communications equipment in mobile transport and fixed broadband, which includes broadband access and connected premises, and Software and Services:
•
Our mobile transport products provide a robust, manageable and scalable solution for mobile operators that enable them to upgrade their mobile fronthaul/backhaul systems and migrate to 5G and beyond. Our mobile backhaul products may be collocated at the radio access node base station and can aggregate multiple radio access node base stations into a single backhaul for delivery of mobile traffic to the radio access node network controller. We provide standard Ethernet/IP or Multiprotocol Label Switching (“MPLS”) interfaces and interoperate with other vendors in these networks.
•
Our broadband access products, which now includes our switching and routing products, offer a variety of solutions for carriers and service providers to connect residential and business customers, either using high-speed fiber or leveraging their existing deployed copper networks to offer broadband services to customer premises. Once our broadband access products are deployed, the service provider can offer voice, high-definition and ultra-high-definition video, high-speed internet access and business class services to their customers.
•
Our connected premises products are designed for high bandwidth services being deployed to the home or business. Our connected premises portfolio consists of indoor/outdoor Optical Network Terminal (“ONT”) gateways delivering best-in-class data throughout to support the most demanding Fiber To The X (“FTTx”) applications. The product feature set gives service providers an elegant migration path from legacy to softswitch architectures without replacing ONTs.
•
Our Software and Services offering consists of Software Defined Networking (“SDN”) Orchestration solutions and Professional and Technical Support services. Our SDN Orchestration strategy is to develop tools and building blocks that will allow service providers to migrate their networks’ full complement of legacy control plane and data plane devices to a centralized intelligent controller that can reconfigure the services of the hundreds of network elements in real time for more controlled and efficient provision of bandwidth and latency across the network. The migration move to SDN/Network Function Virtualization (“NFV”) will provide better service for end customers and a more efficient and cost-effective use of hardware resources for service providers. Our services offerings designed to help our customers rapidly deploy, scale and optimize their broadband networks for agility and reliability.
Our key financial objectives include the following:
•
Increasing revenue while continuing to carefully control costs;
•
Continuing investments in strategic research and product development activities that will provide the maximum potential return on investment; and
•
Minimizing consumption of our cash and cash equivalents.
Recent Developments
On March 8, 2021, DZS made the strategic decision, subject to the proper involvement of the employee representatives, to transition DZS GmbH to a sales and research and development center. Negotiations are being held with the works council in Germany on a reconciliation of interests and a social plan. DZS GmbH is expecting to reduce headcount by approximately 100 employees.
On March 4, 2021, we announced our acquisition of the business of RIFT, Inc., a network automation solutions company.
On February 5, 2021, we acquired Optelian Access Networks Corporation, a leading optical networking solution provider based in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, and its portfolio of optical transport solutions.
On January 26, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement to sell 4.6 million shares of Common Stock (including 0.6 million shares issued pursuant to the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) at a price of $14.00 per share in an underwritten public offering. The equity offering closed on January 29, 2021 and resulted in gross proceeds of approximately $64.4 million and net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, of approximately $60.2 million. We used a portion of the net proceeds from the equity offering to pay off the entire outstanding balance of debt with related parties.
Effective August 1, 2020, Charlie Vogt was appointed as the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company. In addition, Mr. Vogt was elected as a member of the Board, also effective August 1, 2020. In connection with Mr. Vogt’s appointment, Il Yung Kim ceased to serve as President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company and as a member of the Board effective July 31, 2020. Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Vogt was most recently President and Chief Executive Officer of ATX Networks, a leader in broadband access and media distribution, where he led the company through extensive transformation and growth since February 2018 and where he remains a member of the board. From July 2013 to January 2018, Mr. Vogt served as President and Chief Executive Officer of Imagine Communications, where he directed the company through change as it evolved its core technology, including large-scale restructuring and rebranding and multiple technology acquisitions as he implemented a vision and growth strategy. Before joining Imagine Communications, Mr. Vogt was President and Chief Executive Officer of GENBAND (today known as Ribbon Communications), where he transformed the company from a startup to a global leader in voice over IP and real-time IP communications solutions. His professional career has also included leadership roles at Taqua (Tekelec), Lucent Technology (Nokia), Ascend Communications (Lucent), ADTRAN, Motorola and IBM.
On August 1, 2020, the Company completed the relocation of its corporate headquarters from California to Plano, Texas. In connection with the relocation, the Company entered into sublease agreements to sublease an aggregate of approximately 16,300 square feet located at 5700 Tennyson Parkway, Plano, Texas. In September 2020, the Company entered into a lease agreement for approximately 10,300 square feet of additional office space at its headquarters in Plano, TX. The Company retains 16,500 square feet of leased space located in Alameda, California.
Trends and Uncertainties
In December 2019, a strain of coronavirus, now known as COVID-19, was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China. Since that time, the widespread and sustained transmission of the virus has reached global pandemic status. In response to the pandemic, many national and international health agencies have recommended, and many countries and state, provincial and local governments have implemented, various measures, including travel bans and restrictions, limitations on public and private gatherings, business closures or operating restrictions, social distancing, and shelter-in-place orders. The health effects of the pandemic and the above measures taken in response thereto have had an effect on the global economy in general and has materially impacted and will likely continue to impact the Company’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Given the ongoing and dynamic nature of the virus and the worldwide response related thereto, it is difficult to predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s revenues declined relative to its prior expectations, in part due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to the uncertainty around the future economic impact of the pandemic, the fair value measurements used in the Company’s impairment assessments could be negatively impacted and could result in future impairments of goodwill, intangibles and other long-lived assets.
The impact of a continued COVID-19 pandemic or sustained measures taken to limit or contain the outbreak could continue to have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
As discussed further in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements below, the Company has a past-due receivables balance of $17.3 million from a customer in India, for which the Company recorded an allowance for doubtful accounts of $3.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, leaving a remaining unreserved accounts receivable balance of $14.2 million. If the Company’s efforts to collect the outstanding balance under the terms of the agreement are not successful, the Company may recognize an additional allowance for all, or substantially all, of the remaining $14.2 million balance in a future period.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The financial statements and related data presented herein have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Although our operations are influenced by general economic conditions, we do not believe that inflation had a material effect on our results of operations during our fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We list in the table below the historical consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss) as a percentage of total net revenue for the periods indicated.
2020 COMPARED WITH 2019
Net Revenue
The following table presents our revenues by source (in millions):
Net revenue decreased 2.0% or $6.3 million to $300.6 million for 2020 compared to $306.9 million for 2019. The decrease in product revenue was primarily due to impacts from the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic in the first half of 2020, which resulted in disruptions to our supply chain, as well as decreased business operations by certain of our customers earlier in 2020, partially offset by increasing sales of fiber access products in the second half of 2020 and an increase in sales for our next generation mobile edge access transport and fixed broadband access solutions.
Service revenue represents revenue from maintenance and other services associated with product shipments. The decrease in service revenue was primarily related to a lower number of products under contract for maintenance and extended warranty.
Information about our net revenue by geography is summarized below (in millions):
The decrease in net revenue in the Americas was primarily due to a decline in the first half of the year primarily impacts from the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by increasing sales of fiber access products in the second half of 2020. The decline in net revenue within EMEA were due to lower sales of copper-based broadband access solutions as the industry shifts to fiber-based broadband solutions as well as the DZS exit from a lower margin contract manufacturing agreement. Increased sales in Asia was primarily driven by increase sales in South Korea and Japan, for our next generation mobile edge access transport and fixed broadband access solutions.
We anticipate that our results of operations in any given period may depend to a large extent on sales to a small number of large accounts. As a result, our revenue for any quarter may be subject to significant volatility based upon changes in orders from one or a small number of key customers.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit
Total cost of revenue decreased 1.5% to $203.8 million for 2020, compared to $206.8 million for 2019. Total cost of revenue was 67.8% of net revenue for 2020, compared to 67.4% of net revenue for 2019, which resulted in a decrease in gross profit percentage to 32.2% in 2020 from 32.6% in 2019. The decrease in total cost of revenue, was primarily due to the mix of products sold.
We expect that in the future our cost of revenue as a percentage of net revenue will vary depending on the geographic and product mix and average selling prices of products sold. In addition, continued competitive and economic pressures could cause us to reduce our prices, adjust the carrying values of our inventory, or record inventory expenses relating to discontinued products and excess or obsolete inventory.
Research and Product Development Expenses
Research and development expenses include personnel costs, outside contractor and consulting services, depreciation on lab equipment, costs of prototypes and overhead allocations. Research and product development expenses decreased by 2.7% to $37.5 million for 2020 compared to $38.5 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily due to decreased research and product development expenses which was due in part to lower headcount related costs, partially offset by higher outsourced costs.
We intend to continue to invest in research and product development to attain our strategic product development objectives, while seeking to manage the associated costs through expense controls.
Selling, Marketing, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, marketing, general and administrative expenses include personnel costs for sales, marketing, administration, finance, information technology, human resources and general management as well as legal and accounting expenses, rent, utilities, trade show expenses and related travel costs.
Selling, marketing, general and administrative expenses increased 4.6% to $64.0 million for 2020 compared to $61.2 million for 2019. The increase in selling, marketing, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to the increase in allowance for doubtful accounts for one customer in India. Refer to Note 1 in the consolidated financial statements, for further details on the bad debt expense.
Restructuring and Other Charges
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded no restructuring and other charges compared to $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Intangible Asset and Goodwill Impairment Charge
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $6.5 million for DZS GmbH intangible assets as part of the Company’s evaluation for impairment, based on a triggering event for potential impairment. During the
fourth quarter of 2019, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $1.0 million for DZS GmbH goodwill as part of the Company’s 2019 annual evaluation of goodwill for impairment.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net was $2.0 million and $3.5 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. This decrease in interest expense was primarily related to lower average borrowings and borrowing rates during 2020.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
During March 2020, the Company paid the outstanding term loan borrowings in full and terminated the PNC Credit Facilities. In association with this debt repayment, the Company recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.4 million. There was no debt extinguishment in 2019.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense) relates mainly to realized and unrealized foreign exchange gains and losses. Other expense, net was $3.7 million for 2020 compared to other income, net of $0.9 million in 2019. The main reason for the increase in other expense, net was due to foreign currency exchange losses in 2020.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit)
We recorded an income tax expense of $3.5 million for 2020, roughly flat to the $3.6 million incurred in 2019. Despite consolidated net losses, we incur income tax expense due to taxable income generated in South Korea and Japan.
OTHER PERFORMANCE MEASURES
In managing our business and assessing our financial performance, we supplement the information provided by our U.S. GAAP results with adjusted earnings before stock-based compensation, interest, taxes, and depreciation, or Adjusted EBITDA, a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) plus (i) interest expense, net, (ii) provision (benefit) for taxes, (iii) depreciation and amortization, (iv) stock-based compensation, and (v) the impact of material transactions or events that we believe are not indicative of our core operating performance, such as merger and acquisition transaction costs, inventory valuation step-up amortization, purchase price adjustments, restructuring and other charges, goodwill impairment, bargain purchase gain, gain (loss) on sale of assets, impairment of long-lived assets or loss on debt extinguishment, bad debt expense related to a large customer in India, any of which may or may not be recurring in nature. We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA enhances the usefulness of our financial information by presenting a measure that management uses internally to monitor and evaluate our operating performance and to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies. We believe Adjusted EBITDA also assists investors and analysts in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis because it excludes the impact of items that we do not believe reflect our core operating performance.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool. Some of these limitations are:
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual requirements;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debts;
•
Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash expenses, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
•
Non-cash compensation is and will remain a key element of our overall long-term incentive compensation package, although we exclude it as an expense when evaluating our ongoing operating performance for a particular period; and
•
Other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA and similar measures differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net income (loss) or any other performance measures calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP or as a measure of liquidity. Management understands these limitations and compensates for these limitations by relying primarily on our U.S. GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA only as a supplemental measure.
Set forth below is a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA, which we consider to be the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
* Refer to Note 1 in the consolidated financial statements, for further details on the bad debt expense.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our operations have historically and continue to be financed through a combination of our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash generated in the business, borrowings, and sales of equity.
The following table summarizes the information regarding our cash and cash equivalents and working capital (in thousands):
The Company had a net loss of $23.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and net loss of $13.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $52.3 million and working capital of $123.3 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had $45.2 million in cash and cash equivalents, which included $32.2 million in cash balances held by our international subsidiaries, and $43.6 million in aggregate principal debt. On January 29, 2021, the Company closed an equity offering and resulted in gross proceeds to the Company of approximately $64.4 million and net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, of approximately $60.2 million. We used a portion of the net proceeds from the equity offering to pay off the entire outstanding balance of debt with related parties.
We continue to focus on cost management, operating efficiency and restrictions on discretionary spending. In addition, if necessary, we may sell assets, issue debt or equity securities or purchase credit insurance. We may also rationalize the number of products we sell, adjust our manufacturing footprint, and reduce our operations in low margin regions, including reductions in headcount. Based on our current plans and current business conditions, we believe that these measures along with our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to satisfy our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our ability to meet our obligations as they become due in the ordinary course of business for the next 12 months will depend on our ability (i) to achieve forecasted results of operations, and (ii) continue to effectively manage working capital requirements. While we believe that we are likely to achieve forecasted results of operations if we are successful in implementing our business strategies, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic provides great uncertainty with respect to a potential impact on our future operations.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by (used in) by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $5.1 million and ($22.7) million, respectively. The $27.8 million increase in cash provided by operating activities in 2020 was primarily due improved management of working capital compared to 2019.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.3 million and consists of purchases of property, plant and equipment, compared with $7.0 million of net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 which consisted of purchases of property, plant and equipment and the Keymile acquisition.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $17.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of proceeds from borrowings of $32.1 million, proceeds from factored accounts receivable of $11.6 million and proceeds from exercise of stock options and employee stock purchases of $3.7 million, partially offset by a net outflow associated with the repayment of short-term borrowings of $16.7 million and the repayment of long-term debt of $13.1 million. This compared to cash provided by financing activities of $28.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Debt Facilities
DNI Loan
In February 2016, Dasan Network Solutions, Inc. (“DNS California”), a wholly-owned, direct subsidiary of the Company and the sole stockholder of DNS Korea, borrowed $1.8 million from Dasan Networks, Inc. (“DNI”) for capital investment with an interest rate of 4.6% per annum, payable quarterly. On February 27, 2019, in connection with the entry into the PNC Credit Facilities, the Company amended the terms of this loan to extend the repayment date to May 27, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, $1.8 million was outstanding.
In March 2018, DNS Korea borrowed KRW 6.5 billion ($5.8 million USD) from DNI of which KRW 5.0 billion ($4.5 million USD) was repaid on August 8, 2018. The loan bears interest at a rate of 4.6%. On February 27, 2019, in connection with the entry into the PNC Credit Facilities, we amended the terms of this loan to extend the repayment date to May 27, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, KRW 1.5 billion ($1.4 million USD) was outstanding.
In December 2018, we entered into a Loan Agreement with DNI for a $6.0 million term loan with an interest rate of 4.6% per annum. On February 27, 2019, in connection with the entry into the PNC Credit Facilities, we amended the terms of the term loan to extend the repayment date until May 27, 2022 and to terminate any security granted to DNI with respect to such term loan. As of December 31, 2020, $6.0 million was outstanding.
The modifications resulting from the amendments described in the three preceding paragraphs were limited to the extension of the maturity dates and removal of the collateral on the outstanding term loans with DNI. There were no fees paid to DNI or external costs otherwise incurred in connection with these modifications.
On March 5, 2020, DNS Korea, the Company’s wholly-owned, indirect subsidiary entered into a Loan Agreement with DNI (the “March 2020 DNI Loan”). The March 2020 DNI Loan was negotiated and approved on behalf of the Company and its subsidiaries by a special committee of the Board of Directors of the Company (the “Special Committee”) consisting of directors determined to be independent from DNI. The March 2020 DNI Loan consists of a term loan in the amount of KRW 22.4 billion ($18.5 million USD) with interest payable semi-annually at an annual rate of 4.6% and maturing on March 11, 2022. No principal payments are due on the March 2020 DNI Loan until the maturity date, but DNS Korea may prepay the loan, or a portion thereof, without penalty. As of December 31, 2020, KRW 22.4 billion ($20.6 million USD) was outstanding.
As security for the March 2020 DNI Loan (and other existing loans between DNI and DNS Korea and/or DNS California), (i) DNS California, a wholly-owned, direct subsidiary of the Company and the sole stockholder of DNS Korea, agreed to pledge the outstanding shares of DNS Korea to DNI and (ii) DNS Korea granted a security interest in its personal property assets, accounts receivable and intellectual property assets to DNI. The March 2020 DNI Loan includes certain covenants consisting of financial reporting obligations, a maintenance covenant whereby DNS Korea agreed to maintain a minimum stockholders’ equity value in an amount equal to or greater than KRW 43.3 billion ($35.8 million), and customary events of default. If an event of default occurs and is not remedied within the applicable cure period, DNI will be entitled to take various actions, including requiring the immediate repayment of all outstanding amounts under the March 2020 DNI Loan and selling the shares or assets of DNS Korea.
DNS Korea loaned the funds borrowed under the March 2020 DNI Loan to the Company, and the Company used a portion of such funds to repay in full and terminate the PNC Credit Facilities, described below.
In February 2021, the Company paid off the entire outstanding balance of debt with DNI with proceeds of its issuance of shares of its common stock during January of 2021.
PNC Credit Facilities
In February 2019, the Company and ZTI (collectively, the “Borrowers”), and certain direct and indirect subsidiaries of the Borrowers, as guarantors, entered into a Revolving Credit, Term Loan, Guaranty and Security Agreement (the “Domestic Credit Agreement”) and an Export-Import Revolving Credit, Guaranty and Security Agreement (the “Ex-Im Credit Agreement,” and together with the Domestic Credit Agreement, the “Credit Agreements”), in each case with PNC Bank, National Association (“PNC”) and Citibank, N.A. as lenders, and PNC as agent for the lenders (the “PNC Credit Facilities”), which replaced the Company’s former senior secured credit facilities with Wells Fargo Bank (the “Former WFB Facility”). We refer to such transactions and the agreements referenced above as the “PNC Credit Facilities.”
The PNC Credit Facilities provided for a $25 million term loan and a $15 million revolving line of credit (including subfacilities for Ex-Im transactions, letters of credit and swing loans) with a $10 million incremental increase option. The amount the Company was able to borrow on the revolving line of credit at any time was based on eligible accounts receivable and other conditions, less certain reserves. Borrowings under the PNC Credit Facilities bore interest at a floating rate equal to either the PNC prime rate or the LIBOR rate for the applicable period, plus a margin that was based on the type of advance.
The Company used a portion of the funds borrowed from the term loan under the PNC Credit Facilities to (i) repay $5.0 million of existing related party indebtedness with DNI plus accrued interest, (ii) repay $1.5 million revolving line of credit outstanding balance plus accrued interest and fees and cash collateralize $3.6 million in outstanding letters of credit under the Former WFB Facility, and (iii) repay $5.6 million in short-term debt in Korea and Japan. The Company’s obligations under the PNC Credit Facilities were secured by substantially all of the personal property assets of the Company and its subsidiaries that were co-borrowers or guarantors under the PNC Credit Facilities, including their intellectual property.
The PNC Credit Facilities had a three-year term and were scheduled to mature on February 27, 2022. The PNC Credit Facilities contemplated repayment of the term loan in quarterly installments over the term of the loan, with the balance of the term loan and revolving line of credit due at maturity.
In July 2019, $4.4 million in outstanding borrowings under the revolving line of credit (which represented all outstanding borrowings under the revolving line of credit) was repaid in full and in March 2020, the Company paid the outstanding term loan borrowings in full and terminated the PNC Credit Facilities. In association with this debt repayment, the Company recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.4 million during the three months ended March 31, 2020.
Bank and Trade Facilities - Foreign Operations
On June 1, 2020, DZS Japan entered into an assignment agreement with JECC Corporation to factor JPY 1,258,822,828 (approximately $11.7 million) of accounts receivables from one of its customers. JECC assessed a discount equivalent to JPY 5,964,328 (approximately $0.05 million) (or approximately 0.474% of the amount factored, with a stated factoring rate of 1.575% based on the days remaining from factoring to expected receivable collection). DZS Japan received JPY 1,252,858,500 (approximately $11.65 million) on June 19, 2020. In accordance with ASC 860, Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets, this agreement is accounted for as a secured borrowing. The collection of the underlying accounts receivable occurred during 2020 and there was no secured borrowing balance as of December 31, 2020.
Certain of our foreign subsidiaries have entered into various financing arrangements with foreign banks and other lending institutions consisting primarily of revolving lines of credit, trade facilities, term loans and export development loans. These facilities are renewed on an annual basis and are generally secured by a security interest in certain assets of the applicable foreign subsidiaries and supported by guarantees given by DNI or third parties. Payments under such facilities are made in accordance with the given lender’s amortization schedules.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had an aggregate outstanding balance of $13.8 million and $15.8 million, respectively, under such financing arrangements, and the interest rate per annum applicable to outstanding borrowings under these financing arrangements as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 ranged from 0% to 2.3% and 0% to 4.5%, respectively.
Future Requirements and Funding Sources
Our fixed commitments for cash expenditures consist primarily of payments under operating leases, inventory purchase commitments, and payments of principal and interest for debt obligations.
From time to time, we may provide or commit to extend credit or credit support to our customers. This financing may include extending the terms for product payments to customers. Any extension of financing to our customers will limit the capital that we have available for other uses.
Our accounts receivable, while not considered a primary source of liquidity, represent a concentration of credit risk because a significant portion of the accounts receivable balance at any point in time typically consists of a relatively small number of customer account balances. As of December 31, 2020, two customers accounted for 17% and 16%, respectively, of our net accounts receivable. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has an allowance for doubtful account of $3.1 million related to one customer. Refer to Refer to Note 1 Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, for further detail. Our receivables from customers in countries other than the U.S represented 89% of accounts receivable. We do not currently have any material commitments for capital expenditures, or any other material commitments aside from operating leases for our facilities, inventory purchase commitments and debt.
Contractual Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, our future contractual commitments by fiscal year were as follows (in thousands):
* In February 2021, we paid down the remaining long-term debt following the stock issuance in January 2021.
Operating Leases
Future minimum operating lease obligations in the table above include primarily payments for our office locations and manufacturing, research and development locations, which expire at various dates through 2025. See Note 13 “Leases” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding our operating leases.
Purchase Commitments
The purchase commitments shown above represent non-cancellable inventory purchase commitments as of December 31, 2020. See Note 14 “Commitments and Contingencies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding our purchase commitments.
Short-term and Long-term Debt
The debt obligation amount shown above represents scheduled principal repayments, but not the associated interest payments which may vary based on changes in market interest rates. See Note 7 “Debt” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding our operating leases.
Postretirement obligations
The Company’s pension plan obligations are excluded, since the plan is unfunded, and the timing and amount of any cash payments are uncertain. Refer to Note 15 of the consolidated financial statement for more detailed.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The policies discussed below are considered by management to be critical because changes in such estimates can materially affect the amount of our reported net income or loss. For all of these policies, management cautions that actual results could differ materially from such estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenues when we transfer control of promised goods or services to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
We generate revenue primarily from sales of products and services, including, extended warranty service and customer support. Our revenue from product sales is recognized at a point in time when control of the goods is transferred to our customers, generally occurring upon shipment or delivery, dependent upon the terms of the underlying contract. Our revenue from services is generally recognized over time on a ratable basis over the contract term, using an output measure of progress, as the contracts usually provide our customers equal benefit throughout the contract period. We typically invoice customers for support contracts in advance, for periods ranging from one to five years.
Our transaction price is calculated as selling price net of variable consideration. Our sales to certain distributors are made under arrangements which provide our distributors with volume discounts, price adjustments, and other allowances under certain circumstances. These adjustments and allowances are accounted for as variable consideration. To estimate variable consideration, we analyze historical data, channel inventory levels, current economic trends and changes in our customer demand for our products, among other factors. Historically, variable consideration has not been a significant component of our contracts with customers.
For contracts with customers that contain multiple performance obligations, we account for the promises separately as individual performance obligations if they are distinct. In determining whether performance obligations meet the criteria for being distinct, we consider a number of factors, including the degree of interrelation and interdependence between obligations and whether or not the good or service significantly modifies or transforms another good or service in the contract. After identifying the separate performance obligations, we allocate transaction price to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. Standalone selling prices for products are determined using either an adjusted market assessment or expected cost-plus margin. For customer support and extended warranty services, standalone selling price is primarily based on the prices charged to our customers on a standalone basis. Unsatisfied and partially unsatisfied performance obligations as of the end of the reporting period primarily consist of products and services for which our customer purchase orders have been accepted and that are in the process of being delivered.
We record contract assets when we have a right to consideration and record accounts receivable when we have an unconditional right to consideration. We record deferred revenue when cash payments received (or unconditional rights to receive cash) in advance of fulfilling our performance obligations.
Our payment terms vary by the type and location of our customer and the products or services offered. For certain products or services and customer types, we require payment before the products or services are delivered to the customer.
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts
We record an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of customers to make payments for amounts owed to us. The allowance for doubtful accounts is recorded as a charge to general and administrative expenses. We base our allowance on periodic assessments of our customers’ liquidity and financial condition through analysis of information obtained from credit rating agencies, financial statement reviews and historical collection trends. Additional allowances may be required in the future if the liquidity or financial condition of our customers deteriorates, resulting in doubts about their ability to make payments.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost being determined using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method. In assessing the net realizable value of inventories, we are required to make judgments as to future demand requirements and compare these with the current or committed inventory levels. Once inventory has been written down to its estimated net realizable value, its carrying value cannot be increased due to subsequent changes in demand forecasts. To the extent that a severe decline in forecasted demand occurs, or we experience a higher incidence of inventory obsolescence due to rapidly changing technology and customer requirements, we may incur significant charges for excess inventory. We also evaluate the terms of our agreements with our suppliers and establish accruals for estimated losses on adverse purchase commitments as necessary, applying the same lower of cost or net realizable value approach that is used to value inventory.
Goodwill and Long-lived Assets
Goodwill and other acquisition-related intangible assets not subject to amortization are tested annually for impairment and are tested for impairment more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. The quantitative goodwill impairment test is a two-step process with step one requiring the comparison of the reporting unit's estimated fair value with the carrying amount of its net assets. If necessary, step two of the impairment test determines the amount of goodwill impairment to be recorded when the reporting unit's recorded net assets exceed its fair value.
The Company reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Factors the Company considers important which could trigger an impairment review, include, but are not limited to, significant changes in the manner of use the assets, significant changes in the strategy for the Company's overall business or significant negative economic trends. If this evaluation indicates that the value of an intangible asset may be impaired an assessment of the recoverability of the net carrying value of the asset over its remaining useful life is made. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to the future net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future net undiscounted cash flows, an impairment expense is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. If this assessment indicates that the cost of an intangible asset is not recoverable, based on the estimated undiscounted future cash flows or other comparable market valuations of the entity or technology acquired over the remaining amortization period, the net carrying value of the related intangible asset will be reduced to fair value and the remaining amortization period may be adjusted. An impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds the asset’s fair value. In the application of impairment testing, we are required to make estimates of future operating trends and resulting cash flows and judgments on discount rates and other variables. Actual future results and other assumed variables could differ from these estimates.
Business Combination
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. When determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, management makes significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets and certain tangible assets such as inventory acquired in the transaction.
Critical estimates in valuing certain tangible and intangible assets include but are not limited to future expected cash flows from the underlying assets and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates.
Income Tax
We use the asset and liability method to account for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial reporting and the income tax bases of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
The Company does not recognize a tax benefit unless it concludes that it is more likely than not that the benefit will be sustained on audit by the taxing authority based solely on the technical merits of the associated tax position. If the recognition threshold is met, the Company recognizes a tax benefit measured at the largest amount of the tax benefit that, in the Company’s judgment, is greater than 50 percent likely to be realized. The Company records interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in interest expense and in general and administrative expense, respectively.