Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
OVERVIEW
The following overview is a high-level discussion of our operating results, as well as some of the trends and drivers that affect our business. Management believes that an understanding of these trends and drivers provides important context for our results for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, as well as our future prospects. This summary is not intended to be exhaustive, nor is it intended to be a substitute for the detailed discussion and analysis provided elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including in the “Business” section and the “Risk Factors” above, the remainder of this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”)” or the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes.
About Electronic Arts
Electronic Arts is a global leader in digital interactive entertainment. We develop, market, publish and deliver games, content and services that can be played and watched on game consoles, PCs, mobile phones and tablets. We believe that the breadth and depth of our portfolio, live services offerings, and our use of multiple business models and distribution channels provide us with strategic advantages. Our foundation is a collection of intellectual property from which we create innovative games and content that enables us to build on-going and meaningful relationships with a community of players, creators and viewers. Our portfolio includes brands that we either wholly own (such as Battlefield, The Sims, Apex Legends, Need for Speed and Plants vs. Zombies) or license from others (such as FIFA, Madden NFL, UFC, NHL, Formula 1 and Star Wars). Through our live services offerings, we offer our players high-quality experiences designed to provide value to players and extend and enhance gameplay. These live services include extra content, subscription offerings and other revenue generated outside of the sale of our base games. In addition, we are focused on reaching more players whenever and wherever they want to play. We believe that we can add value to our network by making it easier for players to connect to a world of play by offering choice of business model, distribution channel and device.
Financial Results
Our key financial results for our fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 were as follows:
•Total net revenue was $5,629 million, up 2 percent year-over-year.
•Live services and other net revenue was $4,016 million, up 10 percent year-over-year.
•Gross margin was 73.5 percent, down 2 percentage points year-over-year.
•Operating expenses were $3,089 million, up 13 percent year-over-year.
•Operating income was $1,046 million, down 28 percent year-over-year.
•Net income was $837 million, down 72 percent year-over-year. Net income for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 was $3,039 million and included a one-time net tax benefit of $1,760 million.
•Diluted earnings per share was $2.87, down 72 percent year-over-year driven by the one-time net tax benefit included in net income for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020.
•Operating cash flow was $1,934 million, up 8 percent year-over-year.
•Total cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments were $6,366 million.
•We repurchased 5.6 million shares of our common stock for $729 million.
•In November 2020, we initiated and declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.17 per share of common stock. We paid cash dividends of $98 million during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021.
•On May 10, 2021, we declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.17 per share of our common stock, payable June 23, 2021 to shareholders of record as of the close of business on June 2, 2021.
From time to time, we make comparisons of current periods to prior periods with reference to constant currency. For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, foreign currency exchange rates did not have a material impact on our net revenue and operating expenses.
Trends in Our Business
COVID-19 Impact. We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to our people and our business. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, we have focused on actions to support our people, our players, and communities around the world that have been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our People: The wellbeing of our people is our top priority, and to keep everyone as safe as possible, the vast majority of our workforce is expected to work from home at least through September 2021. We are offering support and resources to our people, including payments to assist with work from home costs and care needs, a pandemic care leave program, and additional services for mental and physical health. We have developed a detailed protocol for how we evaluate the readiness to return to work for each of our offices around the world, accounting for guidance from health authorities and government, vaccine availability and effectiveness, the comfort level of our employees, and preparation of our facilities for continued physical distancing.
Our Business: In fiscal year 2021, execution against our strategic pillars and increased engagement with our products and services led to growth in our business, aided by consumers spending more time at home because of social restrictions and local government mandates related to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, longer-term trends that benefit our business accelerated. Live services and other net revenue for fiscal year 2021 increased more than 10 percent year-over-year. We have also experienced a significant increase in the percentage of our games purchased digitally.
Future Outlook: The full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to our business, operations and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the duration and spread of the pandemic, the extent, speed and effectiveness of worldwide containment and vaccination efforts and the impact of these and other factors on our employees, customers, partners and vendors. Trends from fiscal year 2021 that benefited our industry and business may not be indicative of results for future periods, particularly as factors related to the COVID-19 pandemic lessen and consumers can engage with other forms of entertainment, if the trend towards digital adoption decelerates, or if global macroeconomic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic persist even after the pandemic has subsided. Additional factors that could impact our business include: our ability to timely deliver high quality and technically stable games and services while our teams, including our development teams, work in a distributed environment, our ability to safely reintroduce our employees to our offices when it is appropriate to do so, and other factors included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report under the heading “Risk Factors”.
Live Services Business. We offer our players high-quality experiences designed to provide value to players and to extend and enhance gameplay. These live services include extra content, subscription offerings and other revenue generated outside of the sale of our base games. Our net revenue attributable to live services and other was $4,016 million, $3,650 million and $3,157 million for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and we expect that live services net revenue will continue to be material to our business. Within live services and other, net revenue attributable to extra content was $3,068 million, $2,826 million and $2,373 million for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Extra content net revenue has increased as players engage with our games and services over longer periods of time, and purchase additional content designed to provide value to players and extend and enhance gameplay. Our most popular live service is the extra content purchased for the Ultimate Team mode associated with our sports franchises. Ultimate Team allows players to collect current and former professional players in order to build and compete as a personalized team. Net revenue from extra content sales for Ultimate Team was $1,623 million, $1,491 million and $1,369 million during fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a substantial portion of which was derived from FIFA Ultimate Team.
Digital Delivery of Games. In our industry, players increasingly purchase games digitally as opposed to purchasing physical discs. While this trend, as applied to our business, may not be linear because of product mix during a fiscal year, consumer buying patterns and other factors, over time we expect players to purchase an increasingly higher proportion of our games digitally; therefore we expect net revenue attributable to digital full game downloads to increase over time and net revenue attributable to sales of packaged goods to decrease.
Our net revenue attributable to digital full game downloads was $918 million, $811 million and $681 million during fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively; while our net revenue attributable to packaged goods sales decreased from $1,112 million in fiscal year 2019 to $1,076 million in fiscal year 2020 and $695 million in fiscal year 2021. In addition, as measured based on total units sold on Microsoft’s Xbox One and Xbox Series X and Sony’s PlayStation 4 and 5 rather than by net revenue, we estimate that 62 percent, 49 percent, and 49 percent of our total units sold during fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 were sold digitally. Digital full game units are based on sales information provided by Microsoft and Sony; packaged goods units sold through are estimated by obtaining data from significant retail partners in North America, Europe and Asia, and applying internal sales estimates with respect to retail partners from which we do not obtain data. We believe that these percentages are
reasonable estimates of the proportion of our games that are digitally downloaded in relation to our total number of units sold for the applicable period of measurement.
During fiscal year 2021, the percentage of our full games purchased digitally accelerated, likely aided by factors associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, including store closures of our key retail partners for a portion of fiscal year 2021. While digital adoption may decelerate in fiscal year 2022, as factors related to the COVID-19 pandemic lessen or if global macroeconomic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic persist even after the pandemic has subsided, we believe that the significant increase in digital adoption we experienced in fiscal year 2021 is likely a permanent structural change. Increases in consumer adoption of digital purchase of games combined with increases in our live services revenue generally results in expansion of our gross margin, as costs associated with selling a game digitally is generally less than selling the same game through traditional retail and distribution channels.
Free-to-Play Games. The global adoption of mobile devices and a business model for those devices that allows consumers to try new games with no up-front cost, and that are monetized through a live service associated with the game, particularly extra content sales, has led to significant sales growth in the mobile gaming industry. Similarly, sales of extra content are the primary driver of our mobile business. We are investing resources in our mobile business, seeking to maximize our mobile live services, innovate on mobile with our franchises, and have added additional growth opportunities through mergers and acquisitions activity. Likewise, the consumer acceptance of free-to-play, live service-based, online PC games has broadened our consumer base and has begun to expand into the console market. For example, within our business, we offer Apex Legends as a free-to-play, live service-based PC and console game. We expect extra content revenue generated from mobile, PC and console free-to-play games to continue to be an important part of our business.
Concentration of Sales Among the Most Popular Games. In all major segments of our industry, we see a large portion of games sales concentrated on the most popular titles. Similarly, a significant portion of our revenue historically has been derived from games based on a few popular franchises, several of which we have released on an annual or bi-annual basis. In particular, we have historically derived a significant portion of our net revenue from our largest and most popular game, FIFA, the annualized version of which is consistently one of the best-selling games in the marketplace.
Recurring Revenue Sources. Our business model includes revenue that we deem recurring in nature, such as revenue from our annualized sports franchises (e.g., FIFA, Madden NFL), our console, PC and mobile catalog titles (i.e., titles that did not launch in the current fiscal year), and our live services. We have been able to forecast revenue from these areas of our business with greater relative confidence than for new games, services and business models. As we continue to incorporate new business models and modalities of play into our games, our goal is to continue to look for opportunities to expand the recurring portion of our business.
Net Bookings. In order to improve transparency into our business, we disclose an operating performance metric, net bookings. Net bookings is defined as the net amount of products and services sold digitally or sold-in physically in the period. Net bookings is calculated by adding total net revenue to the change in deferred net revenue for online-enabled games.
The following is a calculation of our total net bookings for the periods presented:
(a) At the beginning of fiscal year 2021, we changed the way in which we present net bookings to align with GAAP net revenue measures. Net bookings from mobile platform partners are now presented gross of platform provider fees. Historically, we presented net bookings from these partners net of platform fees. Net bookings for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 has been recast for comparability.
Net bookings were $6,190 million for fiscal year 2021 driven by sales related to FIFA 21, Apex Legends, FIFA 20, The Sims 4, and Madden NFL 21. Net bookings increased $818 million or 15 percent as compared to fiscal year 2020 primarily driven by the FIFA franchise, Apex Legends, Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, The Sims 4, and the Madden franchise, partially offset by Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order, Battlefield V, and Need for Speed Heat. Live services and other net bookings were $4,592 million for fiscal year 2021, and increased $1,000 million or 28 percent as compared to fiscal year 2020. The increase in live services and other net bookings was due primarily to an increase in sales of extra content for Ultimate Team, Apex Legends, Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, and The Sims 4. Full game net bookings were $1,598 million for fiscal year 2021, and decreased $182
million or 10 percent as compared to fiscal year 2020 due to Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order, partially offset by Star Wars: Squadrons and UFC 4.
Mergers and Acquisitions
Acquisition of Glu Mobile. Subsequent to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Glu Mobile Inc., a leading global developer and publisher of mobile games (“Glu” and the “Glu acquisition”) for cash consideration of approximately $2.3 billion. We also assumed all outstanding unvested equity awards held by Glu employees. We expect the Glu acquisition to accelerate our mobile growth by creating a combined organization with ongoing live services across multiple games and genres. We also believe that the acquisition will create value by adding Glu’s expertise in casual sports and lifestyle genres to new titles based on our intellectual property. Glu will be integrated into the Company for financial reporting purposes in the first fiscal quarter of fiscal year 2022. For more information about the Glu acquisition, see Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 7 - Business Combinations.
Acquisition of Codemasters. On February 18, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Codemasters Group Holdings plc (“Codemasters” and the “Codemasters acquisition”) for total cash consideration of $1.2 billion, net of cash acquired. Codemasters is a UK-based game developer and publisher of high-quality racing games across console, PC and mobile. We expect the Codemasters acquisition to grow our presence in racing, creating a global leader in racing entertainment. Codemasters was integrated into the Company for financial reporting purposes during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021. For more information about the Codemasters acquisition, see Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 7 - Business Combinations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these Consolidated Financial Statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, contingent assets and liabilities, and revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. The policies discussed below are considered by management to be critical because they are not only important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations, but also because application and interpretation of these policies requires both management judgment and estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain and unknown, including uncertainty in the current economic environment due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, actual results may differ materially from our estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenue principally from sales of our games, and related extra content and services that can be played on game consoles, PCs, mobile phones and tablets. Our product and service offerings include, but are not limited to, the following:
•full games with both online and offline functionality (“Games with Services”), which generally includes (1) the initial game delivered digitally or via physical disc at the time of sale and typically provide access to offline core game content (“software license”); (2) updates on a when-and-if-available basis, such as software patches or updates, and/or additional free content to be delivered in the future (“future update rights”); and (3) a hosted connection for online playability (“online hosting”);
•full games with online-only functionality which require an Internet connection to access all gameplay and functionality (“Online-Hosted Service Games”);
•extra content related to Games with Services and Online-Hosted Service Games which provides access to additional in-game content;
•subscriptions, such as EA Play and EA Play Pro, that generally offers access to a selection of full games, in-game content, online services and other benefits typically for a recurring monthly or annual fee; and
•licensing to third parties to distribute and host our games and content.
We evaluate and recognize revenue by:
•identifying the contract(s) with the customer;
•identifying the performance obligations in the contract;
•determining the transaction price;
•allocating the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and
•recognizing revenue as each performance obligation is satisfied through the transfer of a promised good or service to a customer (i.e., “transfer of control”).
Certain of our full game and/or extra content are sold to resellers with a contingency that the full game and/or extra content cannot be resold prior to a specific date (“Street Date Contingency”). We recognize revenue for transactions that have a Street Date Contingency when the Street Date Contingency is removed and the full game and/or extra content can be resold by the reseller. For digital full game and/or extra content downloads sold to customers, we recognize revenue when the full game and/or extra content is made available for download to the customer.
Online-Enabled Games
Games with Services. Our sales of Games with Services are evaluated to determine whether the software license, future update rights and the online hosting are distinct and separable. Sales of Games with Services are generally determined to have three distinct performance obligations: software license, future update rights, and the online hosting.
Since we do not sell the performance obligations on a stand-alone basis, we consider market conditions and other observable inputs to estimate the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation. For Games with Services, generally 75 percent of the sales price is allocated to the software license performance obligation and recognized at a point in time when control of the license has been transferred to the customer (which is usually at or near the same time as the booking of the transaction). The remaining 25 percent is allocated to the future update rights and the online hosting performance obligations and recognized ratably as the service is provided (over the Estimated Offering Period).
Online-Hosted Service Games. Sales of our Online-Hosted Service Games are determined to have one distinct performance obligation: the online hosting. We recognize revenue from these arrangements as the service is provided.
Extra Content. Revenue received from sales of downloadable content are derived primarily from the sale of virtual currencies and digital in-game content that are designed to extend and enhance players’ game experience. Sales of extra content are accounted for in a manner consistent with the treatment for our Games with Services and Online-Hosted Service Games as discussed above, depending upon whether or not the extra content has offline functionality. That is, if the extra content has offline functionality, then the extra content is accounted for similarly to Games with Services (generally determined to have three distinct performance obligations: software license, future update rights, and the online hosting). If the extra content does not have offline functionality, then the extra content is determined to have one distinct performance obligation: the online-hosted service offering.
Subscriptions
Sales of our subscriptions are deemed to be one performance obligation and we recognize revenue from these arrangements ratably over the subscription term as the performance obligation is satisfied.
Licensing Revenue
In certain countries, we utilize third-party licensees to distribute and host our games and content in accordance with license agreements, for which the licensees typically pay us a fixed minimum guarantee and/or sales-based royalties. These arrangements typically include multiple performance obligations, such as a time-based license of software and future update rights. We recognize as revenue a portion of the minimum guarantee when we transfer control of the license of software (generally upon commercial launch) and the remaining portion ratably over the contractual term in which we provide the licensee with future update rights. Any sales-based royalties are generally recognized as the related sales occur by the licensee.
Significant Judgments around Revenue Arrangements
Identifying performance obligations. Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified based on the goods and services that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct, (i.e., the customer can benefit from the goods or services either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available), and are distinct in the context of the contract (i.e., it is separately identifiable from other goods or services in the contract). To the extent a contract includes multiple promises, we must apply judgment to determine whether those promises are separate and distinct performance obligations. If these criteria are not met, the promises are accounted for as a combined performance obligation.
Determining the transaction price. The transaction price is determined based on the consideration that we will be entitled to receive in exchange for transferring our goods and services to the customer. Determining the transaction price often requires judgment, based on an assessment of contractual terms and business practices. It further includes review of variable consideration such as discounts, sales returns, price protection, and rebates, which is estimated at the time of the transaction. In addition, the transaction price does not include an estimate of the variable consideration related to sales-based royalties. Sales-based royalties are recognized as the sales occur.
Allocating the transaction price. Allocating the transaction price requires that we determine an estimate of the relative stand-alone selling price for each distinct performance obligation. Determining the relative stand-alone selling price is inherently subjective, especially in situations where we do not sell the performance obligation on a stand-alone basis (which occurs in the majority of our transactions). In those situations, we determine the relative stand-alone selling price based on various observable inputs using all information that is reasonably available. Examples of observable inputs and information include: historical internal pricing data, cost plus margin analyses, third-party external pricing of similar or same products and services such as software licenses and maintenance support within the enterprise software industry. The results of our analysis resulted in a specific percentage of the transaction price being allocated to each performance obligation.
Determining the Estimated Offering Period. The offering period is the period in which we offer to provide the future update rights and/or online hosting for the game and related extra content sold. Because the offering period is not an explicitly defined period, we must make an estimate of the offering period for the service-related performance obligations (i.e., future update rights and online hosting). Determining the Estimated Offering Period is inherently subjective and is subject to regular revision. Generally, we consider the average period of time customers are online when estimating the offering period. We also consider the estimated period of time between the date a game unit is sold to a reseller and the date the reseller sells the game unit to the customer (i.e., time in channel). Based on these two factors, we then consider the method of distribution. For example, games and extra content sold at retail would have a composite offering period equal to the online gameplay period plus time in channel as opposed to digitally-distributed games and extra content which are delivered immediately via digital download and therefore, the offering period is estimated to be only the online gameplay period.
Additionally, we consider results from prior analyses, known and expected online gameplay trends, as well as disclosed service periods for competitors’ games in determining the Estimated Offering Period for future sales. We believe this provides a reasonable depiction of the transfer of future update rights and online hosting to our customers, as it is the best representation of the time period during which our games and extra content are played. We recognize revenue for future update rights and online hosting performance obligations ratably on a straight-line basis over this period as there is a consistent pattern of delivery for these performance obligations. Prior to July 1, 2020, these performance obligations were generally recognized over an estimated nine-month period beginning in the month after shipment for games and extra content sold through retail and an estimated six-month period for digitally-distributed games and extra content beginning in the month of sale.
During the three months ended September 30, 2020, we completed our annual evaluation of the Estimated Offering Period, and noted that generally, consumers were playing our games for longer periods of time as players engage with services we provide that are designed to enhance and extend gameplay. Based on this, we concluded that the Estimated Offering Period applied to sales made after June 30, 2020 should be lengthened. Revenue for service related performance obligations for games and extra content sold through retail are now recognized over an estimated ten-month period beginning in the month of sale, and revenue for service related performance obligations for digitally-distributed games and extra content are now recognized over an estimated eight-month period beginning in the month of sale, which results in revenue being recognized over a longer period of time. This change in Estimated Offering Period did not impact the amount of net bookings or the operating cash flows that we report. During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, this change to our Estimated Offering Period resulted in a decrease in net revenue of $333 million and net income of $280 million, and a decrease of $0.96 diluted earnings per share.
Principal Agent Considerations
We evaluate sales to end customers of our full games and related content via third-party storefronts, including digital storefronts such as Microsoft’s Xbox Store, Sony’s PlayStation Store, Apple App Store, and Google Play Store, in order to determine whether or not we are acting as the principal in the sale to the end customer, which we consider in determining if revenue should be reported gross or net of fees retained by the third-party storefront. An entity is the principal if it controls a good or service before it is transferred to the end customer. Key indicators that we evaluate in determining gross versus net treatment include but are not limited to the following:
•the underlying contract terms and conditions between the various parties to the transaction;
•which party is primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide the specified good or service to the end customer;
•which party has inventory risk before the specified good or service has been transferred to the end customer; and
•which party has discretion in establishing the price for the specified good or service.
Based on an evaluation of the above indicators, except as discussed below, we have determined that generally the third party is considered the principal to end customers for the sale of our full games and related content. We therefore report revenue related to these arrangements net of the fees retained by the storefront. However, for sales arrangements via Apple App Store and Google Play Store, EA is considered the principal to the end customer and thus, we report revenue on a gross basis and mobile platform fees are reported within cost of revenue.
Fair Value Estimates
Business Combinations. We must estimate the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and acquired in-process technology in a business combination. Our assessment of the estimated fair value of each of these can have a material effect on our reported results as intangible assets are amortized over various estimated useful lives. Furthermore, the estimated fair value assigned to an acquired asset or liability has a direct impact on the amount we recognize as goodwill, which is an asset that is not amortized. Determining the fair value of assets acquired requires an assessment of the highest and best use of the asset or group of assets that maximizes the value from a market participant perspective or the expected price to sell the asset and the related expected future cash flows. Determining the fair value of acquired in-process technology also requires an assessment of our expectations related to the use of that technology. Such estimates are inherently difficult and subjective and can have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income Taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for both (1) the expected impact of differences between the financial statement amount and the tax basis of assets and liabilities and (2) the expected future tax benefit to be derived from tax losses and tax credit carryforwards. We do not recognize any deferred taxes related to the U.S. taxes on foreign earnings as we recognize these taxes as a period cost.
We record a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets when it is considered more likely than not that all or a portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized. In making this determination, we are required to give significant weight to evidence that can be objectively verified. It is generally difficult to conclude that a valuation allowance is not needed when there is significant negative evidence, such as cumulative losses in recent years. Forecasts of future taxable income are considered to be less objective than past results. Therefore, cumulative losses weigh heavily in the overall assessment.
In addition to considering forecasts of future taxable income, we are also required to evaluate and quantify other possible sources of taxable income in order to assess the realization of our deferred tax assets, namely the reversal of existing deferred tax liabilities, the carryback of losses and credits as allowed under current tax law, and the implementation of tax planning strategies. Evaluating and quantifying these amounts involves significant judgments. Each source of income must be evaluated based on all positive and negative evidence and this evaluation may involve assumptions about future activity. Certain taxable temporary differences that are not expected to reverse during the carry forward periods permitted by tax law cannot be considered as a source of future taxable income that may be available to realize the benefit of deferred tax assets.
Every quarter, we perform a realizability analysis to evaluate whether it is more likely than not that all or a portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized. Our Swiss deferred tax asset realizability analysis relies upon future Swiss taxable income as the primary source of taxable income but considers all available sources of Swiss income based on the positive and negative evidence. We give more weight to evidence that can be objectively verified. However, there is significant judgment
involved in estimating future Swiss taxable income, specifically related to assumptions about expected growth rates of future Swiss taxable income, which are based primarily on third party market and industry growth data. Actual results that differ materially from those estimates could have a material impact on our valuation allowance assessment. Although objectively verifiable, Swiss interest rates have an impact on the valuation allowance and are based on published Swiss guidance. Any significant changes to such interest rates could result in a material impact to the valuation allowance. Switzerland has a seven-year carryforward period and does not permit the carry back of losses. Changes in Estimated Offering Period and actions we take in connection with acquisitions could also impact the utilization of our Swiss deferred tax asset.
As part of the process of preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements, we are required to estimate our income taxes in each jurisdiction in which we operate prior to the completion and filing of tax returns for such periods. This process requires estimating both our geographic mix of income and our uncertain tax positions in each jurisdiction where we operate. These estimates involve complex issues and require us to make judgments about the likely application of the tax law to our situation, as well as with respect to other matters, such as anticipating the positions that we will take on tax returns prior to our preparing the returns and the outcomes of disputes with tax authorities. The ultimate resolution of these issues may take extended periods of time due to examinations by tax authorities and statutes of limitations. In addition, changes in our business, including acquisitions, changes in our international corporate structure, changes in the geographic location of business functions or assets, changes in the geographic mix and amount of income, as well as changes in our agreements with tax authorities, valuation allowances, applicable accounting rules, applicable tax laws and regulations, rulings and interpretations thereof, developments in tax audit and other matters, and variations in the estimated and actual level of annual pre-tax income can affect the overall effective tax rate.
IMPACT OF RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
The information under the subheading “Impact of Recently Issued Accounting Standards” in Note 1 - Description of Business and Basis of Presentation to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K is incorporated by reference into this Item 7.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our fiscal year is reported on a 52- or 53-week period that ends on the Saturday nearest March 31. Our results of operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 contained 53 weeks and ended on April 3, 2021. Our results of operations for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2020 and 2019 contained 52 weeks each and ended on March 28, 2020 and March 30, 2019, respectively. For simplicity of disclosure, all fiscal periods are referred to as ending on a calendar month end.
Net Revenue
Net revenue consists of sales generated from (1) full games sold as digital downloads or as packaged goods and designed for play on game consoles, PCs and mobile phones and tablets (2) live services associated with these games, such as extra-content, (3) subscriptions that generally offer access to a selection of full games, in-game content, online services and other benefits, and (4) licensing our games to third parties to distribute and host our games.
Comparison of Fiscal Year 2021 to Fiscal Year 2020
Net Revenue
Net revenue for fiscal year 2021 was $5,629 million, primarily driven by FIFA 21, FIFA 20, The Sims 4, Apex Legends, and Madden NFL 21. Net revenue for fiscal year 2021 increased $92 million, as compared to fiscal year 2020. This increase was driven by a $489 million increase in net revenue primarily from The Sims, FIFA, and Madden franchises, and Apex Legends. This increase was partially offset by a $397 million decrease in net revenue primarily from Anthem, and the Star Wars and Battlefield franchises.
Net Revenue by Composition
As our business has evolved and management focuses less on the differentiation between our packaged goods business and our digital business and more on our full game sales and live services that extend and enhance gameplay, we have updated our presentation of net revenue by composition to align with this management view.
Our net revenue by composition for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 was as follows (in millions):
Full Game Net Revenue
Full game net revenue includes full game downloads and packaged goods. Full game downloads includes revenue from digital sales of full games on console, PC, and mobile phones and tablets. Packaged goods includes revenue from software that is sold physically. This includes (1) net revenue from game software sold physically through traditional channels such as brick and mortar retailers, and (2) software licensing revenue from third parties (for example, makers of console platforms, personal computers or computer accessories) who include certain of our full games for sale with their products (for example, OEM bundles).
Full game net revenue for fiscal year 2021 was $1,613 million, primarily driven by FIFA 21, Madden NFL 21, FIFA 20, Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order, and Need for Speed Heat. Full game net revenue for fiscal year 2021 decreased $274 million, or 15 percent, as compared to fiscal year 2020. This decrease was driven by a $381 million decrease in packaged goods net revenue primarily driven by the FIFA franchise, Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order, and Anthem. This decrease was partially offset by a $107 million increase in full game downloads net revenue primarily driven by the FIFA and Madden franchises and UFC 4, partially offset by Anthem and Battlefield V.
Live Services and Other Net Revenue
Live services and other net revenue includes revenue from sales of extra content for console, PC and mobile games, licensing revenue from third-party publishing partners who distribute our games digitally, subscriptions, advertising, and non-software licensing.
Live services and other net revenue for fiscal year 2021 was $4,016 million, primarily driven by sales of extra content for FIFA Ultimate Team, Apex Legends, and The Sims 4. Live services and other net revenue for fiscal year 2021 increased $366 million, or 10 percent, as compared to fiscal year 2020. This increase was driven by sales of extra content for FIFA Ultimate Team, Apex Legends, The Sims 4, and Madden Ultimate Team.
Comparison of Fiscal Year 2020 to Fiscal Year 2019
Net Revenue
Net revenue for fiscal year 2020 was $5,537 million, primarily driven by FIFA 20, FIFA 19, The Sims 4, Apex Legends, and Madden NFL 20. Net revenue for fiscal year 2020 increased $587 million, as compared to fiscal year 2019. This increase was driven by a $924 million increase in net revenue primarily from Apex Legends, Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order and Anthem. This increase was partially offset by a $337 million decrease in net revenue primarily from the Battlefield franchise.
Net Revenue by Composition
Our net revenue by composition for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 was as follows (in millions):
Full Game Net Revenue
Full game net revenue for fiscal year 2020 was $1,887 million, primarily driven by FIFA 20, Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order, Madden NFL 20, Anthem, and FIFA 19. Full game net revenue for fiscal year 2020 increased $94 million, or 5 percent, as compared to fiscal year 2019. This increase was driven by a $130 million increase in full game downloads net revenue primarily driven by Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order and Anthem, partially offset by the Battlefield franchise. This increase was partially offset by a $36 million decrease in packaged goods net revenue primarily driven by the FIFA and Battlefield franchises, partially offset by Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order and Anthem.
Live Services and Other Net Revenue
Live services and other net revenue for fiscal year 2020 was $3,650 million, primarily driven by sales of extra content for FIFA Ultimate Team, Apex Legends, The Sims 4, and Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes. Live services and other net revenue for fiscal year 2020 increased $493 million, or 16 percent, as compared to fiscal year 2019. This increase was driven by sales of extra content for Apex Legends, FIFA Ultimate Team, and The Sims 4, partially offset by the Battlefield franchise.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists of (1) manufacturing royalties, net of volume discounts and other vendor reimbursements, (2) certain royalty expenses for celebrities, professional sports leagues, movie studios and other organizations, and independent software developers, (3) data center, bandwidth and server costs associated with hosting our online games and websites, (4) inventory costs, (5) payment processing fees, (6) mobile platform fees associated with our mobile revenue (for transactions in which we are acting as the principal in the sale to the end customer), (7) expenses for defective products, (8) write-offs of post launch prepaid royalty costs and losses on previously unrecognized licensed intellectual property commitments, (9) amortization of certain intangible assets, (10) personnel-related costs, and (11) warehousing and distribution costs. We generally recognize volume discounts when they are earned from the manufacturer (typically in connection with the achievement of unit-based milestones); whereas other vendor reimbursements are generally recognized as the related revenue is recognized.
Cost of revenue for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 was as follows (in millions):
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased by $125 million, or 9 percent during fiscal year 2021, as compared to fiscal year 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in royalty costs driven by higher sales associated with the FIFA and Madden franchises, and an increase in platform fees and hosting fees driven by higher sales of Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes and Apex Legends, partially offset by a decrease in inventory costs driven by the Star Wars, FIFA, and Need for Speed franchises, and a decrease in royalty costs driven by the Star Wars franchise.
Cost of revenue as a percentage of total net revenue increased by 2 percent during fiscal year 2021, as compared to fiscal year 2020. This increase was primarily due to increases in deferred net revenue, platform fees, and hosting fees, partially offset by a decrease in royalty costs due to product mix and lower inventory costs due to the favorable mix of net revenues from lower packaged goods as compared to digital full game downloads.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred by our production studios for personnel-related costs, related overhead costs, external third-party development costs, contracted services, depreciation and any impairment of prepaid royalties for pre-launch products. Research and development expenses for our online products include expenses incurred by our studios consisting of direct development and related overhead costs in connection with the development and production of our online games. Research and development expenses also include expenses associated with our digital platform, software licenses and maintenance, and management overhead.
Research and development expenses for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 were as follows (in millions):
Research and development expenses increased by $219 million, or 14 percent, in fiscal year 2021, as compared to fiscal year 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $173 million increase in personnel-related costs primarily resulting from an increase in headcount due to our continued investment in our studios and an increase in variable compensation and related expenses, a $56 million increase in stock-based compensation, and a $19 million increase in contracted services. These increases were partially offset by a $28 million decrease in travel and entertainment expense.
Marketing and Sales
Marketing and sales expenses consist of personnel-related costs, related overhead costs, advertising, marketing and promotional expenses, net of qualified advertising cost reimbursements from third parties.
Marketing and sales expenses for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 were as follows (in millions):
Marketing and sales expenses increased by $58 million, or 9 percent, in fiscal year 2021, as compared to fiscal year 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $42 million increase in personnel-related costs primarily resulting from an increase in variable compensation and related expenses, a $24 million increase in advertising and promotional spending primarily on the FIFA franchise, and a $9 million increase in stock-based compensation. These increases were partially offset by a $15 million decrease in travel and entertainment expense, and a $4 million decrease in contracted services.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel and related expenses of executive and administrative staff, corporate functions such as finance, legal, human resources, and information technology, related overhead costs, fees for professional services such as legal and accounting, and allowances for doubtful accounts.
General and administrative expenses for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 were as follows (in millions):
General and administrative expenses increased by $86 million, or 17 percent, in fiscal year 2021, as compared to fiscal year 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $53 million increase in personnel-related costs driven by an increase in variable compensation and related expenses, a $22 million increase in stock-based compensation, a $13 million increase in contracted services, and an $11 million increase in facility related costs. These increases were partially offset by a $16 million decrease in travel and entertainment expense.
Income Taxes
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 was as follows (in millions):
Our effective tax rate for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 was 17.7 percent as compared to negative 101.5 percent for the same period in fiscal year 2020. During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, we completed an intra-entity sale of some of our intellectual property rights to our Swiss subsidiary, where our international business is headquartered (the “Swiss intra-entity sale”). The transaction did not result in a taxable gain. Under U.S. GAAP, any profit resulting from this intercompany transaction is eliminated upon consolidation. However, the transaction resulted in a step-up of the Swiss tax-deductible basis in the transferred intellectual property rights and, accordingly, created a temporary difference between the book basis and the tax basis of such intellectual property rights (the “Swiss Deferred Tax Asset”).
Our effective tax rate and resulting provision for income taxes for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 includes a $103 million tax benefit related to changes in our Swiss Deferred Tax Asset. This benefit was more than offset by a $180 million charge related to our decision to capitalize for income tax purposes certain foreign expenses which increased the taxable income in our foreign entities that is subject to U.S. tax. In accordance with our existing accounting policy, we do not establish deferred tax assets to offset this charge, but we expect future deductions of the capitalized amounts.
Our effective tax rate and resulting provision for income taxes for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 were significantly impacted by our recognition of the Swiss Deferred Tax Asset related to the Swiss intra-entity sale.
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, we recognized a $1.840 billion Swiss Deferred Tax Asset, which is net of the impact of a $131 million valuation allowance and a $393 million reduction due to the impact of the Altera opinion. The Altera opinion also requires related parties in an intercompany cost-sharing arrangement to share stock-based compensation expenses. The Altera opinion resulted in the recognition of a one-time charge of $80 million related to prior period U.S. uncertain tax positions during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. In total, during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, we recognized total one-time tax benefits of $1.760 billion related to the $1.840 billion Swiss Deferred Tax Asset, partially offset by the $80 million one-time Altera opinion charge.
Excluding the impacts of the Swiss Deferred Tax Asset and Altera opinion, our effective tax rate for the year ended March 31, 2020 would have been 15.0 percent. Our effective tax rate for the year ended March 31, 2021 of 17.7 percent was higher primarily due to the increase in U.S. taxes on foreign earnings, which was partially offset by uncertain tax position and valuation allowance benefits.
Our effective tax rates for future periods will continue to depend on a variety of factors, including changes in our business, such as acquisitions and intercompany transactions, our corporate structure, the geographic location of business functions or assets, the geographic mix of income, our agreements with tax authorities, applicable accounting rules, applicable tax laws and regulations, rulings and interpretations thereof, developments in tax audit and other matters, and variations in our annual pre-tax income or loss. We anticipate that the impact of excess tax benefits, tax deficiencies, and changes in valuation allowances may result in significant fluctuations to our effective tax rate in the future.
Comparison of Fiscal Year 2020 to Fiscal Year 2019
For the comparison of our results of operations as it relates to Cost of Revenue, Operating Expenses, and Income Taxes between fiscal year 2020 and fiscal year 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for our fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on May 20, 2020 under the subheading “Comparison of Fiscal Year 2020 to Fiscal Year 2019.”
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
For the comparison of fiscal year 2020 to fiscal year 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for our fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on May 20, 2020 under the subheading “Liquidity and Capital Resources”.
Changes in Cash Flow
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $137 million during fiscal year 2021, as compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily driven by higher collections due to improved performance as we executed against our strategic pillars and increased engagement with our products and services which led to growth in our business, aided by players spending more time at home as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, lower travel and entertainment payments, lower inventory costs, and lower marketing and advertising payments. These increases were partially offset by higher cash payments for income taxes, higher personnel-related costs resulting from an increase in headcount and payments to employees during fiscal year 2021 to assist with work-from-home costs and care needs, higher cash outflow from hedging activities, higher variable compensation payments related to fiscal year 2020 performance, higher prepayments made to contracted services, lower interest income, higher hosting and platform fees, and higher royalty costs.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $852 million during fiscal year 2021, as compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily driven by a $1,544 million increase in proceeds from maturities and sales of short-term investments and a $531 million decrease in the purchase of short-term investments. These decreases were offset by a payment of $1,239 million in connection with our acquisition of Codemasters during fiscal year 2021.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities decreased by $1,343 million during fiscal year 2021, as compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily driven by proceeds from the issuance of the 2031 Notes and 2051 Notes for $1,478 million in February 2021, a $478 million decrease in the repurchase and retirement of our common stock, and a $122 million of contingent consideration payment in connection with our acquisition of Respawn Entertainment, LLC during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. These decreases were offset by a repayment of $600 million of our 2021 Notes in February 2021, payments of $98 million of cash dividends in the current year, and a $61 million increase in cash paid to taxing authorities in connection with withholding taxes for stock-based compensation.
Short-term Investments
Due to our mix of fixed and variable rate securities, our short-term investment portfolio is susceptible to changes in short-term interest rates. As of March 31, 2021, our short-term investments had gross unrealized gains of $1 million, or less than 1 percent of the total in short-term investments. From time to time, we may liquidate some or all of our short-term investments to fund operational needs or other activities, such as capital expenditures, business acquisitions or stock repurchase programs.
Senior Notes
In February 2021, we issued $750 million aggregate principal amount of the 2031 Notes and $750 million aggregate principal amount of the 2051 Notes. The effective interest rate is 1.98% for the 2031 Notes and 3.04% for the 2051 Notes. Interest is payable semiannually in arrears, on February 15 and August 15 of each year.
In February 2016, we issued $600 million aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes and $400 million aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Notes. The effective interest rate was 3.94% for the 2021 Notes and is 4.97% for the 2026 Notes. Interest is payable semiannually in arrears, on March 1 and September 1 of each year. We redeemed $600 million aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes on February 1, 2021 plus accrued and unpaid interest of $9 million.
See Note 12 - Financing Arrangements to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K as it relates to our Senior Notes, which is incorporated by reference into this Item 7.
Credit Facility
On August 29, 2019, we entered into a $500 million unsecured revolving credit facility (“Credit Facility”) with a syndicate of banks. The Credit Facility terminates on August 29, 2024 unless the maturity is extended in accordance with its terms. As of March 31, 2021, no amounts were outstanding under the Credit Facility. See Note 12 - Financing Arrangements to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K as it relates to our Credit Facility, which is incorporated by reference into this Item 7.
Financial Condition
Our material cash requirements as of March 31, 2021 are set forth in our Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference into this Item 7. We expect capital expenditures to more than double in fiscal year 2022 to approximately $250 million due to facility buildouts. We believe that our cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, cash generated from operations and available financing facilities will be sufficient to meet these material cash requirements, which include debt repayment obligations of $1.9 billion, and fund our operating requirements for the next 12 months and beyond, including working capital requirements, capital expenditures, the implementation of our $2.6 billion share repurchase program, quarterly cash dividend, which is currently $0.17 per share, subject to declaration by our Board of Directors or a designated Committee of the Board of Directors, and potentially, future acquisitions or strategic investments. We may choose at any time to raise additional capital to repay debt, strengthen our financial position, facilitate expansion, repurchase our stock, pursue strategic acquisitions and investments, and/or to take advantage of business opportunities as they arise. There can be no assurance, however, that such additional capital will be available to us on favorable terms, if at all, or that it will not result in substantial dilution to our existing stockholders.
During fiscal year 2021, we returned $827 million to stockholders through our capital return programs, repurchasing 5.6 million shares for approximately $729 million and $98 million through our quarterly cash dividend program which was initiated in November 2020.
During fiscal year 2021, we also increased our mergers and acquisitions activity, completing our acquisition of 100% of the equity interests of Codemasters for total cash consideration of $1.2 billion, net of cash acquired, on February 18, 2021, and completing the acquisition of Glu for cash consideration of approximately $2.3 billion on April 29, 2021. We also assumed all outstanding unvested equity awards held by Glu employees.
Our foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to U.S. tax, and to the extent earnings from these subsidiaries can be repatriated without a material tax cost, such earnings will not be indefinitely reinvested. As of March 31, 2021, approximately $1.1 billion of our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments were domiciled in foreign tax jurisdictions. All of our foreign cash is available for repatriation without a material tax cost.
We have a “shelf” registration statement on Form S-3 on file with the SEC. This shelf registration statement, which includes a base prospectus, allows us at any time to offer any combination of securities described in the prospectus in one or more offerings. Unless otherwise specified in a prospectus supplement accompanying the base prospectus, we would use the net proceeds from the sale of any securities offered pursuant to the shelf registration statement for general corporate purposes, which may include funding for working capital, financing capital expenditures, research and development, marketing and distribution efforts, and if opportunities arise, for acquisitions or strategic alliances. Pending such uses, we may invest the net proceeds in interest-bearing securities. In addition, we may conduct concurrent or other financings at any time.
Our ability to maintain sufficient liquidity could be affected by various risks and uncertainties including, but not limited to, customer demand and acceptance of our products, our ability to collect our accounts receivable as they become due, successfully achieving our product release schedules and attaining our forecasted sales objectives, economic conditions in the United States and abroad, the impact of acquisitions and other strategic transactions in which we may engage, the impact of competition, the seasonal and cyclical nature of our business and operating results, and the other risks described in the “Risk Factors” section, included in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
As of March 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.