Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
In this Form 10-K and in other documents incorporated herein, as well as in oral statements made by the Company, statements that are prefaced with the words “may,” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “continue,” “estimate,” “project,” “intend,” “designed,” and similar expressions, are intended to identify forward-looking statements regarding events, conditions, and financial trends that may affect the Company’s future plans of operations, business strategy, results of operations, and financial position. Examples include those statements set forth above prior to “Item 1. Business - Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” These statements are based on the Company’s current expectations and estimates as to prospective events and circumstances about which the Company can give no assurance. Further, any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and the Company undertakes no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect future events or circumstances. Forward-looking statements should not be relied upon as a prediction of actual future financial condition or results. These forward-looking statements, like any forward-looking statements, involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected or anticipated. Such risks and uncertainties include the factors set forth above and the other information set forth in this Form 10-K.
Overview
Eastside Distilling, Inc. (the “Company,” “Eastside Distilling,” “we,” “us,” or “our,” below) was incorporated under the laws of Nevada in 2004 under the name of Eurocan Holdings, Ltd. In December 2014, we changed our corporate name to Eastside Distilling, Inc. to reflect our acquisition of Eastside Distilling, LLC. We manufacture, acquire, blend, bottle, import, market and sell a wide variety of alcoholic beverages under recognized brands. We employ 78 people in the United States.
Our brands span several alcoholic beverage categories, including whiskey, vodka, gin, rum, tequila and Ready-to-Drink (“RTD”). We sell our products on a wholesale basis to distributors in open states, and brokers in control states, and until March 2020, we operated four retail tasting rooms in Portland, Oregon to market our brands directly to consumers. We operate a mobile craft canning and bottling business (“Craft C+B”) that primarily services the craft beer and craft cider business. Craft C+B operates 11 mobile lines in Seattle, Washington; Portland, Oregon; and Denver, Colorado.
Total company revenue in 2020 was almost split evenly between spirits and Craft Canning; yet, the Craft Canning division contributed 80% of our gross profit and spirits contributed 20%. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant effect on each business unit. Craft Canning revenue had over 20% growth from 2019 due to the incremental demand for packaging stimulated by the shift in on-premise beer sales from kegs to cans. The spirits portfolio had approximately 20% in revenue growth from 2019 due to a full year of Azuñia Tequila sales. Overall, the U.S. craft spirits category revenue was down $2.1 billion, or 40%, in 2020 according to the Distilled Spirits Council of the United States (“DISCUS”).
Principal Spirits Brands and Products During 2020
● Hue-Hue (pronounced “way-way”) Coffee Rum - cold-brewed free-trade, single-origin Arabica coffee beans grown at the Finca El Paternal Estate in Huehuetenango, Guatemala that is sourced and then lightly roasted through Portland Roasting Company. The concentrated brew is then blended with premium silver rum and a trace amount of Demerara sugar, giving our Hue-Hue a natural, deep, smooth richness.
● Azuñia Tequila - estate-crafted, smooth, clean craft tequila with authentic flavor from the local terroir. It is the exclusive export of Agaveros Unidos de Amatitán and a second generation, family-owned-and-operated Rancho Miravalle estate, which has created tequila for over 20 years. Made with 100% pure Weber Blue Agave grown in dedicated fields of the Tequila Valley, it is harvested by hand and roasted in traditional clay hornos, and then finished with a natural, open-air fermentation process and bottled on-site in small batches using a consistent process to deliver field-to-bottle quality.
● Portland Potato Vodka - Portland’s award-winning premium craft vodka. The key to producing our vodka is to distill it four times. While most vodka is made from grain used in whiskey, we use potatoes and natural spring water sourced from the state of Oregon.
● Burnside Whiskey -We source the best ingredients available to produce Burnside Whiskey. We develop each blend using the various qualities of Quercus Garryana, the native Oregon Oak. Expanding on our initial experiment in 2012, we made it our mission to turn the Burnside program into a one- of-a-kind oak study. Our blends are all distinctive from one another, and the treatment of oak is equally specific.
Principal Services Provided by Craft Canning and Bottling
Canning
Flexible packaging options in multiple sizes
Nitrogen dosing: Specialized equipment allowing for packaging of still products in addition to carbonated beverages
Velcorin: Specialized equipment that supports microbial control
Label application capabilities
Mobility packaging for clients at their production facility
Full-service packaging provider
Bottling
Supplies all needed packaging and has the ability to package in two primary bottle sizes
Specialized packaging and quality control equipment
We have invested heavily in the past two years expanding our business through acquisitions and making substantial investments in branding and production; however, we have not achieved profitability. The immediate task at hand is to focus on a new sustainable business strategy. Based on a complete review and analysis of our competitive position, market opportunity and assets, we have identified components of the strategy that we believe would improve operating results. Management believes the following components of the strategy are in place and working:
● Strong spirits brands and products;
● Established 3 tier national distributor partnerships;
● Strong market position in Oregon, which is benefiting from an industrywide growth in craft spirits;
● Experience in distilling, blending, and barrel aging for craft spirits;
● Significantly reduced cash burn rate;
● Valuable asset in its employees; and
● Craft Canning division benefits from growth and accretive margin expansion opportunities generating cash flow.
Areas that we need incremental work include the following:
● Effective integration of Azuñia Tequila;
● Increased gross margins for our spirits portfolio at industry standards; and
● A sustainable strategy, fiscal plan, and predictable results.
We plan to complete our business review in 2021 and embark on the following:
● Reinvent the business model for sustainable success:
○ Reduce cash burn rate to less than $3 million per annum in 2021;
○ Provide adequate liquidity and funding of the operating plan;
○ Leverage Craft Canning growth and achieve production synergies with spirits;
○ Refocus spirits branding and strategy to grow and expand;
○ Build the Eastside brand; and
○ Utilize the Eastside brand for limited edition products.
● Focus strategy on value creation that establishes a sustainable growth plan with a clear competitive advantage increasing internal rate of return and value for shareholders;
● Expand the Board of Directors and build strategic alignment;
● Build a 3-year strategic plan;
● Rebuild the budget process to allow for predictable measurable progress on financial goals; and
● Build a professional company platform, deliver results, and then, acquire accretive assets.
Eastside Distilling is unique in several specific areas: (1) to our knowledge, we are the only craft spirits company listed on Nasdaq, (2) we do not function as a traditional craft distillery with store fronts relying on local sales, (3) we are diversified with our contract manufacturing division, and (4) we have a diversified portfolio of spirits brands. We are similar to other craft distillers in that (1) we have concentrated local volume, (2) we produce small batches and remain within the volume definition of “Craft”, and (3) our brands achieve success through differentiation, discovery and distribution.
The U.S. spirits marketplace is occupied by large multi-national conglomerates with substantially more resources than Eastside Distilling. However, we can use our small size to be fast, focused, flexible in our strategy. If we attempt to grow too quickly, we may lack the underlying strength required to build scale with loyalty via strong unaided awareness and powerfully derived attributes. Moreover, attempting to focus our “frame-of-reference” to compete with the biggest brands in the most expensive venues, is likely to fail without first establishing underlying brand equity.
We will seek to utilize our public company stature to our advantage and position our spirits portfolio as a leading tier 2 spirits provider that develops brands, expands geographic presence and positions for either a sale to the tier 1 suppliers or continued ownership with growth in revenue and cash flow. We will look to grow, and vertically integrate, our Craft Canning portfolio.
Recent Developments
During 2020, Craft Canning experienced an increase in demand and revenue growth as customers are continuing to prefer to fill cans for a wider off-premise usage. In order to meet this demand, we invested in additional canning lines. Throughout 2020, the canning industry has faced a shortage of aluminum cans. However, we believe we have sourced enough cans to supply our current business plan. While off-premise business has seen an increase in spirits sales, the customer focus has been on major brands and larger format bottles which we do not currently have on the national platform. Other parts of our business were negatively affected by mandated lockdowns and other related restrictions including a decrease in sales volume in on-premise accounts, where products are typically consumed immediately, such as bars and restaurants. This negative trend has continued through the year.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented specific measures to reduce the spread of the virus including having our employees work remotely whenever possible, screening visitors and workers before entering facilities, requiring visitors and employees to wear masks, and encouraging social distancing. These preventive measures have been effective as evidenced by the minimal number of COVID-19 cases between our workforce, vendors, and customers.
Available Information
Our executive offices are located at 8911 NE Marx Drive, Suite A2, Portland, Oregon 97220. Our telephone number is (971) 888-4264 and our internet address is www.eastsidedistilling.com. The information on, or that may be, accessed from our website is not part of this annual report.
Results of Operations
Overview
During the first quarter of 2020, Eastside Distilling focused its sales and marketing efforts on the distribution of our brands through the national platform, resulting in the decision to close all four of its retail stores in Portland, Oregon by March 31, 2020. On October 29, 2020, we announced our intent to divest the Redneck Riviera brand. We signed a non-binding term sheet between Eastside Distilling and Rich Marks, LLC, Redneck Riviera Whiskey Co, LLC, John D. Rich Tisa Trust and Redneck Spirits Group, LLC (collectively the buyers referred to as “RSG”). The retail operations and Redneck Riviera business have been reported as discontinued operations in the accompanying condensed consolidated financial statements. In the current year, the income, expense, and cash flows from retail and Redneck Riviera operations during the period they were consolidated have been classified as discontinued operations. For comparative purposes amounts in the prior periods have been reclassified to conform to current year presentation.
Consolidated Statements of Operations Data
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Our sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $14.8 million, or approximately 21%, from $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The following table compares our sales during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and excludes the retail tasting room and Redneck Riviera sales that have been classified as discontinued operations:
Our overall 2020 sales were primarily driven by increases in wholesale sales and canning sales and services. Wholesale sales increased primarily due to the acquisition of Azuñia Tequila in September 2019, which accounted for $1.7 million increase over last year as well as a $0.2 million increase in Portland Potato Vodka brand sales. Our canning and bottling revenue increased year over year, which has benefited from a shift in consumer preferences to consume alcohol at home rather than at on-premise locations. This was a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and was also offset by lower co-packing and mobile bottling sales.
Customer programs and excise taxes
Customer programs and excise taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $1.1 million, or approximately 87%, from $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was attributable to higher excise taxes and broker commissions due to increased sales.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales consists of the costs of ingredients utilized in the production of spirits, manufacturing and/or service labor and overhead, warehousing rent, packaging, and in-bound freight charges. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of sales increased to $9.2 million, or approximately 21%, from $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 in line with the increase in sales.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is calculated by subtracting the cost of products sold from net sales. Gross margin is gross profits stated as a percentage of net sales.
The following table compares our gross profit and gross margin for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Gross Margin
Our gross margin of 33% of net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased from our gross margin of 35% for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a change in product and services mix, higher raw material costs, and unabsorbed manufacturing overhead related to lower wholesale production levels. Our goal is to improve our overall gross margin by increasing the efficiencies and reducing the footprint of our production facility as well as evaluate the materials in our finished goods by looking to create economies of scale by creating consistency of the dry goods across our brands.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $3.9 million, or approximately 20%, from $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to a $1.2 million increase in sales and marketing compensation related to the increased headcount from the acquisition of the Azuñia tequila brand.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $9.2 million, or approximately 15%, from $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in compensation and benefits, legal and professional fees and rent, insurance and other miscellaneous general and administrative costs; offset by higher non-cash expenses related to depreciation and amortization from the Craft Canning acquisition and leasehold improvements to our production facility.
Other Expenses
Total other expenses, net was $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 54%. This increase was primarily due to higher interest expense on increased notes payable, a secured line of credit, and accounts receivable factoring programs; and the write-off of services for branding products in 2020; as well as a revaluation of the Azuñia Tequila acquisition in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary capital requirements are for cash used in operating activities, the financing of inventories, and financing acquisitions. Funds for our cash and liquidity needs have historically not been generated from operations but rather from short-term credit in the form of extended payment terms from suppliers as well as from convertible debt and equity financings.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred a net loss of $9.9 million and $16.9 million, respectively, and had an accumulated deficit of approximately $54.1 million as of December 31, 2020. We have been dependent on raising capital from debt and equity financings and utilization of our inventory to meet our needs for cash flow used in operating activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we raised approximately $3.4 million in additional capital through equity and debt financing (net of repayments). See Notes 10 and 11 to our financial statements for a description of our debt. In addition, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we consumed $1.8 million of our inventories.
To help ensure adequate liquidity in light of uncertainties posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, we applied for and received a loan of $1.4 million under the U.S. government Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP Loan”). On January 29, 2021, the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) notified us that it approved our request for full forgiveness of the PPP loan in the principal amount of $1.4 million. As a result of the SBA’s decision to approve our request for forgiveness, the SBA paid the entire outstanding balance of the PPP loan of $1.4 million, which is now considered paid in full.
On May 13, 2020, Live Oak Banking Company (the “Lender”) notified the Company that it was in technical default under certain covenants in a loan agreement, dated January 15, 2020, between the Company, Motherlode LLC, Big Bottom Distilling, LLC, Craft Canning + Bottling LLC, Redneck Riviera Whiskey Co., LLC, Outlandish Beverages LLC, and Live Oak Bank (the “Loan Agreement”). Those technical defaults included the failure to timely deliver information and its belief that we owed certain taxes and did not relate to any failure to pay amounts owing under the Loan Agreement. The Loan Agreement provides that upon an event of default, the Lender may, at its option, declare the entire loan to be immediately due and payable. Further, a default interest rate may apply on all obligations during the existence of an event of default at a per annum rate equal to 2.00% above the applicable interstate. On June 3, 2020 the Company entered into a Second Modification to Loan Agreement (“Modification”) with the Lender agreeing to waive the technical defaults upon the satisfaction of certain conditions by September 30, 2020. The Company complied with these conditions and was compliant with the terms of the Loan Agreement and Modification as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $0.8 million of cash on hand with a negative working capital of $17.3 million. Our ability to meet our ongoing operating cash needs over the next 12 months depends on reducing our operating costs, raising additional debt or equity capital, selling assets and generating positive operating cash flow, primarily through increased sales, improved profit growth, and controlling expenses. We intend to implement actions to improve profitability, by managing expenses while continuing to increase sales. See Notes 10 and 11 to our financial statements for a description of our debt and the debt financing initiatives completed during 2020. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, or additional financing is not available on acceptable terms, we may seek to sell assets, reduce operating expenses, reduce or eliminate marketing initiatives, and take other measures that could impair our ability to be successful.
Our cash flow related information for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
Operating Activities
Total cash used from operating activities was $3.0 million in 2020 compared to $9.1 million in 2019. The decrease in cash usage can be primarily attributed to a $3.0 million decrease in marketing and administrative cash expenditures, and improved management of receivables and prepayments of $0.6 million, which was offset by $0.8 million used in reducing operating liabilities.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities consists primarily of acquisitions and purchases of property and equipment. We incurred capital expenditures of $0.5 million and $2.2 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Proceeds from sales of fixed assets totaled $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in the acquisition of Craft Canning for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1.4 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash flows provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $6.3 million of proceeds from the establishment of a new secured credit facility, offset by $3.0 million repayment and termination of the existing secured credit facility and $1.8 million in debt repayments, $1.4 million of proceeds from the Paycheck Protection Program and $0.4 million in proceeds from borrowing on an existing line of credit with our bank. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our operating losses and working capital needs were primarily funded by issuance of common stock totaling $1.3 million.
Deposit
In August 2020, we entered into discussions with Intersect Beverage, LLC (“Intersect”) and TQLA, LLC (“TQLA”) to address potential changes to the deferred consideration for the Azuñia Tequila acquisition and received a deposit of $0.3 million in cash. In the fourth quarter of 2020, Intersect and TQLA sent us an additional deposit bringing the total outstanding amount deposited to $0.7 million. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the full deposit of $0.7 million was repaid. Eastside Distilling has not reached agreement with Intersect and TQLA to make any substantial changes to the deferred consideration for the Azuñia Tequila acquisition.
Lines of Credit
During 2019, we entered into a Factoring Agreement with ENGS Commercial Capital, LLC that provides for a minimum of $0.5 million purchased accounts receivable and a maximum of $2.0 million purchased accounts receivable. The advance rate is 85%, and interest is charged against the greater of $0.5 million or the total funds advanced at a rate of 5% plus the prime rate published in the Wall Street Journal. The Company factored $3.8 million of invoices during the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $0.1 million factored invoices outstanding.
Since 2019, we utilized an existing accounts receivable factoring line of credit with Park Street Financial Services, LLC. The advance rate is 75%, and interest is charged at a rate of 2.4% for the first 30 days plus 1.44% for each additional ten-day period. The Company factored $4.1 million of invoices during the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $0.1 million factored invoices outstanding.
Inventory Line
In January 2020, we and our subsidiaries entered into a loan agreement with Live Oak Banking Company (“Live Oak”) for a loan in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed the lesser of (i) $8.0 million and (ii) a borrowing base of up to 85% of the appraised value of the borrowers’ eligible inventory of whisky in barrels or totes less an amount equal to all service fees or rental payments owed by borrowers during the 90 day period immediately succeeding the date of determination to any warehouses or bailees holding eligible inventory (the “Live Oak Loan”). The Live Oak Loan is secured by all assets of the Company excluding accounts receivable and certain other specified excluded property. The Live Oak Loan bears interest at a variable rate of interest equal to (i) two and 49/100ths percent (2.49%) per annum plus (ii) the Prime Rate as published in The Wall Street Journal, adjusted on a calendar quarterly basis. Interest is payable monthly. Additionally, the Company issued to Live Oak 100,000 warrants to purchase common stock at an initial exercise price of $3.94 per share. The proceeds of the Live Oak Loan were used to pay off all principal and accrued interest under the TQLA Note of $0.9 million and all principal and interest under loan issued pursuant to that Credit and Security Agreement, by and between the Company and The KFK Children’s Trust, Jeffrey Anderson - Trustee of $3.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, the balance of the Live Oak Loan was $6.5 million and has been fully drawn upon.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations is based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make significant estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. These items are monitored and analyzed by management for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. The more judgmental estimates are summarized below. Changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they become known. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate.
Revenue Recognition
Net sales includes product sales, less excise taxes and customer programs and incentives. The Company recognizes revenue by applying the following steps in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when each performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company recognizes sales when merchandise is shipped from a warehouse directly to wholesale customers (except in the case of a consignment sale). For consignment sales, which include sales to the Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC), the Company recognizes sales upon the consignee’s shipment to the customer. Postage and handling charges billed to customers are also recognized as sales upon shipment of the related merchandise. Shipping terms are generally FOB shipping point, and title passes to the customer at the time and place of shipment or purchase by customers at a retail location. For consignment sales, title passes to the consignee concurrent with the consignee’s shipment to the customer. The customer has no cancellation privileges after shipment or upon purchase at retail locations, other than customary rights of return. The Company excludes sales tax collected and remitted to various states from sales and cost of sales. Sales from items sold through the Company’s retail locations are recognized at the time of sale.
Sales received from online merchants who sell discounted gift certificates for the Company’s merchandise and tastings is deferred until the customer has redeemed the discounted gift certificate or the gift certificate has expired, whichever occurs earlier.
Customer Programs
Customer programs, which include customer promotional discount programs, customer incentives, and broker commissions, are a common practice in the alcoholic beverage industry. The Company makes these payments to customers and incurs these costs to promote sales of products and to maintain competitive pricing. Amounts paid in connection with customer programs and incentives are recorded as reductions to net sales or as sales and marketing expenses in accordance with ASC 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers, based on the nature of the expenditure. Amounts paid to customers totaled $1.0 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Excise Taxes
The Company is responsible for compliance with the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (“TTB”) regulations, which includes making timely and accurate excise tax payments. The Company is subject to periodic compliance audits by the TTB. Individual states also impose excise taxes on alcoholic beverages in varying amounts. The Company calculates its excise tax expense based upon units produced and on its understanding of the applicable excise tax laws. Excise taxes totaled $0.1 million and $0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales consists of ingredients utilized in the production of spirits, manufacturing labor and overhead, warehousing rent, packaging, and in-bound freight charges. Ingredients account for the largest portion of the cost of sales, followed by packaging and production costs.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
The following expenses are included in sales and marketing expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations: media advertising costs, promotional costs of value-added packaging, salary and benefit expenses, travel and entertainment expenses for the sales, brand and sales support workforce and promotional activity expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following expenses are included in general and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations: salary and benefit expenses, travel and entertainment expenses for executive and administrative staff, rent and utilities, professional fees, insurance, and amortization and depreciation expense. General and administrative costs are expensed as incurred.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash equivalents are considered to be highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less at the time of the purchase. The Company had no cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Concentrations
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk consist principally of trade receivables. As of December 31, 2020, one distributor represented 14% of trade receivables. As of December 31, 2019, two distributors represented 40% of trade receivables. Sales to one distributor accounted for 18% of consolidated sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. Sales to one distributor accounted for 16% of consolidated sales for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Inventories
Inventories primarily consist of bulk spirits, packaging supplies, and finished goods which are stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost is determined using an average costing methodology, which approximates cost under the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method. A portion of our finished goods inventory is held by certain independent distributors on consignment until it is sold to a third party. The Company regularly monitors inventory quantities on hand and records write-downs for excess and obsolete inventories based primarily on the Company’s estimated forecast of product demand and production requirements. Such write-downs establish a new cost basis of accounting for the related inventory.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company recognizes as compensation expense all stock-based awards issued to employees. The compensation cost is measured based on the grant-date fair value of the related stock-based awards and is recognized over the service period of stock-based awards, which is generally the same as the vesting period. The fair value of stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes valuation model, which estimates the fair value of each award on the date of grant based on a variety of assumptions including expected stock price volatility, expected terms of the awards, risk-free interest rate, and dividend rates, if applicable. Stock-based awards issued to nonemployees are recorded at fair value on the measurement date and are subject to periodic market adjustments at the end of each reporting period and as the underlying stock-based awards vest. Net stock-based compensation was $1.3 million and $0.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.