ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Introductory Statement
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes to those financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements and information relating to our business that reflect our current views and assumptions with respect to future events and are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause our or our industry’s actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, or achievements. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, we expressly disclaim any obligation or undertaking to disseminate any update or revisions of any of the forward-looking statements to reflect any change in our expectations with regard thereto or to conform these statements to actual results.
Addressing challenges post-COVID-19
As of August 22, 2021, the cumulative number of cases reported globally is now over 211 million and the cumulative number of deaths is just over 4.4 million (WHO), and has caused the worst global economic contraction of the past 80 years (IMF). The concerted global efforts achieved the development of vaccines that have helped to reduce a person´s risk of contracting the virus. However, as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, the disruptions due to COVID 19 could continue causing a materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. If the corona virus cannot get under control and or worsens in any regions in which we have material operations or sales, our business activities originating from affected areas, including sales, manufacturing and supply chain related activities, could be adversely affected. Disruptive activities could include the temporary closure of our manufacturing facilities and those used in our supply chain processes, restrictions on the export or shipment of our products, significant cutback of ocean container delivery from Germany, business closures in impacted areas, and restrictions on our employees’ and consultants’ ability to travel and to meet with customers. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our results will depend on future developments, which still uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the virus variants and the actions to contain it or treat its impact, among others. COVID-19 could also continue to result in social, economic and labor instability in the countries in which we or our customers and suppliers operate.
If workers at one or more of our offices or the offices of our suppliers or manufacturers become ill or are quarantined and in either or both events are therefore unable to work, our operations could be subject to disruption. Further, if our manufacturers become unable to obtain necessary raw materials or components, we may incur higher supply costs or our manufacturers may be required to reduce production levels, either of which may negatively affect our financial condition or results of operations.
In light of these challenges, the Company is focusing its efforts on supporting key areas of our business that will help us to stabilize in the new environment and strategize for what comes next. Those key areas are: crisis and management response, workforce, operation and supply chain, finance and liquidity, tax, trade and regulatory, as well as strategy and brand.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. Note 2 of the Notes to Financial Statements describes the significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the financial statements. Certain of these significant accounting policies are considered to be critical accounting policies, as defined below.
A critical accounting policy is defined as one that is both material to the presentation of our financial statements and requires management to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments that could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Specifically, critical accounting estimates have the following attributes: 1) we are required to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time of the estimate; and 2) different estimates we could reasonably have used, or changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur, would have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be applicable and reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change as new events occur, as additional information is obtained and as our operating environment changes. These changes have historically been minor and have been included in the financial statements as soon as they became known. Based on a critical assessment of our accounting policies and the underlying judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies, management believes that our financial statements are fairly stated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and present a meaningful presentation of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect our more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Risks and Uncertainties - The Company’s business could be impacted by price pressure on its product manufacturing, acceptance of its products in the market place, new competitors, changes in federal and/or state legislation and other factors and new technology. If the Company is unsuccessful in securing adequate liquidity, its plans may be curtailed. Adverse changes in these areas could negatively impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Basis of Presentation
The financial statements include the accounts of Energy and Water Development Corp and have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission. In the opinion of management, all adjustments, consisting of normal recurring adjustments, necessary for a fair presentation of financial position and the results of operations for the periods presented have been reflected herein.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Estimates which are particularly significant to the financial statements include estimates relating to the determination of impairment of assets, assessment of going concern, the useful life of property and equipment, the determination of the fair value of stock-based compensation, and the recoverability of deferred income tax assets.
Leases
Effective January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASC 842- Leases (“ASC 842”). The lease standard provided a number of optional practical expedients in transition. The Company elected the package of practical expedients. As such, the Company did not have to reassess whether expired or existing contracts are or contain a lease; did not have to reassess the lease classifications or reassess the initial direct costs associated with expired or existing leases. The lease standard also provides practical expedients for an entity’s ongoing accounting. The Company elected the short-term lease recognition exemption under which the Company will not recognize right-of-use (“ROU”) assets or lease liabilities, and this includes not recognizing ROU assets or lease liabilities for existing short-term leases. The Company elected the practical expedient to not separate lease and non-lease components for certain classes of assets (facilities).
At the inception of an arrangement, the Company determines whether the arrangement is or contains a lease based on the unique facts and circumstances present in the arrangement. Leases with a term greater than one year are recognized on the balance sheet as right-of-use assets and short-term and long-term lease liabilities, as applicable. The Company does not have operating or financing leases.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method as stipulated by ASC 740, “Accounting for Income Taxes”. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Under ASC 740, the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities or a change in tax rate is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Deferred tax assets are reduced to estimated amounts to be realized by the use of the valuation allowance. A valuation allowance is applied when in management’s view it is more likely than not (50%) that such deferred tax will not be utilized.
ASC 740 provides interpretative guidance for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. In the unlikely event that an uncertain tax position exists in which the Corporation could incur income taxes, the Corporation would evaluate whether there is a probability that the uncertain tax position taken would be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities. A liability for uncertain tax positions would then be recorded if the Corporation determined it is more likely than not that a position would not be sustained upon examination or if a payment would have to be made to a taxing authority and the amount is reasonably estimable.
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, the Corporation does not believe any uncertain tax positions exist that would result in the Corporation having a liability to the taxing authorities. The Corporation’s policy is to classify interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits, if and when required, as part of interest expense and general and administrative expense, respectively, in the statement of operations. The Corporation’s tax returns for the years ended 2012 through 2019 are subject to examination by the federal and state tax authorities. The Corporation’s tax returns for the tax year ended 2020 has not been filed.
We record our provision for income taxes in our statements of operations by estimating our taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. We estimate our actual current tax exposure together with assessing temporary differences arising from differing treatment of items recognized for financial reporting versus tax return purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets, which are included in our balance sheets. In general, deferred tax assets represent future tax benefits to be received when certain expenses previously recognized in our statements of operations become deductible expenses under applicable income tax laws, or loss or credit carry forwards are utilized. Valuation allowances are recorded when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. We make these estimates and judgments about our future taxable income that are based on assumptions that are consistent with our future plans. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had recorded a full valuation allowance on our U.S. net deferred tax assets because we expect that it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will not be realized in the foreseeable future. Should the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of our valuation allowance could be materially impacted.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, the core principle of which is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
To achieve this core principle, five basic criteria must be met before revenue can be recognized: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when or as the Company satisfies a performance obligation. The Company has not generated any revenues to date.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at a measurement date. A fair value hierarchy requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs, where available, and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value.
Described below are the three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical assets or liabilities,
Level 2 - Observable prices that are based on inputs not quoted on active markets, but corroborated by market data,
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs are used when little or no market data is available.
Certain assets and liabilities are required to be recorded at fair value on a recurring basis. The Company adjusts derivative financial instruments to fair value on a recurring basis. The fair value for other assets and liabilities such as cash, accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other current assets, accounts payable and accrued expenses, customer/investor deposit have been determined to approximate carrying amounts due to the short maturities of these instruments. The Company believes that its indebtedness approximates fair value based on current yields for debt instruments with similar terms.
Stock-Based Payments
The Company adopted Accounting Standards Update 2018-07 (“ASU 2018-07”), “Improvement to Nonemployee Share Based Payment Accounting”, which expanded the scope of ASC 718 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees. The guidance was applied prospectively to all new awards granted after the date of adoption. In addition, the guidance was applied to all existing equity-classified awards for which a measurement date has not been established under ASC 505-50 by the adoption date by remeasuring at fair value as of the adoption date and recording a cumulative effect adjustment to opening accumulated deficit on January 1, 2019.
For the Company’s equity-classified awards for which a measurement date has not been established under ASC 505-50, the fair value on January 1, 2019, the adoption date, approximated the value assigned on December 31, 2018, therefore no cumulative adjustment to opening accumulated deficit was required.
Under the revised guidance, the accounting for awards issued to non-employees will be similar to the model for employee awards, except that ASU 2018-07:
●
allows the Company to elect on an award-by-award basis to use the contractual term as the expected term assumption in the option pricing model, and
●
the cost of the grant is recognized in the same period(s) and in the same manner as if the grantor had paid cash.
Employee and Non-Employee Share Based Compensation
The Company applies ASC 718-10, “Share - Based Payment,” which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expenses for all share based payment awards made to employees and directors including employee stock options under the Company’s stock plans and equity awards issued to non-employees based on estimated fair values.
ASC 718-10 requires companies to estimate the fair value of equity-based option awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model. The fair value of the award is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods. The Company recognizes share based award forfeitures as they occur.
The Company estimates the fair value of granted option equity awards using a Black-Scholes options pricing model. The option-pricing model requires a number of assumptions, of which the most significant are share price, expected volatility and the expected option term (the time from the grant date until the options are exercised or expire). Expected volatility is estimated based on volatility of similar companies in the technology sector. The Company has historically not paid dividends and has no foreseeable plans to issue dividends. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield from governmental zero-coupon bonds with an equivalent term. The expected option term is calculated for options granted to employees and directors using the “simplified” method. Grants to non-employees are based on the contractual term. Changes in the determination of each of the inputs can affect the fair value of the options granted and the results of operations of the Company.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses to improve information on credit losses for financial assets and net investment in leases that are not accounted for at fair value through net income. ASU 2016-13 replaces the current incurred loss impairment methodology with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses. In April 2019 and May 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-04, “Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses, Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, and Topic 825, Financial Instruments” and ASU No. 2019-05, “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Targeted Transition Relief” which provided additional implementation guidance on the previously issued ASU. In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-10, “Financial Instruments - Credit Loss (Topic 326), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815), and Leases (Topic 842),” which defers the effective date for public filers that are considered small reporting companies (“SRC”) as defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission to fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Since the Company is an SRC, implementation is not needed until January 1, 2023. The Company will continue to evaluate the effect of adopting ASU 2016-13 will have on the Company’s financial statements and disclosures.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The new standard eliminates certain exceptions related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period, and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences related to changes in ownership of equity method investments and foreign subsidiaries. The guidance also simplifies aspects of accounting for franchise taxes and enacted changes in tax laws or rates, and clarifies the accounting for transactions that result in a step-up in the tax basis of goodwill. For public business entities, it is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the potential impact of this standard on its financial statements.
In June 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40). This standard eliminates the beneficial conversion and cash conversion accounting models for convertible instruments. It also amends the accounting for certain contracts in an entity’s own equity that are currently accounted for as derivatives because of specific settlement provisions. In addition, the new guidance modifies how particular convertible instruments and certain contracts that may be settled in cash or shares impact the diluted EPS computation. For public business entities, it is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years using the fully retrospective or modified retrospective method. Early adoption is permitted but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the potential impact of this standard on its financial statements.
Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Report.
Comparison of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Revenue
During the fourth quarter of 2020, EAWD delivered its first equipment sale pursuant to an equipment sale agreement; however, the revenue of $550,000 along with the associate $350,000 of construction costs will not be recognized until the equipment is installed. The installation of the equipment has been deemed to be an unfulfilled performance obligation. The sales agreement, as amended states that EAWD will complete the equipment installation upon notice from the buyer of the final location of the system. Due to the COVID 19 situation in Mexico, the installation has been delayed. For the fiscal year 2019, we generated no revenue.
Cost of equipment sold
The equipment was manufactured by third-party fabricators in accordance with EAWD’s specifications at a cost to EAWD of $350,000, which will be recognized along with the revenue, once the equipment is installed. The manufacturer’s provided financing to EAWD to facilitate the delivery.
Gross profit
EAWD expect to recognize a gross profit from the sale and installation of equipment of $200,000, when the unit is installed in accordance with the terms of the equipment sale agreement, as amended.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense increased by $6,193,791 or 641% to $7,159,744 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $965,953 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The following discussion provides further explanation of the change in each item.
The largest element of change was an increase in officer’s salaries to $6,000,000 or 1,900.0% as compared to $300,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019.The increase resulted primarily from the two following events. To begin, in the first quarter of 2020 the Company issued a combination of common and preferred stock whose value totaled $1,175,000 for our CEO and $1,063,000 for our COO in satisfaction of accrued salary accumulated during the previous years. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020 the Company issued a combination of common and preferred stock whose value totaled $2,850,000 for each of our CEO and COO as a bonus for among other things, successful structuring the Company’s first equipment sale. The Company also issued preferred stock whose value totaled $300,000 for both our CEO and COO as settlement of unpaid accrued salaries.
There was $195,883 in increased professional fees from $339,605 for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $535,488 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which includes financial consulting, accounting services and legal fees. The bulk of the increase came from a $110,102 increase in financial consulting directed towards identifying and attracting sources of funding consulting as a result of an increase in spending from $134,400 for the year ended at December 31, 2019 compared to $244,503 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Legal fees accounted for $43,611 of the increase as fees increased from $167,152 for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $210,763 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The largest increase in legal fees focused on SEC activities, accounting for $61,631 of the legal fee increase. A $42,169 increase in accounting services from $38,053 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $80,223 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In addition to the increase in professional fees, we incurred increases and decreases in the following items:
·
$8,049 decrease for travel and entertainment a result of COVID-19 restrictions;
·
$272,244 increase for marketing and contact data base efforts,
·
$8,712 increase for other general and administrative expenses.
Other Income
Other income (expense) decreased by $493,328 from $60,288 income for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $433,040 loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the following:
·
$1,455,296 increase in interest expense also related to issuance of debt instruments which incurred interest and resulted in amortization of debt discount in 2020 compared to 2019
·
$1,001,968 gain in change in fair value of derivative liability related to issuance of debt instruments 2020.
Net Loss
Net loss increased $6,687,119 to $7,592,784 for the year ended December 31, 2020, when Compared to $905,665 for the year ended December 31, 2019. As discussed above, this increase was primarily attributable to the compensation bonus and conversion of accrued salary into stock and increase in general and administrative expenses partially offset by other income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had cash of $12,047 and a working capital deficit of $1,567,791 at December 31, 2020. Our operating and capital requirements in connection with supporting our operations will continue to be significant. Since inception, our losses from operations and working capital requirements have been satisfied through the deferral of payment for services performed by our founders and related parties discussed more fully below.
We have sustained operating losses since we began our operations in 2012. At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $19,357,927. The Company cannot predict how long it will continue to incur further losses or whether it will ever become profitable as this is dependent upon the reduction of certain expenses and success in obtaining project contracts, among other things. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern.
We also satisfied our cash and working capital requirements in 2020, through Company expenses paid by EAWC-TV, the issuance of convertible debentures, and the first sale of product. During 2020, the expenses paid on behalf of the Company totaled $291,768. During the years ended December 2020 and 2019, the Company issued $466,000 and $330,000, respectively, in convertible debentures. The holders of certain of such instruments had the option to convert these convertible debentures into the Company’s common stock at conversion prices ranging from $0.05 to $0.20 and had all converted by December 31, 2020. The remaining holders have convertible instruments with variable conversion rates. During 2020, holders of convertible debentures exercised their conversion options on convertible debentures amounting to $571,000 in exchange for 8,334,361 shares of common stock.
Comparison of Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
We used $869,394 of cash in our operating activities in 2020 compared to $373,200 used in 2019. The increase in cash used of $496,194 is due primarily to $424,637 net reduction in working capital components of $101,251 for 2020 compared to increases of $525,888 in 2019.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
We used or provided no funds from our investing activities in 2020 and 2019.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
We received $881,440 and $373,200 in cash from financing activities in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase of $508,240 is due to additional financing in 2020 through $72,500 increase in convertible debentures plus $435,740 increase in stock sales to investors in 2020 compared to 2019.
Financial Position
Total Assets - The Company had assets of $428,992 consisting primarily of deferred costs and accounts receivable and other assets.
PLAN OF OPERATION AND FUNDING
We expect to generate our first revenues which should, grow in time and lead to a positive cash flow. In the near future, we expect that working capital requirements will continue to be funded through lines of credit, convertible loans and/or further issuances of other securities in sufficient quantities that we will be able to meet our working capital requirement from these possible sources. Additional issuances of equity or convertible debt will result in dilution to our current shareholders.
We seek to focus on three main aspects of the water and energy business: (1) generation, (2) supply, and (3) maintenance. We seek to assist private companies, government entities and NGO’s to build profitable and sustainable supplies/generation capabilities of water and energy as required, by selling them the required technology or technical service to enhance their productivity/operability. With its outsourced technical arm and its commission-based global network of vendors, the Company expects to create sustainable added value to each project it takes on while generating revenue from its engineering and technical consultancy services, project management, sale of our Self Sufficient Power Supply Atmosphere Water Generation Systems (eAWGs) Solar Energy Generation Systems and Energy Management Systems, royalties from the commercialization of energy and water in certain cases, and revenues from the licensed innovated technologies.
Through our BlueTech Alliance for Water Generation established in December 2020, we have state-of the art technology partners, technology transfer agreements, and technology representation agreements in place relating to aspects of renewable energy and water supply. These unique key relationships offer important selling features and capabilities that differentiated EAWD from its competitors.
The Company plans to generate revenue from its engineering and technical consultancy services, project management, sale of our Self Sufficient Power Supply Atmosphere Water Generation Systems (eAWGs), Solar Energy Generation Systems, and Energy Management Systems, royalties from the commercialization of energy and water in certain cases, and revenues from the licensed innovated technologies.
Material Commitments
Employment Agreements
The Company entered into employment agreements with each of Mr. Hofmeier, its President, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, and Ms. Velazquez, its Chief Operating Officer and Vice-Chairman (together, the “Employment Agreements”), effective January 1, 2012. Under the Employment Agreements, the Company agreed to pay each of Mr. Hofmeier and Ms. Velazquez an annual base salary of $125,000 during the first year and $150,000 during the second year and forward. Any increase to the annual base salary after the second year is subject to approval by the company’s Board of Directors. Each Employment Agreement has an initial term of ten (10) years and is automatically renewed for successive one-year terms unless either party delivers timely notice of its intention not to renew.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Related Party Transactions
Due to officers
Amounts due to officers as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are:
Unsecured advances due to officers represent unreimbursed company expenses paid by the officers on behalf of the Company. These net advances are non-interest bearing and are due on demand.
Accrued salaries represent amounts accrued in accordance with the employment agreements for Mr. Hofmeier, the Company’s President, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, and Ms. Velazquez, the Company’s Chief Operating Officer and Vice-Chairman. Mr. Hofmeier and Ms. Velazquez are also significant stockholders.
On January 9, 2020, the Company entered into a Settlement Agreement with each of Mr. Hofmeier and Ms. Velazquez whereby (i) Mr. Hofmeier agreed to receive an aggregate 1,022,095 shares of Common Stock and 2,002,488 shares of Series A Preferred Stock in full and complete satisfaction of an aggregate $1,175,000 in unpaid compensation owed to him pursuant to his January 1, 2012 employment agreement with the Company and (ii) Ms. Velazquez agreed to receive an aggregate 1,022,095 shares of Common Stock and 1,778,488 shares of Series A Preferred Stock in full and complete satisfaction of an aggregate $1,063,000 in unpaid compensation owed to her pursuant to her January 1, 2012 employment agreement with the Company.
On December 18, 2020, the Company entered into a Settlement Agreement with each of Mr. Hofmeier and Ms. Velazquez whereby Mr. Hofmeier and Ms. Velazquez each agreed to receive 300,000 shares of its Series A Preferred Stock with fair market value of $150,000 (collectively, the “Compensation Shares”). Compensation Shares were issued in full satisfaction of the $150,000 accrued salary due each of the executives in 2020. In recognition of each of Mr. Hofmeier and Ms. Velazquez’ extraordinary service to and sacrifice for the benefit of the Company, simultaneously with the Compensation Shares, each executive received a one-time bonus of (i) 10,000,000 shares of the Company’s Common Stock with an aggregate fair market value of $1,500,000 and (ii) 2,700,000 shares of the Company’s Series A Preferred Stock, with an aggregate fair market value of $1,350,000.
Due to/from EAWC-TV
During the year ended December 31, 2019, EAWC-TV provided $200,000 of paid services and $100,000 of accrued services plus $13,389 net in interest and remitted $155,537 to vendors in satisfaction of EAWD obligations. EAWD also remitted $358,540 to EAWC-TV. The balance due to EAWC-TV by EAWD at December 31, 2019 was $4,959 in paid charges and $100,000 in unpaid services. In addition, pursuant to a 2017 distribution agreement, EAWC-TV also functions as a distributor of EAWD product and as such, has placed a $550,000 order for a solar powered atmospheric water generator (“AWG”) for an EAWC-TV customer, which has been secured by EAWC-TV accepting a $303,742 reduction in the amount due to EAWC-TV in exchange for a customer deposit with EAWD. The deposit will be repaid out of proceeds from the sale, when performance has occurred. The equipment was built in Germany.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, EAWC-TV provided $75,000 of paid services and $225,000 of accrued services plus $6,464 net in interest and remitted $187,518 to vendors in satisfaction of EAWD obligations. During the same period, EAWD raised from investors and lenders and remitted $445,865 to EAWC-TV. EAWD also executed several payments totaling $66,500 as a deposit on the equipment purchase and $124,352 which represented the final net balance in the D/T/F EAWC-TV account which was accounted for as a deposit for the customer’s purchase. In addition, also functions as a distributor of EAWD product and as such, has placed a $550,000 order for a solar powered atmospheric water generator (“AWG”) for an EAWC-TV customer, which has been secured by EAWC-TV accepting a $303,742 reduction in the amount due to EAWC-TV in exchange for a customer deposit with EAWD. The equipment was delivered on December 26, 2020. The deposit was satisfied out of proceeds from the sale, as delivery has occurred.
Going Concern Qualification
The Company delivered its first equipment on December 26, 2020 pursuant to an equipment sale agreement and will record the sale once the installation is complete. Once installed, the Company will record a sale for $550,000 along with associate $350,000 cost of construction, earning $200,000 gross profit. The next step to accomplish is to achieve sufficient sales volume to yield positive a net income. The Company has incurred operating losses since it began operations (December 2012) totaling $19,357,927 at December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred net losses of $7,592,784. The Company also incurred a working capital deficit of $1,567,791 at December 31, 2020. We are an early-stage company and have generated losses from operations since inception (we began operations in December 2012). The Company expects its sales to continue to expand in 2021.
The Company’s ability to transition to profitable operations is dependent upon achieving a level of revenues adequate to support its cost structure. The timing and amount of our actual expenditures will be based on many factors, including cash flows from operations and the anticipated growth of our business and availability to sufficient resources.
Management expects sales operations to continue to expand. If necessary, the Company may need to raise additional funds during 2021. Management of the Company intends to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity securities or debt, credit lines or advances from suppliers. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern depends upon its ability to generate sales or obtain additional funding to finance operating losses until the Corporation is profitable.
These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.