Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the information set forth under "Selected Financial Data" and our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that are based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our fiscal year ends December 31.
Overview
Eventbrite is a global self-service ticketing and experience technology platform that serves event creators and empowers their success. Our mission is to bring the world together through live experiences, and since inception, we have been at the center of the experience economy, helping to transform the way people organize and attend events.
Eventbrite was built as a self-service platform to make it possible for anyone to create and sell tickets to live experiences. Creators-the people who bring others together to share their passions, artistry and causes through live experiences-are our North Star, and we have built, and continue to build, our platform to provide them with an intuitive, secure and reliable way to plan and execute their live and online events and scale their operations. We have a creator-aligned business model: we succeed when our creators succeed. We allow creators of free events to use our platform for free and we charge creators of paid events on a per-ticket basis when an attendee purchases a paid ticket for an event. Our platform integrates seamlessly with internally-developed and third-party features designed to help our creators sell more tickets and scale their businesses.
The global COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted our company and the events industry as a whole as disease and government and third-party preventative and protective measures have limited the ability to gather in-person. We acted swiftly to implement cost savings, access capital to strengthen our financial position and shift our strategy to focus on our self-service creator experience and support for virtual events. Although our 2020 paid ticket volumes remained well below normal levels due to restrictions on in-person gatherings, we continued to see meaningful creator engagement throughout 2020 as creators pivoted to hosting virtual events and live events returned in select markets. We expect the recovery of live events will be neither quick nor linear, but we believe that by leaning into our core strengths-smaller events and self-service-we will help our creators successfully navigate the recovery and believe we have positioned Eventbrite for success over the long term.
In May 2020, we entered into a credit agreement (Credit Agreement) with FP EB Aggregator, L.P. (FP) and FP Credit Partners, L.P., as the administrative agent, which Credit Agreement was amended on June 15, 2020 to, among other things, appoint Wilmington Trust, National Association as administrative agent in place of FP Credit Partners, L.P. The Credit Agreement provides for initial term loans (Initial Term Loans) in the aggregate principal amount of $125.0 million and delayed draw term loans (Delayed Draw Term Loans, and together with the Initial Term Loans, Term Loans) in an aggregate principal amount of $100.0 million. The Delayed Draw Term Loans may only be accessed from December 31, 2020 until September 30, 2021, subject to certain conditions. In accordance with the terms of the Credit Agreement, the amount currently available under the Delayed Draw Term Loans is $50.0 million as a result of us issuing $150.0 million in convertible senior notes, discussed in further detail below. The full amount of the Initial Term Loans was funded in May 2020. In connection with the Credit Agreement, we also entered into a stock purchase agreement with FP and issued 2,599,174 shares of our Class A common stock for a purchase price of $0.01 per share. The fair value of these shares, which was $27.4 million as of the issuance date, is being accounted for as additional debt issuance costs, reducing the initial carrying amount of the debt, and will be amortized using the effective interest rate method over the contractual term of the Initial Term Loans.
In June 2020, we issued $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.000% convertible senior notes due 2025 in a private offering, inclusive of the initial purchaser's exercise in full of their option to purchase additional notes (2025 Notes). The Company determined the carrying amount of the liability component of the 2025 Notes by estimating the fair value of similar liabilities that do not have associated convertible features and separated the principal amount of the 2025 Notes into a liability component and an equity component. The fair value of the equity component was recorded as a discount to the debt and is being amortized using the effective interest rate method over the contractual term of the 2025 Notes.
In November 2020, we acquired ToneDen for an aggregate consideration of $7.5 million. We believe that this acquisition will enhance our customer engagement capabilities by offering our creators various marketing tools that we plan to integrate into our core product with a subscription offering.
Components of Results of Operations
Net Revenue
We generate revenues primarily from service fees and payment processing fees from the sale of paid tickets on our platform. We also generate revenues from fees for providing certain creators with account management services and customer support services. Our fee structure typically consists of a fixed fee and a percentage of the price of each ticket sold by a creator. Revenue is recognized when control of promised goods or services is transferred to the creator, which for service fees and payment processing fees is when the ticket is sold. For account management services and customer support, revenue is recognized over the period from the date of the sale of the ticket to the date of the event. Net revenue excludes sales taxes and value added taxes (VAT) and is presented net of estimated customer refunds, chargebacks and amortization of creator signing fees. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our actual refunds of our fees and our estimates for future customer refunds were significantly higher than previous periods as a result of refund activity largely related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We also generate a small portion of our net revenue from complementary solutions, such as day-of-event on-site product and services, web presence development and branding, software solutions to manage event venue administration and marketing services that we provide to creators.
Cost of Net Revenue
Cost of net revenue consists of fixed costs related to making our platform generally available and variable costs related to activities on our platform. Our fixed costs consist primarily of expenses associated with the operation and maintenance of our platform, including website hosting fees and platform infrastructure costs, amortization of capitalized software development costs, onsite operations costs and allocated customer support costs. Cost of net revenue also includes the amortization expense related to our acquired developed technology assets, which may be incurred in future periods related to future acquisitions. Variable costs relate to creator activity and primarily consist of payment processing fees.
Generally, we expect cost of net revenue to fluctuate as a percentage of net revenue in the near- to mid-term primarily as a result of both our geographical revenue mix and our total net revenue. Our payment processing costs for credit and debit card payments are generally lower outside of the United States due to a number of factors, including lower card network fees and lower cost alternative payment networks. Consequently, if we generate more revenue internationally than in the United States, we expect that our payment processing costs will decline as a percentage of revenue. As our total net revenue increases or decreases and to the extent our fixed costs are unaffected, our cost of net revenue as a percentage of net revenue will similarly fluctuate. Consequently, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and our increased refunds and revenue reserves for estimated future refunds in the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted in a significant increase in our cost of net revenue as a percentage of net revenue.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of product development, sales, marketing and support and general and administrative expenses. Direct and indirect personnel costs, including stock-based compensation expense, are the most significant recurring component of operating expenses. We also include sublease income as a reduction of our operating expenses.
As our total net revenue increases or decreases and to the extent our operating expenses are not equally affected, our operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue will similarly fluctuate. The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on our operating expenses, along with the related decrease in net revenue resulted in a significant increase in our operating expenses as a percentage of our net revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020.
In April 2020, our Board of Directors approved a global reduction in workforce impacting approximately 45% of our employees as part of an expense reduction plan related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on our reported paid ticket volume and net revenue. With this reduction in workforce, we are repositioning our platform to focus on self-sign on and sales creators who use our platform with limited training, support or professional services. We recorded approximately $9.5 million in operating expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 related to this reduction in workforce, of which $7.5 million was related to severance costs and post-termination employee benefits and the remaining $2.0 million were costs related primarily to disposals of assets.
Product development. Product development expenses consist primarily of costs associated with our employees in product development and product engineering activities. We expect our product development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars over the long term. In the near-term, we anticipate our product development expenses will increase as we focus on enhancing, improving and expanding the capabilities of our platform. We also expect to continue investing in building Eventbrite's infrastructure to enhance and support development of new technologies. Over the long-term, we anticipate that
product development expenses will decrease as a percentage of net revenue as we expect our revenue to recover and grow and as we continue to expand our development staff in lower cost markets.
Sales, marketing and support. Sales, marketing and support expenses consist primarily of costs associated with our employees involved in selling and marketing our products, public relations and communication activities, marketing programs, travel and customer support costs associated with free events on our platform. For our sales teams, this also includes commissions. Sales, marketing and support expenses are driven by investments to grow and retain creators and attendees on our platform. Additionally, we classify certain creator-related expenses, such as refunds of the ticket price paid by us on behalf of a creator as sales, marketing and support expense. In April 2020, we reduced our sales, marketing and support personnel by 64%, consistent with our increased priority on delivering a self-service platform experience to our creators. The majority of the related headcount reduction costs were recorded in the three months ended June 30, 2020. As a result of the workforce reduction, we expect personnel-related sales, marketing and support expenses to decrease over the near-term.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we increased our chargebacks and refunds reserve by $30.5 million to account for estimated losses related to event cancellations and postponements, recorded within sales, marketing and support expense. This reserve is an estimate and requires significant judgement. Due to the nature of the COVID-19 situation and the limited amount of currently available data, there is a high degree of uncertainty around these reserves and our actual losses could be materially different from our current estimates. We will adjust our recorded reserves in the future to reflect our best estimates of future outcomes.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, for finance, accounting, legal, risk, human resources and administrative personnel. It also includes professional fees for legal, accounting, finance, human resources and other corporate matters. Our general and administrative expenses also include accruals for sales tax and VAT, as well as impairment charges related to creator upfront payments, which increased in the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our general and administrative expenses have increased on an actual dollar basis over time. Over the long-term, we anticipate general and administrative expenses to decline as a percentage of net revenue as we expect to grow our net revenues and scale our business.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 consists primarily of cash interest expense and amortization of the discount and debt issuance costs on our Term Loans and 2025 Notes. The Credit Agreement provides for Initial Term Loans in an aggregate principal amount of $125.0 million. The full amount of the Initial Term Loans was funded in May 2020. In June 2020, we also issued the 2025 Notes, which consisted of $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.000% convertible senior notes due 2025.
Previously, interest expense consisted primarily of interest related to a senior secured credit facility, which consisted of term loans with an aggregate principal amount of $75.0 million (2019 Term Loans), which was fully repaid in September 2019.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income and foreign exchange rate remeasurement gains and losses recorded from consolidating our subsidiaries each period-end. The primary driver of our other income (expense), net is fluctuation in the value of the U.S. dollar against the local currencies of our foreign subsidiaries.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit)
Income tax provision (benefit) consists primarily of U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. The differences in the tax provision and benefit for the periods presented and the U.S. federal statutory rate is primarily due to foreign taxes in profitable jurisdictions and the recording of a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For a discussion and comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of the 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020. The following tables set forth our consolidated results of operations data and such data as a percentage of net revenue for the periods presented:
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net revenue
The decrease in net revenue during 2020 compared to 2019 was driven primarily by reduction in paid ticket volume resulting from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Paid tickets decreased by 57.0% from 2019 to 2020, from 109.4 million paid tickets in 2019 to 47.1 million paid tickets in 2020. Net revenue per paid ticket of $2.25 in 2020 also decreased when compared with net revenue per paid ticket in 2019 of $2.99, reflecting the impact of refunds, ticket mix, average ticket prices and other factors.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, largely as a result of COVID-19 and its effect on our creators' events, we incurred actual refunds of our fees of $27.0 million and increased our estimated revenue reserves for future refunds by $28.9 million.
Cost of net revenue
The decrease in cost of net revenue during 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in payment processing costs of $55.1 million, driven by a reduction in paid ticket volume resulting from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, a decrease in field operations costs of $6.9 million, a decrease in allocated customer support costs of $1.4 million, a decrease in depreciation of $1.3 million and other costs relating to platform fees and web design.
Our gross margin decreased in the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the significant increase in our actual refunds and estimated future refunds of our fees discussed above under net revenue.
Operating expense
Product development
The decrease in product development costs during 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease of $11.1 million in compensation costs due to lower headcount, offset by an increase in software maintenance costs.
Sales, marketing and support
The decrease in sales, marketing and support expenses during 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease of $21.9 million in compensation costs due to lower headcount, a decrease of $6.6 million in direct and discretionary marketing costs and a decrease of $4.3 million in costs relating to event hosting and professional services. This decrease was partially offset by an increase of $14.1 million in creator related expenses primarily due to chargebacks and refunds reserve and event cancellation losses.
General and administrative
The increase in general and administrative expenses during 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase of $18.1 million in creator related expenses driven by the increased reserves for creator signing fees and creator advances, as a result of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
This increase was partially offset by decreased compensation costs of $8.1 million due to lower headcount, $5.8 million in professional services and other costs, a decrease of $1.2 million in sales and other business taxes due to reductions in ticket sales.
Interest expense
The increase in interest expense during 2020 compared to 2019 was the result of higher amounts of interest-bearing debt outstanding during the period with higher effective interest rates. The Initial Term Loans and the 2025 Notes which were outstanding in 2020 bore interest at a rate higher than the 2019 Term Loans, which were outstanding during 2019. In September 2019, we repaid the 2019 Term Loans in full, and we terminated the underlying credit agreement.
Loss on debt extinguishment
________
* Not meaningful
In September 2019, we repaid the 2019 Term Loans in full making payments of $62.2 million of principal and $0.8 million of accrued interest and fees, and we terminated the underlying credit agreement. We recorded a loss on debt extinguishment of $1.7 million during 2019 related to the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs.
Other income (expense), net
The decrease in other income during 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by a $3.9 million decrease in interest income due to lower interest rates on our money market funds. The remaining change was primarily driven by higher other expense of $3.7 million as a result of fluctuations in foreign currency transaction gains or losses.
Income tax provision (benefit)
The benefit from income taxes decreased $0.1 million in 2020 compared to 2019 and was primarily attributable to the change in our year-over-year jurisdictional earnings mix.
Quarterly Results of Operations Data
The following tables set forth our unaudited quarterly statements of operations data for each of the eight quarters in the period ended December 31, 2020. The information for each quarter has been prepared on a basis consistent with our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and, in the opinion of management, includes all adjustments, which consist only of normal recurring adjustments, necessary for the fair statement of the results of operations for these periods. This data should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These quarterly results of operations are not necessarily indicative of the results we may achieve in any future period.
The following table presents our paid ticket volume for each of the periods indicated:
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $505.8 million and funds receivable of $10.8 million. Our cash and cash equivalents includes bank deposits and money market funds held by financial institutions and is held for working capital purposes. Our funds receivable represents cash-in-transit from credit card processors that is received to our bank accounts within five business days of the underlying ticket transaction. Collectively, our cash, cash equivalents and funds receivable balances represent a mix of cash that belongs to us and cash that is due to the creator. The amounts due to creators, which was $191.1 million as of December 31, 2020, are captioned on our consolidated balance sheets as accounts payable, creators. Although creator cash is legally unrestricted, we do not utilize creator cash for our own financing or investing activities as the amounts are payable to creators on a regular basis.
Until March 11, 2020, for qualified creators who applied to receive their funds in advance of their events, we passed proceeds from ticket sales to the creators prior to the events, subject to certain limitations. We refer to these payments as advance payouts. When we provide advance payouts, we assume significant risk that the event may be cancelled, postponed, fraudulent, materially not as described or removed from our platform due to its failure to comply with our terms of service or our merchant agreement, which could result in significant chargebacks, refund requests and/or disputes between attendees and creators. This risk has been significantly exacerbated by the unprecedented nature of the COVID-19 pandemic. The terms of our standard merchant agreement obligate creators to repay us for ticket sales advanced under such circumstances. However, we may not be able to recover our losses from these events, and COVID-19 has significantly increased the likelihood that we will not recover these losses. Such unrecoverable amounts could equal up to the value of the transaction or transactions settled to the creator prior to the event that has been postponed or cancelled or is otherwise disputed. This amount could be many multiples of the fees we collected from such transaction. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily suspended the advance payout program on March 11, 2020. We are exploring new ways to make advance payouts to qualified creators who meet strict guidelines and have started making advance payouts available to a limited number of low risk creators.
As of December 31, 2020, our chargebacks and refunds reserve increased to $33.2 million from $2.7 million at December 31, 2019, an increase of $30.5 million. This increase was largely driven by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and related event cancellations and postponements and our estimated costs related to chargebacks and refunds, in part driven by our advance payouts program. Due to the nature of the COVID-19 situation and the limited amount of currently available data, there is a high degree of uncertainty around these reserves and our actual losses could be materially different from our current estimates. We will adjust our recorded reserves in the future to reflect our best estimates of future outcomes, and we may pay in cash a portion of, all, or a greater amount than the $33.2 million reserve recorded as of December 31, 2020.
In May 2020, we entered into the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement provides for the Initial Term Loans in the aggregate principal amount of $125.0 million and the Delayed Draw Term Loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to the lesser of (x) $100.0 million or (y) if we incur certain convertible indebtedness pursuant to the terms of the Credit Agreement, $325.0 million less the sum of (i) the aggregate principal amount of the Initial Term Loans outstanding at such time and (ii) the aggregate principal amount of such convertible indebtedness outstanding at such time. The amount currently available under the Delayed Draw Term Loans is $50.0 million as a result of the issuance of $150.0 million in 2025 Notes, discussed in further detail below. The Delayed Draw Term Loans may only be accessed from December 31, 2020 until September 30, 2021, subject to certain conditions. The full amount of the Initial Term Loans was funded in May 2020. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at a rate per annum equal to (i) 4.0% payable in cash and (ii) 8.5% payable in kind. The Term Loans mature on the fifth anniversary of the Initial Funding Date, and there are no amortization payments with respect to the Term Loans.
In June 2020, we issued $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.000% convertible senior notes due 2025 in a private offering, inclusive of the initial purchaser's exercise in full of their option to purchase additional notes. In connection with the offering of the 2025 Notes, we entered into capped call transactions with certain financial institutions (Capped Calls). We used $15.6 million of the net proceeds from the sale of the 2025 Notes to purchase the Capped Calls. We intend to use the remaining net proceeds from the sale of the 2025 Notes for general corporate purposes. See Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for additional information about the 2025 Notes and Capped Calls.
We believe that our existing cash, including proceeds from the Initial Term Loans and 2025 Notes, together with cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months. However, our liquidity assumptions may prove to be incorrect, and we could exhaust our available financial resources sooner than we currently expect. We may seek to raise additional funds at any time through debt, equity and equity-linked arrangements.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately 26.1% of our cash was held outside of the United States, which was held primarily on behalf of, and to be remitted to, creators and to fund our foreign operations. We do not expect to incur significant taxes related to these amounts.
Cash Flows
Our cash flow activities were as follows for the periods presented:
For a discussion and comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of the 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The net cash used in operating activities of $156.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due primarily to a net loss of $224.7 million with adjustments for provision for chargebacks and refunds of $61.0 million, stock-based compensation expense of $40.2 million, depreciation and amortization of $22.6 million, amortization of debt discount and issuance costs of $10.2 million, payment in kind interest of $6.8 million, amortization of creator signing fees of $8.6 million, impairment charges relating to creator advances and creator signing fees of $12.3 million and provision for bad debt and creator advances of $17.6 million. Additionally, there was a decrease in accounts payable to creators of $116.7 million due to decreases in paid ticket volume resulting from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, cash paid for refunds and chargebacks of $30.4 million, a decrease in other accrued liabilities of $8.0 million, a decrease in accrued taxes of $3.2 million offset by cash from funds receivable of $44.1 million.
The net cash provided by operating activities of $30.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was due primarily to a net loss of $68.8 million with adjustments for depreciation and amortization of $24.3 million, stock-based compensation expense of $37.6 million, amortization of creator signing fees of $10.9 million, impairment charges of $5.7 million, provision for bad debt and creator advances of $2.4 million and loss on debt extinguishment of $1.7 million. Additionally, there was an increase in accounts payable to creators of $36.2 million due to increases in paid ticket volume, a decrease in funds receivable of $3.8 million and an increase in other accrued liabilities of $3.5 million. These items were partially offset by an increase in creator signing fees paid of $21.2 million, an increase in creator advances, net of $5.7 million and a decrease in accrued taxes of $2.8 million, The increases in creator signing fees, net, and creator advances, net, were due to increases in our sales contracting with creators.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The net cash used in investing activities of $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to cash paid for acquisition of ToneDen in November 2020 of $6.4 million, capitalized software development costs of $4.6 million and purchases of property and equipment of $1.7 million.
The net cash used in investing activities of $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to capitalized software development costs of $7.7 million and purchases of property and equipment of $5.9 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
The net cash provided by financing activities of $255.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to proceeds from issuing the Initial Term Loans and 2025 Notes of $256.1 million, net of issuance costs, proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $19.3 million and $1.3 million of purchases under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP), partially offset by the purchase of convertible notes capped calls at $15.6 million in connection with the issuance of the 2025 Notes and $5.5 million in taxes paid related to the net share settlement of equity awards.
The net cash used in financing activities of $32.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 was due primarily to $73.6 million in principal payments on our debt obligations and $2.4 million in taxes paid related to the net share settlement of equity awards. These cash outflows were offset by $40.7 million in proceeds from exercise of stock options and $3.6 million of purchases under our ESPP.
Concentrations of Credit Risk
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, there were no customers that represented 10% or more of our accounts receivable balance. There were no customers that individually exceeded 10% of our net revenue during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our principal commitments consist of obligations under the Initial Term Loans and 2025 Notes (including principal and coupon interest), operating leases for office space, future creator signing fees and creator advances, as well as non-cancellable purchase commitments. Refer to Note 11, Commitments and Contingent Liabilities, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more details, including a table of our contractual obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not currently have any off-balance sheet arrangements and did not have any such arrangements during each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP).
Use of Estimates
In order to conform with GAAP, we are required to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions when preparing our consolidated financial statements. These estimates, judgments and assumptions affect the reported assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported periods. These estimates include, but are not limited to, the recoverability of creator signing fees and creator advances, chargebacks and refunds due to cancelled or postponed events, the capitalization and estimated useful life of internal-use software, certain assumptions used in the valuation of equity awards, assumptions used in determining the fair value of business combinations, the allowance for doubtful accounts and indirect tax reserves. Due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, there is uncertainty and significant disruption in the global economy and financial markets. We have had to make significant estimates in our consolidated financial statements, specifically related to chargebacks and refunds due to cancelled or postponed events, which impacts net revenue, advance payouts, creator signing fees and creator advances. We evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results could differ from those estimates and such differences could be material to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We adopted and began applying ASC 606 on January 1, 2019 in accordance with ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) and Other Assets and Deferred Costs-Contracts with Customers (Subtopic 340-40) using a modified retrospective approach to contracts which were not completed as of the adoption date. The adoption of ASC 606 had no material impact to our net revenues recorded in the year ended December 31, 2019. We recorded a cumulative-effect adjustment to opening accumulated deficit as of January 1, 2019 of $0.6 million and a corresponding increase to contract
liabilities, included within other accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. We recognized this $0.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 and had a contract liability of $0.8 million recorded as of December 31, 2019.
We derive our revenues primarily from service fees and payment processing fees charged at the time a ticket for an event is sold. We also derive revenues from providing certain creators with account management services and customer support. Our customers are event creators who use our platform to sell tickets to attendees. Revenue is recognized when or as control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. We allocate the transaction price by estimating a standalone selling price for each performance obligation using an expected cost plus a margin approach. For service fees and payment processing fees, revenue is recognized when the ticket is sold. For account management services and customer support, revenue is recognized over the period from the date of the sale of the ticket to the date of the event.
The event creator has the choice of whether to use Eventbrite Payment Processing (EPP) or to use a third-party payment processor, referred to as Facilitated Payment Processing (FPP). Under the EPP option, we are the merchant of record and are responsible for processing the transaction and collecting the face value of the ticket and all associated fees at the time the ticket is sold. We are also responsible for remitting these amounts collected, less our fees, to the event creator. Under the FPP option, we are not responsible for processing the transaction or collecting the face value of the ticket and associated fees. In this case, we invoice the creator for all of our fees.
We evaluate whether it is appropriate to recognize revenue on a gross or net basis based upon our evaluation of whether we obtain control of the specified goods or services by considering if we are primarily responsible for fulfillment of the promise, have inventory risk, and have the latitude in establishing pricing and selecting suppliers, among other factors. We determined the event creator is the party responsible for fulfilling the promise to the attendee, as the creator is responsible for providing the event for which a ticket is sold, determines the price of the ticket and is responsible for providing a refund if the event is canceled. Our service provides a platform for the creator and event attendee to transact and our performance obligation is to facilitate and process that transaction and issue the ticket. The amount that we earn for our services is fixed. For the payment processing service, we determined that we are the principal in providing the service as we are responsible for fulfilling the promise to process the payment and we have discretion and latitude in establishing the price of our service. Based on our assessment, we record revenue on a net basis related to our ticketing service and on a gross basis related to our payment processing service. As a result, costs incurred for processing the transactions are included in cost of net revenues in the consolidated statements of operations.
Revenue is presented net of indirect taxes, value-added taxes, creator royalties and reserves for customer refunds, payment chargebacks and estimated uncollectible amounts. If an event is cancelled by a creator, then any obligations to provide refunds to event attendees are the responsibility of that creator. If a creator is unwilling or unable to fulfill their refund obligations, we may, at our discretion, provide attendee refunds. Revenue is also presented net of the amortization of creator signing fees. The benefit we receive by securing exclusive ticketing and payment processing rights with certain creators from creator signing fees is inseparable from the customer relationship with the creator and accordingly these fees are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the consolidated statements of operations.
Chargebacks and Refunds Reserve
The terms of our standard merchant agreement obligate creators to reimburse attendees who are entitled to refunds. When we provide advance payouts, we assume risk that the event may be cancelled, fraudulent, or materially not as described, resulting in significant chargebacks and refund requests. If the creator is insolvent or has spent the proceeds of the ticket sales for event-related costs, we may not be able to recover our losses from these events, and such unrecoverable amounts could equal the value of the transaction or transactions settled to the creator prior to the event that is disputed, plus any associated chargeback fees not assumed by the creator. We record estimates for refunds and chargebacks of our fees as contra-revenue. We record estimates for losses related to chargebacks and refunds of the face value of tickets as an operating expense classified within sales, marketing and support. Reserves are recorded based on our assessment of various factors, including the amounts paid and outstanding to creators in conjunction with the advance payout program, the size and nature of future events, the status of and remaining time to event date, macro-economic conditions and current events, and actual chargeback and refund activity during the current year. The chargebacks and refunds reserve was $33.2 million and $2.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in the reserve balance during the year ended December 31, 2020 was the result of estimated losses from the advance payout program and estimated future refunds of fees, relating largely to the COVID-19 pandemic. Prior to March 31, 2020, we included our chargebacks and refunds reserve in other accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets, and have reclassified the balance as of December 31, 2019 on the consolidated balance sheets included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to be consistent with the presentation as of December 31, 2020.
Business Combinations, Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
We account for business acquisitions using the purchase method of accounting, in accordance with which assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their respective fair values at the acquisition date. We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. Such valuations require us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired users, acquired technology and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives and discount rates. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates.
Goodwill represents the excess of the aggregate fair value of the consideration transferred in a business combination over the fair value of the assets acquired, net of liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized but the Company evaluates goodwill impairment of its single reporting unit annually in the fourth quarter, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate the goodwill may be impaired.
On January 1, 2020, we adopted ASU 2017-04, which eliminates the requirement to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill to measure a goodwill impairment charge. We determined that the conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and the decline in the market value of our common stock warranted an assessment of its goodwill carrying amount. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we performed an analysis by comparing our estimated fair value to our carrying amount, including goodwill. Our analysis indicated that its estimated fair value, using the market price of our common stock, exceeded its carrying amount and therefore goodwill was not impaired and no additional steps were necessary.
Acquired intangible assets, net consists of identifiable intangible assets such as developed technology, customer relationships, and trade names resulting from our acquisitions. Acquired intangible assets are recorded at fair value on the date of acquisition and amortized over their estimated economic lives following the pattern in which the economic benefits of the assets will be consumed, which is straight-line. Acquired intangible assets are presented net of accumulated amortization in the consolidated balance sheets.
We evaluate the recoverability of our acquired intangible assets for potential impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to the fair value. We determined that the conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic warranted an assessment of intangible assets carrying amount. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we performed an analysis by comparing the undiscounted future cash flows to the carrying amount and concluded no impairment of the carrying value was required.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense is measured based on the grant-date fair value of the awards and recognized in the consolidated statements of operations over the period during which the award recipient is required to perform services in exchange for the award (the vesting period of the award).
We estimate the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We measure the fair value of RSUs based on the fair value of the underlying shares on the date of grant. Compensation expense is recognized over the vesting period of the applicable award using the straight-line method. We estimate forfeitures in order to calculate stock-based compensation expense.
Income Taxes
We record income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. Valuation allowances are provided when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. Although we believe we have adequately provided for its uncertain tax positions, we can provide no assurance that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be materially different. We adjust these allowances when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such
differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 of our Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.