ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical data, this discussion contains forward-looking statements about our business, results of operations, cash flows, financial condition and prospects based on current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those in this discussion as a result of various factors, including, but not limited to, those discussed under Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a bank holding company, and our principal subsidiary, Eastern Bank, is a Massachusetts-chartered bank that has served the banking needs of our customers since 1818. Our business philosophy is to operate as a diversified financial services enterprise providing a broad array of banking and other financial services primarily to retail, commercial and small business customers. We had total assets of $16.0 billion and $11.6 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We are subject to comprehensive regulation and examination by the Massachusetts Commissioner of Banks, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”), the Federal Reserve Board and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
We manage our business under two business segments: our banking business, which contributed $495.0 million, which is 83.7%, of our total income for the year ended December 31, 2020, and our insurance agency business, which contributed $96.7 million, which is 16.3%, of our total income for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our banking business consists of a full range of banking, lending (commercial, residential and consumer), savings and small business offerings, including our wealth management and trust operations that we conduct through our Eastern Wealth Management division. Our insurance agency business consists of insurance-related activities, acting as an independent agent in offering commercial, personal and employee benefits insurance products to individual and commercial clients. See the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Business” for further discussion of our banking business and insurance agency business.
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 computed in accordance with GAAP was $22.7 million, as compared to $135.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net income for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included items that our management considers noncore, which are excluded for purposes of assessing operating earnings. Net operating earnings, a non-GAAP financial measure, for year ended December 31, 2020 was $102.1 million compared to net operating earnings of $129.7 million for year ended December 31, 2019, representing a 21.3% decrease. This decrease was largely driven by an increase in the provision for credit losses and a decrease in net interest income, both of which are attributed to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for a reconciliation of net operating earnings to GAAP net income.
Outlook and Trends
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has had and continues to have an adverse effect on our business and the markets in which we operate. We expect the short-term and long-term economic consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic to our customers will continue to be significant, and that the continuing health and safety concerns relating to the ongoing pandemic will change the way we conduct our business and interact with our customers. Consistent with our philosophy of seeking to be a source of economic strength to our communities, we have taken a broad range of steps intended to help our colleagues, our borrowers and our communities during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our Borrowers. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily modified our practices with respect to the collection of delinquent loans to assist our customers during this difficult economic time, and during the year ended December 31, 2020 we originated $1.2 billion of Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") loans, $1.0 billion of which remained outstanding at December 31, 2020.
•For our retail customers, we temporarily suspended all collection of overdue payments beginning March 16, 2020, including residential property foreclosure and related property sales. We resumed collection activities with respect to delinquent consumer loans beginning in late July 2020.
•Through December 31, 2020, the balance of loans that had received a COVID-19 modification was $1.0 billion, of which approximately 48% were for full payment deferrals (both interest and principal) and 52% were for deferral of only principal payments, and included $616.6 million of commercial real estate loans, including construction loans, $132.9 million of commercial and industrial loans, $133.4 million of business banking loans, $102.8 million of residential real estate loans and $28.7 million of consumer loans, including home equity loans. Most of these deferrals ended in the third or fourth quarter of the year ended December 31, 2020, and $703.1 million of these loans have resumed payments and were not 30 days or more past due at December 31, 2020. The loans remaining in a modified status as of December 31, 2020 compared to total modifications executed through September 30, 2020 are presented by portfolio below. These modifications met the criteria of either Section 4013 of the CARES Act or the Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus (Revised) and therefore are not deemed troubled debt restructurings ("TDRs").
(1)Remaining COVID-19 modifications reflect only those loans which underwent a modification and have not yet resumed payment. We define a modified loan to have resumed payment if it is one month past the modification end date and not more than 30 days past due.
•As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are unable to reasonably estimate the aggregate amount of loans that will likely become delinquent after the respective deferral period. The following table shows certain data, as of December 31, 2020, related to loans to our borrowers in the industry categories that we believe will likely experience the most adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Loans included in the table that had been modified as of December 31, 2020 represented approximately 3.4% of our aggregate outstanding loan balances to all borrowers in those categories as of December 31, 2020.
(1)The percentage of loans in each category, calculated as a percentage of aggregate outstanding loan balances for each such category as of December 31, 2020, that we modified primarily due to the effects on borrowers of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic slowdown beginning in late March 2020.
(2)The retail segment includes all retail commercial real estate loans and non-essential commercial and industrial retail loans.
•As of December 31, 2020, we concluded the first round of originations of PPP loans under the CARES Act. We disbursed $1.2 billion of loans to approximately 8,900 borrowers under the PPP of the CARES Act during the year ended December 31, 2020, $1.0 billion of which was outstanding at December 31, 2020. The vast majority of our PPP borrowers are existing commercial and small business borrowers, non-profit customers, retail banking customers and clients of Eastern Wealth Management and Eastern Insurance Group LLC. We anticipate that the vast majority of our remaining PPP exposure will be forgiven in the year ending December 31, 2021. $28.8 million of our PPP exposure at December 31, 2020 had a maturity of five years; all of our other PPP loans outstanding at December 31, 2020 have a maturity of two years.
•Through December 31, 2020, we received approximately $37.1 million of PPP loan origination fees from the SBA. We also deferred certain origination costs, totaling $4.6 million, related to PPP loans. Our net PPP fee accretion (fee accretion less cost amortization) for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $13.9 million.
•As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we have commenced PPP lending under the latest government stimulus package.
The following table shows certain data related to our remaining PPP loans as of December 31, 2020:
Our Operating Results. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020, and we believe it will continue to have a significant impact during the year ending December 31, 2021.
•During March 2020, the Federal Reserve took multiple steps to lower interest rates and reduced the target range for the federal funds rate to between 0.0% and 0.25%, compared to the previous target of between 1.00% and 1.25%. These interest rate reductions, combined with the decline in longer term rates, have lowered and will continue to lower our net interest income over time from the levels we experienced in the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Our loan loss provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $38.8 million compared to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We expect our loan loss provision to continue to be elevated until the economy has recovered from the COVID-19 pandemic. The economic uncertainties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic are significant, and the timing and pace of the economic recovery both locally and nationally will determine the severity and timing of our future loan losses.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We present certain non-GAAP financial measures, which management uses to evaluate our performance, and which exclude the effects of certain transactions, non-cash items and GAAP adjustments that we believe are unrelated to our core business and are therefore not necessarily indicative of our current performance or financial position. Management believes excluding these items facilitates greater visibility for investors into our core businesses as well as underlying trends that may, to some extent, be obscured by inclusion of such items in the corresponding GAAP financial measures.
There are items in our financial statements that impact our results but which we believe are unrelated to our core business. Accordingly, we present net operating earnings, noninterest income on an operating basis, noninterest expense on an operating basis, total operating income, net operating earnings per share, and the efficiency ratio on an operating basis, each of which excludes the impact of such items because we believe such exclusion can provide greater visibility into our core business and underlying trends. Such items that we do not consider to be core to our business include (i) income and expenses from investments held in rabbi trusts, (ii) gains and losses on sales of securities available for sale, net, (iii) gains and losses on the sale of other assets, (iv) rabbi trust employee benefits, (v) impairment charges on tax credit investments and associated tax credit benefits, (vi) expenses indirectly associated with our IPO, (vii) other real estate owned gains, (viii) merger and acquisition expenses, and (ix) the stock donation to the Eastern Bank Charitable Foundation in connection with our mutual-to-stock conversion and IPO.
We also present tangible shareholders’ equity, tangible assets, the ratio of tangible shareholders’ equity to tangible assets, and tangible book value per share, each of which excludes the impact of goodwill and other intangible assets, as we believe these financial measures provide investors with the ability to further assess our performance, identify trends in our core business and provide a comparison of our capital adequacy to other companies. We have included the tangible ratios because management believes that investors may find it useful to have access to the same analytical tools used by management to assess performance and identify trends.
Our non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered as an alternative or substitute to GAAP net income, or as an indication of our cash flows from operating activities, a measure of our liquidity or an indication of funds available for our cash needs. An item which we consider to be non-core and exclude when computing these non-GAAP financial measures can be of substantial importance to our results for any particular period. In addition, our methodology for calculating non-GAAP financial measures may differ from the methodologies employed by other companies to calculate the same or similar performance measures and, accordingly, our reported non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to the same or similar performance measures reported by other companies.
The following table summarizes the impact of non-core items recorded for the time periods indicated below and reconciles them to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
(1)Reflects costs associated with the IPO that are indirectly related to the IPO and were not recorded as a reduction of capital.
(2)The net tax (expense) benefit associated with these items is determined by assessing whether each item is included or excluded from net taxable income and applying our combined statutory tax rate only to those items included in net taxable income.
The following table summarizes the impact of non-core items with respect to our total income, noninterest income, noninterest expense and the efficiency ratio, which reconciles to the most directly comparable respective GAAP financial measure, for the periods indicated:
(1)Reflects costs associated with the IPO that are indirectly related to the IPO and were not recorded as a reduction of capital.
The following table summarizes the calculation of our tangible shareholders' equity, tangible assets, the ratio of tangible shareholders' equity to tangible assets, and tangible book value per share, which reconciles to the most directly comparable respective GAAP measure, as of the dates indicated:
Financial Position
Summary of Financial Position
Cash and cash equivalents
Total cash and cash equivalents increased by $1.7 billion, or 466.5%, to $2.1 billion at December 31, 2020 from $362.6 million at December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to proceeds received from investors in our IPO, as well as customer deposit growth, which exceeded our funding needs for new lending activities.
Securities
Our current investment policy authorizes us to invest in various types of investment securities and liquid assets, including U.S. Treasury obligations, securities of government-sponsored enterprises, mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, corporate notes, asset-backed securities and municipal securities. We do not engage in any investment hedging activities or trading activities, nor do we purchase any high-risk investment products. We typically invest in the following types of securities:
U.S. government securities: At December 31, 2020 our U.S. government securities consisted of U.S. Agency bonds and U.S. Treasury securities. At December 31, 2019, our U.S. government securities consisted solely of U.S. Treasury securities. We maintain these investments, to the extent appropriate, for liquidity purposes, at zero risk weighting for capital purposes, and as collateral for interest rate derivative positions. U.S. Agency bonds include securities issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, the Federal Home Loan Bank, and the Federal Farm Credit Bureau.
Mortgage-backed securities: We invest in residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities insured or guaranteed by Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae. We have not purchased any privately-issued mortgage-backed securities. We invest in mortgage-backed securities to achieve a positive interest rate spread with minimal administrative expense, and to lower our credit risk as a result of the guarantees provided by Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae.
Investments in residential mortgage-backed securities involve a risk that actual payments will be greater or less than the prepayment rate estimated at the time of purchase, which may require adjustments to the amortization of any premium or acceleration of any discount relating to such interests, thereby affecting the net yield on our securities. We periodically review current prepayment speeds to determine whether prepayment estimates require modification that could cause amortization or accretion adjustments. There is also reinvestment risk associated with the cash flows from such securities. In addition, the market value of such securities may be adversely affected by changes in interest rates.
State and municipal securities: We invest in fixed rate investment grade bonds issued primarily by municipalities in our local communities within Massachusetts and by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The market value of these securities may be affected by call options, long dated maturities, general market liquidity and credit factors.
The Risk Management Committee of our Board of Directors is responsible for approving and overseeing our investment policy, which it reviews at least annually. This policy dictates that investment decisions be made based on the safety of the investment, liquidity requirements, potential returns and market risk considerations.
The following table shows the fair value of our securities by investment category as of the dates indicated:
Securities Portfolio Composition
Our securities portfolio has increased year-to-date. Available for sale securities increased $1.7 billion, or 111.1%, to $3.2 billion at December 31, 2020 from $1.5 billion at December 31, 2019. This increase is due to investment purchases, as well as an increase in unrealized gains during the year ended December 31, 2020. Trading securities totaled $1.0 million at December 31, 2019, and all securities have matured as of December 31, 2020.
We did not have held-to-maturity investments at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
A portion of our securities portfolio continues to be tax-exempt. Investments in federally tax-exempt securities totaled $280.9 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $283.5 million at December 31, 2019. Investments in state tax-exempt securities totaled $70.9 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $0 at December 31, 2019.
Our available for sale securities are carried at fair value and are categorized within the fair value hierarchy based on the observability of model inputs. Securities which require inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable are classified as level 3 within the fair value hierarchy. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $0 and $6.3 million, respectively, of securities categorized as level 3 within the fair value hierarchy.
Maturities of our securities portfolio are based on the final contractual payment dates, and do not reflect the effect of scheduled principal repayments, prepayments, or early redemptions that may occur.
The following tables show contractual maturities of our available for sale securities and weighted average yields at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Weighted average yields in the table below have been calculated based on the amortized cost of the security:
Securities Portfolio, Amounts Maturing
The yield on tax-exempt obligations of states and political subdivisions has been adjusted to a FTE basis by adjusting tax-exempt income upward by an amount equivalent to the prevailing federal income taxes that would have been paid if the income had been fully taxable.
Net unrealized gains on available for sale securities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaled $58.7 million and $28.0 million, respectively.
Loans
We consider our loan portfolio to be relatively diversified by borrower and industry. Our loans increased $743.5 million, or 8.3%, to $9.7 billion at December 31, 2020 from $9.0 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase as of December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in business banking loans of $567.7 million and an increase in commercial and industrial loans of $352.8 million, both related to PPP loan originations, partially offset by a decrease in other consumer loans of $124.7 million.
•The increase in our commercial and industrial loans from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 was primarily a result of $568.8 million PPP loan originations, offset by a transfer of smaller loans to business banking during the year ended December 31, 2020.
•The increase in our business banking loans from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 was primarily a result of $457.4 million in PPP loan originations during the year ended December 31, 2020, and a transfer of smaller loans from commercial and industrial and commercial real estate portfolios.
•The $38.2 million increase in our commercial real estate loans from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 was primarily a result of an increase of $119.3 million of investment commercial real estate loans, offset by a decrease of $65.4 million in owner-occupied commercial real estate loans.
•The decrease in our retail portfolio from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 was due to the following:
◦The residential portfolio decreased $57.7 million due to an increase in secondary market sales and higher refinance activity in 2020 due to the low interest rate environment;
◦The home equity portfolio decreased $64.8 million due to a high level of prepayments driven by a strong residential refinance market;
◦Other consumer loans decreased $124.7 million primarily as a result of a $117.2 million decrease in the automobile portfolio due to the Bank's exit from the indirect automobile lending business.
The following table shows the composition of our loan portfolio, by category, as of the dates indicated:
Loan Portfolio Composition
We believe that our commercial loan portfolio composition is relatively diversified in terms of industry sectors, property types and various lending specialties, and is concentrated in the New England geographical area, with 90.6% of our loans in Massachusetts and New Hampshire as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, concentrations in our commercial loan portfolios were as follows:
We believe that the loan to value ratio (“LTV”) is an important factor in monitoring the risk characteristics of our loans secured by real estate. The following tables show the distribution of loan balances by LTV and year of origination for each of our portfolios of loans secured by real estate as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Current LTV is calculated based upon exposure amount and the most recently available appraisal value as of the reporting period.
(2) Insufficient data available to calculate LTV.
The maturity distribution of our loan portfolio is one factor used by management to evaluate the risk characteristics of our loan portfolio. The following table shows the maturity distribution of our loans as of December 31, 2020:
Scheduled Contractual Loan Maturity
The interest rate risk to our loan portfolio is an important element in the management of net interest margin. We attempt to manage the relationship between the interest rate sensitivity of our assets and liabilities to produce an effective interest differential that is not significantly impacted by changes in the level of interest rates. The following table shows the interest rate risk of our loans, net of allowance for credit losses and unamortized premiums, due one year after December 31, 2020:
Loan Interest Rate Risk
(1) Total adjustable rate loans include approximately $3.4 billion of loans with interest rates utilizing LIBOR as a benchmark rate.
Asset quality. We continually monitor the asset quality of our loan portfolio utilizing portfolio scorecards and various credit quality indicators. Based on this process, loans meeting certain criteria are categorized as delinquent, impaired, or non-performing and further assessed to determine if non-accrual status is appropriate.
For the commercial portfolio, which includes our commercial and industrial, commercial real estate, commercial construction and business banking loans, we monitor credit quality using a risk rating scale, which assigns a risk-grade to each borrower based on a number of quantitative and qualitative factors associated with a commercial loan transaction. Effective December 2020, management implemented an enhanced loan risk rating methodology based on a 15-point scale and adopted new risk rating scorecard tools. The rating scale expanded from the prior 12-point scale to provide more refinement in the pass grade categories; new pass grades are 0-10. There are no changes to non-pass categories, which continue to align with regulatory guidelines and are found in ratings: special mention (11), substandard (12), doubtful (13) and loss (14).
Risk rating assignment is determined using one of 14 separate scorecards developed for distinctive portfolio segments based on common attributes. Key factors include: industry and market conditions, position within the industry, earnings trends, operating cash flow, asset/liability values, debt capacity, guarantor strength, management and controls, financial reporting, collateral and other considerations. The new risk rating methodology, inclusive of the expanded grade levels and the scorecard tools, has increased, and is expected to continue to increase granularity and distribution of risk rating assignment with more precision and effectiveness; provide customized and enhanced templates to incorporate more risk factors
and attributes applicable to loan and collateral types; increase precision and effectiveness of credit risk identification; and provide a foundation for enhanced reporting, including migration of risk rating analysis.
Over the past five years, the asset quality of our commercial loan portfolio remained strong. Special mention, substandard and doubtful loans totaled 7.7% and 2.6% of total commercial loans outstanding at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This increase was driven by an increase in the special mention category, due to the downgrading of our hotel and restaurant loan portfolios as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
For the retail portfolio, which includes residential real estate, consumer home equity, and other consumer portfolios, we monitor credit quality using the borrower’s FICO score. As of December 31, 2020, 67.4% of retail borrowers, based on loan balance, have a FICO score of 740 or greater. The following table shows the balances by borrower’s current FICO score as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Borrower FICO scores are updated on a semi-annual basis, and the most recent update occurred in July 2020.
(2)Insufficient data available to report.
Our philosophy toward managing our loan portfolios is predicated upon careful monitoring, which stresses early detection and response to delinquent and default situations. We seek to make arrangements to resolve any delinquent or default situation over the shortest possible time frame.
Reflecting in part the loan modifications that continued through December 31, 2020 (see “Outlook and Trends-COVID-19 Pandemic-Our Borrowers” within this section), the delinquency rate of our total loan portfolio remained constant at 0.49% at both December 31, 2020 and 2019. The following table provides details regarding our delinquency rates as of the dates indicated:
Loan Delinquency Rates
(1)In the calculation of the delinquency rate as of December 31, 2020, the total amount of loans outstanding includes $1.0 billion of PPP loans.
The following table provides details regarding the age analysis of past due loans as of the dates indicated:
Age Analysis of Past Due Loans
As a general rule, loans more than 90 days past due with respect to principal or interest are classified as non-accrual loans. However, based on our assessment of collateral and/or payment prospects, certain loans that are more than 90 days past due may be kept on an accruing status. Income accruals are suspended on all non-accrual loans and all previously accrued and uncollected interest is reversed against current income. A loan is expected to remain on non-accrual status until it becomes current with respect to principal and interest, the loan is liquidated, or the loan is determined to be uncollectible and is charged-off against the allowance for loan losses.
Non-performing assets (“NPAs”) are comprised of non-performing loans (“NPLs”), other real estate owned (“OREO”) and non-performing securities. NPLs consist of non-accrual loans and loans that are more than 90 days past due but still accruing interest. OREO consists of real estate properties, which primarily serve as collateral to secure our loans, that we control due to foreclosure. These properties are recorded at the lower of cost or fair value less estimated costs to sell on the date we obtain control.
The following table sets forth information regarding NPAs held as of the dates indicated:
Non-performing Assets
NPLs decreased $0.5 million, or 1.2%, to $43.3 million at December 31, 2020 from $43.8 million at December 31, 2019. NPLs as a percentage of total loans decreased to 0.45% at December 31, 2020 from 0.49% at December 31, 2019 as a result of an increase in NPLs in our business banking and residential real estate portfolios, offset by a decrease in our commercial and industrial portfolio due to a single, larger loan payoff and a reduction in the outstanding balance of a single, larger Asset Based Lending (“ABL”) credit, and an increase in loan balances due to PPP.
Non-accrual loans decreased $1.4 million, or 3.4%, to $41.0 million at December 31, 2020 from $42.5 million at December 31, 2019, primarily due to a $9.8 million decrease in commercial and industrial non-accruals and partially offset by an $8.9 million increase in business banking non-accruals.
The total amount of interest recorded on NPLs was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gross interest income that would have been recorded under the original terms of those loans if they had been performing amounted to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The total amount of interest recorded on NPLs was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The gross interest income that would have been recorded under the original terms of those loans if they had been performing amounted to $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
In the course of resolving NPLs, we may choose to restructure the contractual terms of certain loans. We attempt to work-out alternative payment schedules with the borrowers in order to avoid foreclosure actions. We review any loans that are modified to identify whether a TDR has occurred. TDRs involve situations in which, for economic or legal reasons related to the borrower’s financial difficulties, we grant a concession to the borrower that we would not otherwise consider. As noted previously, loan modifications made in response to the COVID-19 pandemic met the criteria of either Section 4013 of the CARES Act or the Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus (Revised) and therefore are not deemed TDRs.
All TDR loans are considered impaired and therefore are subject to a specific review for impairment loss. The impairment analysis discounts the present value of the anticipated cash flows by the loan’s contractual rate of interest in effect prior to the loan’s modification or the fair value of collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. The amount of impairment loss, if any, is recorded as a specific reserve to each individual loan in the allowance for loan losses. Commercial loans (commercial and industrial, commercial real estate, commercial construction, and business banking) and residential loans that have been classified as TDRs and which subsequently default are reviewed to determine if the loan should be deemed collateral dependent.
TDR loans modified during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $4.2 million and $30.8 million, respectively (post modification balance). The overall decrease in TDR loans consisted of a decrease of $23.4 million in commercial loan TDRs and a decrease of $3.1 million in consumer loan TDRs. One loan totaling $40,000 was modified during the preceding 12 months, which subsequently defaulted during the year ended December 31, 2020.
It is our policy to have any restructured loans, which are on non-accrual status prior to being modified, remain on non-accrual status for approximately six months subsequent to being modified before we consider its return to accrual status. If the restructured loan is on accrual status prior to being modified, we review it to determine if the modified loan should remain on accrual status.
Purchase credit impaired (“PCI”) loans are loans we acquired that have shown evidence of deterioration of credit quality since origination and, therefore, it was deemed unlikely that all contractually required payments would be collected upon the acquisition date. We consider factors such as payment history, collateral values and accrual status when determining whether there was evidence of deterioration at the acquisition date. The carrying value and prospective income recognition of PCI loans are predicated on future cash flows expected to be collected. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019 the carrying amount of PCI loans was $9.3 million and $13.5 million, respectively.
The following table provides additional details related to our loan portfolio and the distribution of NPLs as of the dates indicated:
Distribution of Non-performing Loans
(1) Total loans outstanding includes $1.0 billion of PPP loans.
In the normal course of business, we become aware of possible credit problems in which borrowers exhibit potential for the inability to comply with the contractual terms of their loans, but which currently do not yet meet the criteria for classification as NPLs. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we reviewed all of our credit exposures in industries that were expected to experience significant problems due to the pandemic and resulting economic contraction. As part of that review, we downgraded our hotel loans, restaurant loans and other loans that we expected to have associated challenges in the current economic environment. These loans were neither delinquent nor on non-accrual status. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our potential problem loans (including these COVID-19-related loans), or loans with potential weaknesses that were not included in the non-accrual loans or in the loans 90 days or more past due categories, totaled $563.3 million and $157.3 million, respectively.
Allowance for loan losses. Due to our emerging growth company status under the Jumpstart Our Business ("JOBS") Act, we still follow the incurred loss allowance GAAP accounting model. See "Risk Factors-We may be required to increase our allowance for loan losses as a result of our adoption as of January 1, 2022 of the new accounting standard for determining the amount of the allowance for loan losses" in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For the purpose of estimating our allowance for loan losses, we segregate the loan portfolio into homogenous loan pools that possess unique risk characteristics such as loan purpose, repayment source, and collateral that are considered when determining the appropriate level of the allowance for loan losses for each category.
While we use available information to recognize losses on loans, future additions or subtractions to/from the allowance for loan losses may be necessary based on changes in NPLs, changes in economic conditions, or other reasons. Additionally, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of our examination process, periodically assess the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses to assess whether the allowance for loan losses was determined in accordance with GAAP and applicable guidance.
We perform an evaluation of our allowance for loan losses on a regular basis (at least quarterly), and establish the allowance for loan losses based upon an evaluation of our loan categories, as each possess unique risk characteristics that are considered when determining the appropriate level of allowance for loan losses, including:
•estimated future loss in all impaired loans in each category;
•known increases in concentrations within each category;
•certain higher risk classes of loans, or pledged collateral;
•historical loan loss experience within each category;
•results of any independent review and evaluation of the category’s credit quality;
•trends in volume, maturity and composition of each category;
•volume and trends in delinquencies and non-accruals;
•national and local economic conditions and downturns in specific local industries;
•corporate goals and objectives;
•expertise of our lending staff;
•lending policy and practices; and
•current and forecasted banking industry conditions, as well as regulatory environment.
Loans are periodically evaluated using changes in asset quality, historical losses, and other loss allocation factors, which form our basis for estimating incurred losses. For risk rated loans, our risk-rating system takes into consideration a number of quantitative and qualitative factors, such as the borrower’s financial capacity, cash flow, liquidity, leverage, adequacy of collateral, tangible net worth, management team, industry, sales and supplier concentration, credit history, additional support and the impact of outside factors on repayment ability. Homogenous populations of loans that are not risk rated loans, are analyzed by loan category, taking into account delinquency ratios and historical loss experience.
The allowance for loan losses is allocated to loan categories using both a formula-based approach and an analysis of certain individual loans for impairment. We use a methodology to systematically estimate the amount of credit loss incurred in the loan portfolio. Under our current methodology, the allowance for loan losses contains specific, general and other components.
The specific component consists of reserves for impaired loans (defined as those where we determine it is probable we will not collect all payments when due, typically classified as either doubtful or substandard). All commercial, residential and consumer loan portfolios are periodically reviewed to identify the loans with deteriorating performance. The reports used to identify those loans include, but are not limited to, delinquency reports, risk rating migration (for risk rated loans), asset quality reports, watch loan list and other credit risk management reports. When a loan is determined to be impaired, the measurement will be based on the present value of expected future cash flows, except for collateral-dependent loans, where the impairment is based on the fair value of the collateral.
The general loss reserves methodology, which is applied to categories of loans with similar characteristics, covers all non-impaired loans and is based on our portfolio’s segment historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative factors. The general loss reserve methodology considers multiple qualitative factors that may impact the loss experience during the incurred loss horizon period, including internal infrastructure factors, external macroeconomic factors, internal credit quality factors and external industry data, tailored to the specific loan category.
For a discussion of our risk rating methodology, see Note 5, “Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The allowance for loan losses increased by $30.7 million, or 37.3%, to $113.0 million, or 1.16% of total loans (including PPP loans), at December 31, 2020 from $82.3 million, or 0.92% of total loans at December 31, 2019. The increase in the allowance for loan losses was primarily a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the Bank's borrowers. This, along with other factors, resulted in a provision for credit losses of $38.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table summarizes changes in the allowance for loan losses and other selected statistics for the periods presented:
Summary of Changes in the Allowance for Loan Losses
The following table sets forth the allocation of the allowance for loan losses by loan categories listed in loan portfolio composition as of the dates indicated:
Summary of Allocation of Allowance for Loan Losses
(1)PPP loans are included within these portfolios as of December 31, 2020; however, as of December 31, 2020, no allowance for loan losses have been recorded on these loans due to the SBA guarantee of 100% of the loans.
To determine if a loan should be charged-off, all possible sources of repayment are analyzed. Possible sources of repayment include the potential for future cash flows, liquidation of the collateral and the strength of co-makers or guarantors. When available information confirms that specific loans or portions thereof are uncollectible, these amounts are promptly charged-off against the allowance for loan losses and any recoveries of such previously charged-off amounts are credited to the allowance for loan losses.
Regardless of whether a loan is unsecured or collateralized, we charge off the amount of any confirmed loan loss in the period when the loans, or portions of loans, are deemed uncollectible. For troubled, collateral-dependent loans, loss confirming events may include an appraisal or other valuation that reflects a shortfall between the value of the collateral and the carrying value of the loan or receivable, or a deficiency balance following the sale of the collateral.
For additional information regarding our allowance for loan losses, see Note 5, “Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Federal Home Loan Bank stock
The FHLBB is a cooperative that provides services to its member banking institutions. The primary reason for our membership in the FHLBB is to gain access to a reliable source of wholesale funding and as a tool to manage interest rate risk. The purchase of stock in the FHLB is a requirement for a member to gain access to funding. We purchase and/or are subject to redemption of FHLBB stock proportional to the volume of funding received and view the holdings as a necessary long-term investment for the purpose of balance sheet liquidity and not for investment return.
We held an investment in the FHLBB of $8.8 million and $9.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Goodwill and other intangible assets
Goodwill and other intangible assets were $376.5 million and $377.7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in goodwill and other intangibles assets was due to the amortization of definite-lived intangibles during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was partially offset by an increase in goodwill and other intangibles associated with an insurance agency acquisition during the year. We did not record any impairment to our goodwill or other intangible assets during the year ended December 31, 2020. We will continue to assess our goodwill and other intangible assets to determine if impairments are necessary as it relates to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Deposits and other interest-bearing liabilities
Deposits originating within the markets we serve continue to be our primary source of funding our earning assets. We have been able to compete effectively for deposits in our primary market areas. The distribution and market share of deposits by type of deposit and by type of depositor are important considerations in our assessment of the stability of our fund sources and our access to additional funds. Furthermore, we shift the mix and maturity of the deposits depending on economic conditions and loan and investment policies in an attempt, within set policies, to minimize cost and maximize net interest margin. We do not, and in recent years have not, obtained deposit funding through brokered deposits.
The following table presents our deposits as of the dates presented:
Components of Deposits
Deposits increased by $2.6 billion, or 27.3%, to $12.2 billion at December 31, 2020 from $9.6 billion at December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily the result of an increase in demand deposits of $1.4 billion, an increase in interest checking deposits of $566.2 million, and an increase in money market deposits of $429.5 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we transferred a product for our Financial Institutions customers from borrowings to deposits. The product totaled $109.6 million at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the classification of deposits on an average basis for the years indicated:
Classification of deposits on an Average Basis
Other time deposits of $100,000 and greater, including certificates of deposits of $100,000 and greater, as of the dates indicated had maturities as follows:
Maturities of Time Certificates of Deposits $100,000 and over
Borrowings
Our borrowings consist of both short-term and long-term borrowings and provide us with sources of funding. Maintaining available borrowing capacity provides us with a contingent source of liquidity.
Our total borrowings decreased by $207.3 million, or 88.1%, to $28.0 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $235.4 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of $201.1 million of federal funds purchased. The decrease in our federal funds purchased was primarily due to the transfer of a product for our Financial Institution customers (which totaled $109.6 million at December 31, 2020) from borrowings to deposits as described above.
The following table sets forth information concerning balances on our borrowings as of the dates indicated:
Borrowings by Category
Results of Operations
Summary of Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Interest and Dividend Income
Our yields on loans and securities are generally presented on an FTE basis where the embedded tax benefit on loans or securities are calculated and added to the yield. This presentation allows for better comparability between institutions with different tax structures.
Interest and dividend income decreased by $31.7 million, or 7.1%, to $413.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $445.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was a result of lower interest income on our loans, partially offset by net PPP fee accretion (fee accretion less cost amortization). The FTE yield on average interest-earning assets decreased 100 basis points to 3.3% during the year ended December 31, 2020. Our average interest-earning assets increased by $2.2 billion, or 21.2%, to $12.8 billion as of December 31, 2020 compared to $10.5 billion as of December 31, 2019.
•Interest income on loans decreased by $29.9 million, or 7.4%, to $372.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $402.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income on our loans was primarily due to the decrease in the yield on average loans. The decrease in the average yield on our loans was primarily due to the downward adjustment of the interest rates on our existing adjustable-rate loans as a result of the lowering interest rate environment, whereas the average balance of loans increased primarily due to the addition of PPP loans to the portfolio. On an average basis, PPP loans were $761.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and had a contractual interest rate of 1%. The FTE yield on average loans decreased 63 basis points to 3.9% during the year ended December 31, 2020. The average balance of our loans increased by $702.9 million, or 7.9%, to $9.7 billion as of December 31, 2020 compared to $8.9 billion as of December 31, 2019.
•Interest income on securities decreased $1.7 million, or 4.1%, to $41.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $42.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income on securities was due to lower overall market rates. The FTE yield on average securities and other interest-earning assets decreased 148 basis points to 1.4% during the year ended December 31, 2020. The average balance of securities and other interest earning assets increased by $1.5 billion, or 97.1%, to $3.1 billion as of December 31, 2020 compared to $1.6 billion as of December 31, 2019.
•We received approximately $37.1 million of PPP loan origination fees from the SBA. We also deferred certain origination costs, totaling $4.2 million, related to our PPP loans. The loan fees and the deferred costs will be amortized through interest income over the life of the PPP loans, which is expected to be 24 months, but the amortization period will be adjusted as PPP loans are forgiven or repaid. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $13.9 million in PPP loan fees, net in interest income.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $21.7 million, or 64.2%, to $12.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $33.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was a result of decreased rates paid on deposits. The overall rates paid on average interest-bearing liabilities decreased 37 basis points to 0.17% during the year ended December 31, 2020. Average interest-bearing liabilities increased $648.4 million, or 10.3%, to $6.9 billion as of December 31, 2020 compared to $6.3 billion as of December 31, 2019.
•Interest expense on our interest-bearing deposits decreased by $16.0 million, or 58.6%, to $11.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $27.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in our interest expense on interest-bearing deposits was due to a decrease in the cost of deposits that more than offset the increase in the average balance of deposits during the period. The average balance of interest-bearing deposits increased due to our increasing core deposits to help fund loan growth, whereas the average cost of deposits decreased due to the interest rate decreases occurring in the year ended December 31, 2020. The average cost of our interest-bearing deposits decreased 30 basis points to 0.16% in the year ended December 31, 2020. The average balance of our interest-bearing deposits increased by $867.7 million, or 14.5%, to $6.9 billion as of December 31, 2020 compared to $6.0 billion as of December 31, 2019.
•Interest expense on borrowed funds decreased by $5.7 million, or 88.2%, to $0.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $6.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense on borrowed funds was primarily due to a reduction in federal funds purchased as a result of the transfer of a product for our Financial Institution customers from borrowings to deposits as described above. In addition, the average balance of FHLB advances decreased by $78.7 million to $15.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $94.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The reduction in FHLB borrowings was driven by an increase in deposits that reduced the Company’s need to borrow. The average balance of borrowed funds decreased by $219.3 million, or 75.3%, to $72.1 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $291.4 million as of December 31, 2019.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income decreased by $10.0 million, or 2.4%, to $401.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $411.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily a result of the decrease in interest and dividend income partially offset by the decrease in interest expense, which are each attributable to the decrease in interest rates during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net interest margin is determined by dividing FTE net interest income by average-earning assets. For purposes of the following discussion, income from tax-exempt loans and investment securities has been adjusted to an FTE basis, using a marginal tax rate of 21.8% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and 21.7% for the year ended December 31, 2018. Net interest margin decreased 77 basis points to 3.19% during the year ended December 31, 2020, from 3.96% during the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following tables set forth average balance sheet items, average yields and costs, and certain other information for the periods indicated. All average balances in the table reflect daily average balances. Non-accrual loans were included in the computation of average balances but have been reflected in the table as loans carrying a zero yield. The yields set forth below include the effect of deferred fees, discounts and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income or expense.
Average Balances, Interest Earned/Paid, & Average Yields
(1)Non-accrual loans are included in Loans.
(2)Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the weighted average yield on interest-earning assets and the weighted average cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
(3)Net interest-earning assets represent total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
(4)Net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
The following table presents, on a tax equivalent basis, the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income for the periods indicated. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The total column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume.
Rate and Volume Analysis
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses represents the charge to expense that is required to maintain an appropriate level of allowance for loan losses.
The provision for loan losses increased by $32.5 million, or 515.9%, to $38.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the change in loan risk ratings to reflect the impact of the increased concerns about customers that are expected to face financial difficulties due to the current economic environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily related to the downgrading of our hotel and restaurant loan portfolios.
Our periodic evaluation of the appropriate allowance for loan losses considers the risk characteristics of the loan portfolio, current economic conditions, and trends in loan delinquencies and charge-offs.
Noninterest Income
The following table sets forth information regarding noninterest income for the periods shown:
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income decreased by $3.9 million, or 2.2%, to $178.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $182.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $5.7 million decrease in interest rate swap income, a $5.5 million decrease in service charges on deposit accounts, a $1.7 million decrease in gains on sales of securities available for sale, net, and a $1.3 million decrease in trading securities gains, net, partially offset by a $6.3 million increase in net gains on sales of mortgage loans held for sale and a $3.9 million increase in insurance commissions.
•Interest rate swap income decreased primarily as a result of lower volume. In addition, the unfavorable mark-to-market adjustment was greater during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the current interest rate and economic environment.
•Deposit service charges decreased primarily as a result of reduced overdraft charges as a result of lower volume due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Gains on securities available for sale decreased due to fewer sales during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Trading securities gains decreased due to our exit from the capital markets business during the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Net gains on sales of mortgage loans held for sale increased primarily due to the low interest rate environment.
•Insurance commissions increased primarily as a result of an increase in our profit-sharing revenues and commissions.
Noninterest Expense
The following table sets forth information regarding noninterest expense for the periods shown:
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest expense increased by $92.2 million, or 22.4%, to $504.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $412.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an $82.4 million increase in charitable contributions, a $9.6 million increase in salaries and employee benefits, and a $2.9 million increase in professional services.
•Charitable contributions increased primarily as a result of a $91.3 million stock contribution to the Eastern Bank Charitable Foundation made in connection with the Company's IPO during the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Salaries and employee benefits increased primarily as a result of an increase in salaries and commissions as well as increases in other compensation due to the payment of COVID-19 premiums for employees working onsite during the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Professional services increased primarily as a result of costs associated with our IPO that are indirectly related to the IPO and were not recorded as a reduction of capital, and higher legal costs related to corporate-related matters.
Income Taxes
We recognize the tax effect of all income and expense transactions in each year’s consolidated statements of income, regardless of the year in which the transactions are reported for income tax purposes. The following table sets forth information regarding our tax provision and applicable tax rates for the periods indicated:
Tax Provision and Applicable Tax Rates
Income tax expense decreased by $26.3 million, or 66.7%, to $13.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $39.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in income tax expense and increase in the effective tax rate during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to lower income before income tax expense, increasing the impact on the effective rate related to favorable permanent differences, including investment tax credits and tax-exempt income. The reduction in income tax expense related to lower income before income tax expense was partially offset by the establishment of a $12.0 million valuation allowance against the Company's charitable contribution carryover deferred tax asset. For additional information related to the Company’s income taxes see Note 12, “Income Taxes” and Note 13, “Low Income Housing Tax Credits and Other Tax Credit Investments” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Position and Results of Operations of our Business Segments
Banking Segment
•Average interest-earning assets increased $2.2 billion, or 21.2%, to $12.8 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $10.5 billion as of December 31, 2019, and average total loans, our largest category of average interest-earning assets, increased $702.9 million, or 7.9%, to $9.7 billion as of December 31, 2020 compared to $8.9 billion as of December 31, 2019.
•Average interest-bearing liabilities increased $648.4 million, or 10.3%, to $6.9 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $6.3 billion as of December 31, 2019, and average total deposits, our largest category of average interest-bearing liabilities, increased $867.7 million, or 14.5%, to $6.9 as of December 31, 2020 compared to $6.0 billion as of December 31, 2019.
•Losses related to interest rate swaps were $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to income of $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of 131.7%. This change was due to a decrease in transactional volume of $4.3 million and an increase in the unfavorable mark-to-market adjustment of $1.5 million.
•Service charges on deposit accounts decreased by $5.5 million, or 20.3%, to $21.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $27.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in overdraft fees as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Assets under management in our wealth management business increased $336.7 million or 13.1%, to $2.9 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $2.6 billion as of December 31, 2019. Our income related to our asset management business, which we record as noninterest income, increased $1.4 million, or 7.4%, to $21.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $19.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to the fees we earned, which are largely based upon asset values.
•Gains on sales of mortgage loans held for sale, net, increased by $6.3 million, or 788.8%, to $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to increased volume due to the low interest rate environment.
Insurance Agency Segment
•Noninterest income related to our insurance agency business increased by $4.0 million, or 4.4%, to $96.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $92.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven primarily by an increase in recurring commissions of $3.6 million due to organic growth as well as a $1.2 million non-recurring item, and an increase in our combined negotiated commission and profit sharing income of $0.8 million, partially offset by a $0.3 million decrease in income from investments held in rabbi trusts.
•Expenses related to our insurance agency business decreased $1.2 million, or 1.6%, to $77.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $79.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, due to decreases in
amortization of intangible assets, printing and supplies, and salaries, wages and benefits, partially offset by an increase in data processing services.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are discussed in detail in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for credit losses is the amount estimated by us as necessary to absorb loan losses incurred in the loan portfolio that are probable and reasonably estimable at the balance sheet date. The amount of the allowance is based on significant judgments and estimates, and the ultimate losses may vary from such estimates as more information becomes available or conditions change. The methodology for determining the allowance for credit losses is considered a critical accounting policy due to the high degree of judgement involved in determining the risk characteristics of the loan portfolio, subjectivity of assumptions used and the potential for changes in the economic environment that could result in changes to the amount of the recorded allowance for loan losses. Additionally, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of the regulatory examination process, periodically assess the appropriateness of the allowance for loan losses and may require us to increase the provision for loan losses or recognize further loan charge-offs, in accordance with GAAP.
The allowance for credit losses is evaluated at least quarterly. While we use current information in establishing the allowance for losses, future adjustments to the allowance may be necessary if economic conditions or conditions relative to borrowers differ substantially from the assumptions used in making the evaluation. We use a methodology to systematically estimate the amount of credit loss incurred in the portfolio. Commercial real estate, commercial construction, commercial and industrial, and business banking loans are evaluated using a loan rating system, historical losses and other factors which form the basis for estimating incurred losses. Portfolios of more homogeneous populations of loans, including residential mortgages and consumer loans, are analyzed as groups using delinquency ratios, historical loss experience and charge-offs.
The allowance consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are deemed to be impaired. For impaired loans, an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or collateral value or observable market price) of the loan is lower than the carrying value of the loan. The general component covers non-impaired, non-classified loans and is based on historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative factors.
Income Taxes. We account for income taxes by establishing deferred tax assets and liabilities for the temporary differences between the accounting basis and the tax basis of our assets and liabilities at enacted tax rates. We make significant judgments regarding the amount and timing of recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities. This requires subjective projections of future taxable income resulting from interest on loans and securities, as well as noninterest income. A valuation allowance is established if it is considered more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Interest and penalties paid on the underpayment of income taxes are classified as income tax expense.
We periodically evaluate the potential uncertainty of our tax positions as to whether it is more likely than not its position would be upheld upon examination by the appropriate taxing authority. The tax position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that we believe is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement.
Goodwill and Other Intangibles. We evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually, or more often if warranted, using a quantitative impairment approach. The quantitative impairment testing compares book value to fair value of the reporting unit. If book value exceeds fair value, an impairment is charged to earnings and allocated to the appropriate reporting unit.
We evaluate other intangible assets, all of which are definite-lived, for impairment whenever there is an indication of impairment, and we evaluate annually the remaining useful lives of those intangible assets. We amortize other intangible assets over their respective estimated useful lives.
Securities. Debt securities are classified at the time of purchase as either “trading,” “available for sale,” or “held to maturity.” Equity securities are measured at fair value with changes in the fair value recognized through net income.
We evaluate impaired securities for other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) at least on a quarterly basis, and more frequently when economic or market concerns warrant such evaluation. Consideration is given to the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than cost, current market conditions, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer, performance of collateral underlying the securities, the ratings of the individual securities, the interest rate environment, our intent to sell the security or whether it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the debt security before its anticipated recovery, as well as other qualitative factors. The term other-than-temporary impairment is not intended to indicate that the decline is permanent. It indicates that the prospects for near-term recovery are not necessarily favorable or that there is a lack of evidence to support fair values greater than or equal to the carrying value of the investment.
If a decline in fair value below the amortized cost basis of an investment is judged to be other than temporary, the investment is written down to fair value. The portion of the impairment related to credit losses is included in net income, and the portion of the impairment related to other factors is included in other comprehensive income. Gains and losses on sales of securities are recognized at the time of sale on the specific-identification basis.
Pension Plans. We provide pension benefits for employees using a noncontributory, defined benefit plan, through membership in the Savings Banks Employees Retirement Association ("SBERA"). Effective November 1, 2020, the defined benefit plan was amended to convert the plan from a traditional final average earnings plan design to a cash balance plan design. Benefits earned under the final average earnings plan design were frozen at October 31, 2020. Starting November 1, 2020, future benefits are earned under the cash balance plan design. Our employees become eligible after attaining age 21 and one year of service. Under the final average earnings plan design, benefits became fully vested after three years of eligible service for individuals employed on or before October 31, 1989. For individuals employed subsequent to October 31, 1989 and who were already in the Defined Benefit Plan as of November 1, 2020, benefits became fully vested after five years of eligible service. Under the cash balance plan design, benefits become fully vested after three years of eligible service. Our annual contribution to the plan is based upon standards established by the Pension Protection Act. The contribution is based on an actuarial method intended to provide not only for benefits attributable to service to date, but also for those expected to be earned in the future.
Plan assets are invested in various investment funds and held at fair value which generally represents observable market prices. Pension liability is determined based on the actuarial cost method factoring in assumptions such as salary increases, expected retirement date, mortality rate, and employee turnover. The actuarial cost method used to compute the pension liabilities and related expense is the projected unit credit method. The projected benefit obligation is principally determined based on the present value of the projected benefit distributions at an assumed discount rate (which is the rate at which the projected benefit obligation could be effectively settled as of the measurement date). The discount rate which is utilized is determined using the spot rate approach whereby the individual spot rates on the Financial Times and Stock Exchange (“FTSE”) above-median yield curve are applied to each corresponding year’s projected cash flow used to measure the respective plan’s service cost and interest cost. Periodic pension expense (or income) includes service costs, interest costs based on the assumed discount rate, the expected return on plan assets, if applicable, based on the market value of assets and amortization of actuarial gains and losses. Net period benefit cost excluding service cost is included within other noninterest expense in the consolidated statements of income. Service cost is included in salaries and employee benefits in the consolidated statements of income. The amortization of actuarial gains and losses for the Defined Benefit Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan ("DB SERP") and Outside Directors' Retainer Continuance Plan (“ODRCP”) is determined using the 10% corridor minimum amortization approach and is taken over the average remaining future service of the plan participants for the ODRCP, and over the average remaining future life expectancy of plan participants for the DB SERP. The amortization of actuarial gains and losses for the Defined Benefit Plan and Benefit Equalization Plan (“BEP”) is determined without using the 10% corridor minimum amortization approach and is taken over the average remaining future service of the plan participants. The overfunded or underfunded status of the plans is recorded as an asset or liability on the consolidated balance sheets, with changes in that status recognized through other comprehensive income, net of related taxes. Funded status represents the difference between the projected benefit obligation of the plan and the market value of the plan’s assets.
Derivative Financial Instruments. Derivative instruments are carried at fair value in our financial statements. The accounting for a derivative instrument is determined by whether it has been designated and qualifies as part of a hedging relationship, and further, by the type of hedging relationship. Our derivative instruments that qualify for hedge accounting are classified as cash flow hedges (i.e., hedging the exposure to variability in expected future cash flows associated with a recognized asset or liability, or a forecasted transaction). Our derivative instruments not designated as hedging instruments include interest rate swaps, foreign exchange contracts offered to commercial customers to assist them in meeting their financing and investing objectives for their risk management purposes, and risk participation agreements entered into as financial guarantees of performance on customer-related interest rate swap derivatives. The interest rate and foreign exchange risks associated with customer interest rate swaps and foreign exchange contracts are mitigated by entering into similar derivatives having offsetting terms with correspondent bank counterparties.
Fair Value Measurements. “Fair value” is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We estimate the fair value of a financial instrument and any related asset impairment using a variety of valuation methods. Where financial instruments are actively traded and have quoted market prices, quoted market prices as of the measurement date are used for fair value. When the financial instruments are not actively traded, other observable market inputs, such as quoted prices of securities with similar characteristics, quoted prices in markets that are not active or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data, may be used, if available, to determine fair value. When observable market prices do not exist, we estimate fair value. These estimates are subjective in nature and imprecision in estimating these factors can impact the amount of revenue or loss recorded. To the extent that valuation is based on models or inputs that are less observable or unobservable in the market, the determination of fair value requires more judgment. Accordingly, the degree of judgment we exercise in determining fair value is greatest for instruments categorized in Level 3.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses on Financial Instruments and relevant amendments (Topic 326) (“ASU 2016-13”). This update was created to replace the current GAAP method of calculating credit losses. Specifically, the standard replaces the existing incurred loss impairment guidance by requiring immediate recognition of expected credit losses. For financial assets carried at amortized cost that are held at the reporting date (including trade and other receivables, loans and commitments, held-to-maturity debt securities and other financial assets), credit losses are measured based on historical experience, current conditions and reasonable supportable forecasts. The standard also amends existing impairment guidance for available for sale securities, in which credit losses will be recorded as an allowance versus a write-down of the amortized cost basis of the security. It will also allow for a reversal of impairment loss when the credit of the issuer improves. The guidance requires a cumulative effect of the initial application to be recognized in retained earnings at the date of initial application.
In November 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-19, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) (“ASU 2018-19”). The amendments in Update No. 2018-19 were intended to clarify that receivables arising from operating leases are not within the scope of Subtopic 326-20. Instead, impairment of receivables arising from operating leases should be accounted for in accordance with Topic 842, Leases. In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-11, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses. This update requires entities to include expected recoveries of the amortized cost basis previously written off or expected to be written off in the valuation account for purchased financial assets with credit deterioration. In addition, the amendments in this update clarify and improve various aspects of the guidance for ASU 2016-13.
For public entities that meet the definition of a U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filer (excluding smaller reporting entities) the guidance is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019. Early adoption is permitted for all entities as of the fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018. For all other entities, the guidance is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years.
The Company, which currently qualifies as an emerging growth company (“EGC”) under the JOBS Act, anticipates adopting this standard on January 1, 2022 and is currently assessing the impact of the adoption of this standard on its Consolidated Financial Statements. To date, the Company has been assessing the key differences and gaps between its current allowance methodology and model and those it is considering using upon adoption. The Company has contracted with a vendor and is currently assessing the adequacy of existing loss data and developing models for default and loss estimates. While currently unable to reasonably estimate the impact of adopting ASU 2016-13, it is expected that the impact of adoption will be influenced by the composition, characteristics and quality of the loan and securities portfolios as well as the prevailing economic conditions and forecasts as of the adoption date.
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements that may affect our financial position or results of operations, refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of our customers. The financial instruments include commitments to originate loans, unused lines of credit, unadvanced portions of construction loans and standby letters of credit, all of which involve elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount recognized in the consolidated balance sheets. Our exposure to credit loss is represented by the contractual amount of the instruments. We use the same credit policies in making commitments as we do for on-balance sheet instruments.
At December 31, 2020, we had $3.8 billion of commitments to originate loans, comprised of $2.3 billion of commitments under commercial loans and lines of credit (including $292.5 million of unadvanced portions of construction loans), $1.2 billion of commitments under home equity loans and lines of credit, $210.2 million in overdraft coverage commitments, $98.5 million of unfunded commitments related to residential real estate loans and $19.2 million in other consumer loans and lines of credit. In addition, at December 31, 2020, we had $60.2 million in standby letters of credit outstanding. We also had $41.2 million in forward commitments to sell loans.
Management of Market Risk
General. Market risk is the sensitivity of income to changes in interest rates, foreign exchange rates, commodity prices and other market-driven rates or prices. Interest rate sensitivity is the most significant market risk to which we are exposed. Interest rate risk is the sensitivity of income to changes in interest rates. Changes in interest rates, as well as fluctuations in the level and duration of assets and liabilities, affect net interest income, our primary source of income. Interest rate risk arises directly from our core banking activities. In addition to directly impacting net interest income, changes in the level of interest rates can also affect the amount of loans originated, the timing of cash flows on loans and securities, and the fair value of securities and derivatives, as well as other effects. The primary goal of interest rate risk management is to control this risk within limits approved by the Risk Management Committee of our Board of Directors.
These limits reflect our tolerance for interest rate risk over both short-term and long-term horizons. We attempt to manage interest rate risk by identifying, quantifying, and where appropriate, hedging its exposure. If assets and liabilities do not re-price simultaneously and in equal volume, the potential for interest rate exposure exists. Our objective is to maintain stability in the growth of net interest income through the maintenance of an appropriate mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and, when necessary, within limits that management determines to be prudent, through the use of off-balance sheet hedging instruments such as interest rate swaps, floors and caps.
Net Interest Income. We analyze our sensitivity to changes in interest rates through a net interest income model. We estimate what our net interest income would be for a 12-month period assuming no changes in interest rates. We then calculate what the net interest income would be for the same period under the assumption that the U.S. Treasury yield curve increases or decreases instantaneously by +200, +300, +400 and -100 basis point increments, with changes in interest rates representing immediate and permanent, parallel shifts in the yield curve. A basis point equals one-hundredth of one percent, and 100 basis points equals one percent. An increase in interest rates from 3% to 4% would mean, for example, a 100 basis point increase in the “Changes in Interest Rates” column in the table below. The model requires that interest rates remain positive for all points along the yield curve for each rate scenario which may preclude the modeling of certain falling rate scenarios during periods of lower market interest rates. The relatively low level of interest rates prevalent at December 31, 2020 precluded the modeling of certain falling rate scenarios, including negative interest rates.
The tables below set forth, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the calculation of the estimated changes in our net interest income on an FTE basis that would result from the designated immediate changes in the U.S. Treasury yield curve.
Interest Rate Sensitivity
(1)Assumes an immediate uniform change in interest rates at all maturities, except in the down 100 basis points scenario, where rates are floored at zero at all maturities.
The tables above indicate that at December 31, 2020 and 2019, in the event of an instantaneous parallel 200 basis points increase in rates, we would have experienced a 25.5% and 2.7% increase, respectively, in net interest income on an FTE basis, and in the event of an instantaneous 100 basis points decrease in interest rates, we would have experienced a 5.0% and a 3.9% decrease at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, in net interest income, on an FTE basis. Management may use interest rate derivative financial instruments, within internal policy guidelines, to manage interest rate risk as part of our asset/liability strategy. These derivatives provide significant protection against falling interest rates.
Economic Value of Equity Analysis. We also analyze the sensitivity of our financial condition in interest rates through our economic value of equity (“EVE”) model. This analysis calculates the difference between the present value of expected cash flows from assets and liabilities assuming various changes in current interest rates.
The table below represents an analysis of our interest rate risk (excluding the effect of our pension plans) as measured by the estimated changes in our EVE model, resulting from an instantaneous and sustained parallel shift in the yield curve (+200, +300, +400 basis points and -100 basis points) at December 31, 2020 and 2019. The model requires that interest rates remain positive for all points along the yield curve for each rate scenario which may preclude the modeling of certain falling rate scenarios during periods of lower market interest rates. The relatively low level of interest rates prevalent at December 31, 2020 precluded the modeling of certain falling rate scenarios, including negative interest rates.
Our earnings are not directly or materially impacted by movements in foreign currency rates or commodity prices. Movements in equity prices may have a modest impact on earnings by affecting the volume of activity or the amount of fees from investment-related business lines.
EVE Interest Rate Sensitivity
(1)Assumes an immediate uniform change in interest rates at all maturities, except in the down 100 basis points scenario, where rates are floored at zero at all maturities.
(2)EVE is the discounted present value of expected cash flows from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet contracts.
(3)Present value of assets represents the discounted present value of incoming cash flows on interest-earning assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity. Liquidity describes our ability to meet the financial obligations that arise in the normal course of business. Liquidity is primarily needed to meet deposit withdrawals and anticipated loan fundings, as well as current and planned expenditures. We seek to maintain sources of liquidity that are deep and diversified and that may be used during the normal course of business as well as on a contingency basis.
The net proceeds from our IPO significantly increased our liquidity and capital resources at both Eastern Bankshares, Inc. and Eastern Bank. Over time, the initial level of liquidity will be reduced as net proceeds from the stock offering are used for general corporate purposes, including the funding of loans. Our financial condition and results of operations will be enhanced by the net proceeds from the stock offering, resulting in increased net interest-earning assets and net interest and dividend income. However, due to the increase in equity resulting form the net proceeds raised in our IPO, our return on equity has been and will continue to be adversely affected until we can effectively employ the proceeds of the offering.
Our primary sources of funds are deposits, principal and interest payments on loans and securities, and proceeds from calls, maturities and sales of securities. While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions, and competition. Our most liquid assets are cash and due from banks and securities classified as available for sale. In the future, our liquidity position will be affected by the level of customer deposits and payments, as well as acquisitions, dividends, and stock repurchases in which we may engage. We believe that our existing resources will be sufficient to meet the liquidity and capital requirements of our operations for the foreseeable future.
We participate in the IntraFi Network (formerly “Promontory”), which allows us to provide access to multi-million dollar FDIC deposit insurance protection on customer deposits for consumers, businesses and public entities. We can elect to sell or repurchase this funding as reciprocal deposits from other IntraFi Network banks depending on our funding needs. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had a total of $364.8 million and $176.3 million of IntraFi Network one-way sell deposits, respectively. These deposits could have been repurchased as reciprocal deposits and should be considered a source of liquidity.
Although customer deposits remain our preferred source of funds, maintaining additional back up sources of liquidity is part of our prudent liquidity risk management practices. We have the ability to borrow from the FHLBB. At December 31, 2020, we had $14.6 million in outstanding advances and the ability to borrow up to an additional $1.6 billion. We
also have the ability to borrow from the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston as well as the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility. At December 31, 2020, we had a $503.5 million collateralized line of credit from the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston with no outstanding balance. Additionally, we had $1.0 billion in PPP loans that could have been pledged to the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility. We had a total of $620.0 million of discretionary lines of credit at December 31, 2020.
Sources of Liquidity
(1)As of December 31, 2020, loans have been pledged to the FHLBB with a carrying value of $2.4 billion to secure additional borrowing capacity. As of December 31, 2019, loans and securities were pledged to the FHLBB with a carrying value of $1.5 billion and $0.9 billion, respectively, to secure additional borrowing capacity.
(2)Loans with a carrying value of $0.9 billion and $1.0 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, have been pledged to the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston resulting in this additional unused borrowing capacity.
We believe that advanced preparation, early detection, and prompt responses can avoid, minimize, or shorten potential liquidity crises. Our Board of Directors and our Asset Liability Committee have put a liquidity contingency plan in place to establish methods for assessing and monitoring risk levels, as well as potential responses during unanticipated stress events. As part of its risk management framework, we perform periodic liquidity stress testing to assess our need for liquid assets as well as backup sources of liquidity.
Capital Resources. We are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the Massachusetts Commissioner of Banks, the FDIC and the Federal Reserve (with respect to our consolidated capital requirements). At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we exceeded all applicable regulatory capital requirements, and were considered “well capitalized” under regulatory guidelines.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
In the ordinary course of our operations, we enter into certain contractual obligations. Such obligations include data processing services, operating leases for premises and equipment, agreements with respect to borrowed funds and deposit liabilities. The amounts below assume the contractual obligations and commitments will run through the end of the applicable term and, as such, do not include early termination fees or penalties where applicable. The following table summarizes our contractual obligations, other commitments and contingencies at December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
(1)Unused commitments that are deemed to be unconditionally cancellable are included in the less than one year category in the above table.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The financial nature of our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes thereto presented elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K is more clearly affected by changes in interest rates than by inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily fluctuate in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. However, as prices and money supply grow, interest rates are affected by inflationary expectations, which in turn affects our business. The impact on our business is noted in the increase in the size of loan requests with resulting growth in total assets. In addition, operating expenses may increase without a corresponding increase in productivity. There is no precise method to measure the effects of inflation on our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes thereto presented elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Accordingly, any examination or analysis of the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes thereto presented elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K should take into consideration the possible effects of inflation.