Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, including those set forth under “Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results and experience could differ materially from the anticipated results and other expectations expressed in our forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including but not limited to those discussed in this Item and in Item 1A - “Risk Factors.” Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We develop products and operate platforms to provide a real money online gambling experience focused on esports and competitive gaming.
We operate licensed online gambling platforms which are real money betting platforms. Our mission is to define, shape and drive growth of the current and future esports wagering ecosystem by providing advanced product, platform and marketing solutions directly to service providers and customers. We accept wagers on major esports titles including: Counter-Strike: GO, League of Legends, Dota 2, StarCraft 2, Rocket League, Rainbow Six, Warcraft 3, King of Glory and FIFA; as well as professional sports including the National Football League, National Basketball Association, Major League Baseball, soccer and more.
On November 29, 2021, we acquired the Business to Consumer (B2C) business of Aspire Global plc (“Aspire”). The B2C business offers a portfolio of distinctive proprietary brands focused primarily on igaming, which is online casino and table games such as blackjack, virtual sport computer simulated games and slot machines, as well as traditional sports betting, in the locations where we are licensed to do so, to a diverse customer base operating across regulated markets. We acquired the B2C business for €65,000,000 payable as follows: (i) a cash amount of €50,000,000; (ii) €10,000,000, payable in accordance with the terms of an unsecured subordinated promissory note; and (iii) 186,838 shares of our common stock, which were valued at €5,000,000.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended September 30, 2021, compared to the Year Ended September 30, 2020
Results of Operations
Results of operations in dollars and as a percentage of net revenue were as follows:
Year Ended September 30, 2021, compared to September 30, 2020
Revenue and Gross Profit
During the year ended September 30, 2021, we generated $164,807 in revenue and $127,063 in gross profit. For the year ended September 30, 2020, we generated $195,778 in revenue and $81,214 in gross profit. The decrease in revenue in the year ended September 30, 2021, when compared with the same period in the prior year was primarily driven by the disruption to our business required to launch our improved wagering platform and expanding our payment solutions. The launch of our improved wagering platform delayed launching our marketing campaign resulting in reduced outreach to new and existing customers, which resulted in lower revenues. The increase in gross profit in the year ended September 30, 2021, when compared with the same resulted from a modified contractual relationship with our new wagering platform requiring the costs of the platform to be recorded in product and technology expense.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense was $3,221,218 for the year ended September 30, 2021, an increase from zero in the same period in the prior year. This increase was a result of adding marketing staff of approximately $0.4 million to prepare for our outreach campaign related to our new wagering products and services, $1.1 million of stock-based compensation costs to employees and consultants, licensing of software and external consultants of $1.7 million and the initial roll out of our marketing campaigns focused primarily on our free to play game. We expect sales and marketing expenses to increase in future periods as our marketing campaigns increase in both number and volume.
Product and Technology Expense
Product and technology expense was $3,103,611 for the year ended September 30, 2021, as compared to zero for the same period in the prior year. The increase is due to increased hiring of both employees and consultants focused on expanding our product offerings. Product and technology expenses for the year ended September 30, 2021, included payroll-related costs of $1.6 million, stock-based compensation of $0.6 million and other development costs of $0.9 million consisting primarily of consulting and other development costs.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense was $7,103,943 for the year ended September 30, 2021, as compared to $192,160 for the same period in the prior year. General and administrative expense included payroll-related costs of $1.6 million, $2.4 million of stock-based compensation cost (of which $1.5 million was to outside consultants), and professional fees of approximately $1.9 million.
Interest and Other Expenses
During the year ended September 30, 2021, we recognized interest expense of $1,704,395, which included amortization of debt discount of $1.5 million related to the convertible debt issued to acquire certain intangible assets consisting of acquired domain names. We also incurred a foreign currency loss of $46,304.
Net Income/Loss
Net loss for the year ended September 30, 2021, was $15,200,024 compared to a net loss of $573,255 for the same period in the prior year. The increase in net loss was primarily due to the significant in increase in general and administrative expenses of $6.9 million, an increase in product and technology expenses of $3.1 million and a increase in our Sales and Marketing costs of $3.2 million as we expand our business and develop new products and services. The increase in interest expense of $1.5 million also contributed to the increase in net loss.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On September 30, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $9,064,859, and had working capital of $7,997,241. We have historically funded our operations from proceeds from debt and equity sales, and funds received from customers.
During October and November 2020, we completed a private placement of 2,000,000 shares of our common stock for gross proceeds of $4.0 million.
During January and February 2021, we completed a private placement of 250,014 shares of our common stock at $3.00 per share for gross proceeds of $0.75 million.
In April 2021, the Company completed its IPO and issued 2,400,000 shares of common stock for gross cash proceeds of $14,400,000. The Company paid underwriting fees and other expenses of $885,800 and issued 168,000 warrants to purchase shares of common stock at a price of $7.20 per share for a period of five years.
Acquisition of Aspire Global Business to Consumer (“B2C”) Business
In order to accelerate the growth and expand market access for our esports product offerings, on November 29, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Aspire Global’s B2C business for €65,000,000 payable as follows: (i) a cash amount of €50,000,000; (ii) €10,000,000, payable in accordance with the terms of an unsecured subordinated promissory note; and (iii) 186,838 shares of our common stock, which were valued at €5,000,000.
On September 30, 2021, the Company entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors (the “Investors”). Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, the Investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and the Company agreed to issue and sell to such Investors, simultaneous with the closing of the Acquisition Agreement, shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Preferred Stock”) for a purchase price of $1,000.00 per share (the “Private Placement”). For each share of Preferred Stock issued, the Company issued the Investor a warrant to purchase 150% of the shares of Company common stock underlying the Preferred Stock (the “Warrants”). The aggregate Private Placement, which was completed on the closing date of the Acquisition Agreement was $37.7 million.
On November 29, 2021, the Company entered a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with CP BF Lending, LLC (“Lender”), pursuant to which the Lender agreed to make a single loan to the Company of $30.0 million (the “Loan”). The Loan bears interest on the unpaid principal amount at a rate per annum equal to 15.0% as follows: (1) cash interest on the unpaid principal amount of the Loan at a rate equal to 14.0% per annum, plus (2) payable-in-kind interest (“PIK Interest”) on the unpaid principal amount of the Loan at a rate equal to 1.0% per annum. The Company paid to Lender on the closing date a non-refundable origination fee in an amount equal to $750,000.
As of September 30, 2021, we have incurred an accumulated deficit of $16,649,550 since inception and have not yet generated any meaningful income from operations.
Cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $8,308,198 for the year ended September 30, 2021, as compared to cash used in operating activities of $67,717 for the same period in the prior year. Net cash used in operating activities during the twelve months ended September 30, 2021, included payments made for employee costs, professional fees to our consultants, attorneys and accountants for services related to completion of our audit, development of our new wagering platform and preparation of our public offering filings.
Cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $577,811 for the year ended September 30, 2021 and was related to the purchase of software assets to support the new wagering platform, and the purchase of long-term assets related to intellectual property rights.
Cash used provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $17,896,957 for the year ended September 30, 2021 and was related to the sale of 2,000,000 shares of common stock at $2.00 per share in a private placement, partially offset by costs of capital to brokers of $351,929 as well as private placements of our common stock completed in January and February 2021, at $3.00 per share for gross proceeds of $750,000. In April 2021, the Company completed its IPO and issued 2,400,000 shares of common stock for gross cash proceeds of $14,400,000. The Company paid underwriting fees and other expenses of $885,800 and issued 168,000 warrants to purchase shares of common stock at a price of $7.20 per share for a period of five years.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements, including the notes thereto. We consider critical accounting policies to be those that require more significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements, including the following: long lived assets; intangible assets valuations; and income tax valuations. Management relies on historical experience and other assumptions believed to be reasonable in making its judgment and estimates. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
Management believes its application of accounting policies, and the estimates inherently required therein, are reasonable. These accounting policies and estimates are periodically reevaluated, and adjustments are made when facts and circumstances dictate a change.
Stock-based Compensation
Our historical and outstanding stock-based compensation awards, including the issuances of options and other stock awards under our equity compensation plans, have typically included service-based or performance-based vesting conditions. For awards with only service-based vesting conditions, we record compensation cost for these awards using the straight-line method over the vesting period. For awards with performance-based vesting conditions, we recognize compensation cost on a tranche-by-tranche basis.
Stock-based compensation expense is measured based on the grant-date fair value of the stock-based awards and is recognized over the requisite service period of the awards. The Black-Scholes model requires management to make a number of key assumptions, including expected volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. The risk-free interest rate is estimated using the rate of return on U.S. treasury notes with a life that approximates the expected term. The expected term assumption used in the Black-Scholes model represents the period of time that the options are expected to be outstanding and is estimated using the midpoint between the requisite service period and the contractual term of the option.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and our management uses significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense for future periods could be materially different, including as a result of adjustments to stock-based compensation expense recorded for prior period.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We regularly review our long-term assets, comprising intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Determination of recoverability generally requires us to estimate the fair value of the long-term asset, including making assumptions and judgments on several items including, but not limited to, the future cash flows that will be generated by these assets. Measurement of any impairment loss for long-lived assets is based on the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the asset.
Business Combinations
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the companies acquired based on their fair values at the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair value of these assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill and may involve engaging independent third parties to perform an appraisal. When determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the acquired company, management makes significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets.
Critical estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, expected future cash flows, which includes consideration of future growth rates, and discount rates. Fair value estimates are based on the assumptions management believes a market participant would use in pricing the asset or liability. Amounts recorded in a business combination may change during the measurement period, which is a period not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, as additional information about conditions existing at the acquisition date becomes available.
Goodwill
We review goodwill for impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable. A qualitative assessment is first performed to determine if the fair value of a reporting unit is more likely than not to be less than its carrying amount. Judgment in the assessment of qualitative factors of impairment may include changes in business climate, market conditions, or other events impacting the reporting unit. If we determine an impairment is more likely than not based on our qualitative assessment, a quantitative assessment of impairment is performed.
Performing a quantitative goodwill impairment test includes the determination of the fair value of a reporting unit and involves significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include, among others, revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions, and the determination of appropriate market comparables. If we determine the carrying amount exceeds fair value, goodwill is impaired, and the excess is recognized as an impairment loss.