ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis provides material historical and prospective disclosures intended to enable investors and other users to assess our financial condition and results of operations. Statements that are not historical are forward-looking and involve risk and uncertainties, including those discussed under the caption “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and elsewhere in this Report. You should read this discussion and analysis in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Report. The words “anticipate,” “preliminary,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend” and similar expressions identify forward-looking statements. We believe these forward-looking statements are based upon reasonable assumptions. All such statements involve risks and uncertainties, and as a result, actual results could differ materially from those projected, anticipated, or implied by these statements.
In view of such uncertainties, investors should not place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements since such statements may prove to be inaccurate and speak only as of the date when made. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis covers the continuing operations of the Company, which are comprised of the production and sale of business forms and other business products. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis includes the following sections:
•
Overview - An overall discussion regarding our Company, the business challenges and opportunities we believe are key to our success, and our plans for facing these challenges relating to our continuing operations.
•
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - A discussion of the accounting policies that require our most critical judgments and estimates relating to our continuing operations. This discussion provides insight into the level of subjectivity, quality, and variability involved in these judgments and estimates. This section also provides a summary of recently adopted and recently issued accounting pronouncements that have or may materially affect our business.
•
Results of Operations - An analysis of our consolidated results of operations and segment results for the three years presented in our consolidated financial statements. This analysis discusses material trends within our continuing business and provides important information necessary for an understanding of our continuing operating results.
•
Liquidity and Capital Resources - An analysis of our cash flows and a discussion of our financial condition and contractual obligations. This section provides information necessary to evaluate our ability to generate cash and to meet existing and known future cash requirements over both the short and long term.
References to 2021, 2020 and 2019 refer to the fiscal years ended February 28, 2021, February 29, 2020 and February 28, 2019, respectively.
Overview
The Company - Our management believes we are the largest provider of business forms, pressure-seal forms, labels, tags, envelopes, and presentation folders to independent distributors in the United States.
Our Business Challenges - Our industry is currently experiencing consolidation of traditional supply channels, product obsolescence, paper supplier capacity adjustments, and increased pricing and potential supply allocations due to demand/supply curve imbalance. Technology advances have made electronic distribution of documents, internet hosting, digital printing and print-on-demand valid, cost-effective alternatives to traditional custom-printed documents and customer communications. Improved equipment has become more accessible to our competitors due to the continued low interest rate environment. We face highly competitive conditions throughout our supply chain in an already over-supplied, price-competitive print industry. In addition to the risk factors discussed under the caption “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report, some of the key challenges of our business include the following:
COVID-19 Pandemic - The global spread of the novel strain of COVID-19 has significantly impacted health and economic conditions throughout the United States and the world, including the markets in which we operate. In
response to COVID-19, federal, state and local authorities have recommended social distancing and have imposed various restrictions, including quarantine and isolation measures, mandatory closures of businesses deemed “non-essential” in certain jurisdictions. As of the date of this report, our plants continue to be deemed “essential,” largely due to our business’s support of many important sectors of the economy, including healthcare, government, food and beverage and banking. The U.S. economy continues to be significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and parts of the economy have started to re-open as vaccinations become more prevalent, but remain subject to ongoing surges and local shutdowns, creating a very fluid economic environment. Current governmental statistics have indicated an increase in economic activity that had previously been curtailed due to the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to contain it. These statistics provide evidence that various sectors continue to improve, while others have not, which we believe was reflected in our sequential sales increase and improvements in our gross profit margin and operational margin during the third quarter. Even so, we expect the pandemic to continue to have a negative impact on our financial condition and operational results, on a comparative basis, until at least the end of this fiscal year based on the information currently available. While the impacts of the pandemic have been significant, our results of operations were within our forecasted parameters for the period ended February 28, 2021.
The following is a summary of our recent and anticipated actions in response to COVID-19 and its impact on our business.
➣
Cash/Liquidity:
We believe our strong liquidity position will help us mitigate the ongoing adverse impacts of COVID-19. On February 28, 2021 we had $75.2 million in cash, in addition to $99.4 million available under our credit facility, if needed. During the period, our cash position increased by $6.9 million and our working capital position increased by $1.1 million from February 29, 2020. In addition, our liquidity and debt ratios have all improved since the start of the pandemic, with our current ratio (calculated by dividing our current assets by our current liabilities) increasing from 3.95 to 4.22, our quick ratio (calculated by dividing our current assets less inventories by our current liabilities) increasing from 3.03 to 3.29, and our net debt to equity ratio (after application of cash) decreasing from .01 to -.04.
➣
Receivable and Inventory Management:
We continue to closely monitor and manage our outstanding trade receivables and inventories. During the period, our days’ sales in our receivables increased slightly to 39 days from 36 days (February 29, 2020), and our days’ sales of inventory increased slightly to 34 days from February 29, 2020 (29 days). The Company continues to monitor incoming orders and is adjusting its raw material purchases accordingly.
➣
Supply Chain:
To date, COVID-19 has not materially impacted, nor do we currently expect it to materially impact, the supply chain for the products we sell. Most of our products are sourced domestically from suppliers deemed “essential” by the government, and therefore currently remain in operation, and we have been able to switch from impacted suppliers to non-impacted suppliers in several instances since the outbreak. However, if one or more of our major suppliers are negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, through plant closures, deteriorating financial condition, or otherwise, it could adversely affect our operational results and financial condition.
➣
Cost Savings:
COVID-19 has severely impacted global economic activity, including the printing industry in the United States. To date, our traditional tag and folder operations have been impacted more severely than our specialty products operations, including those that service the medical, banking and other related industries. We will continue to monitor incoming order volume so that we can proactively adjust our costs accordingly. While economic activity remains depressed due to the pandemic, we will continue to monitor projected sales and our cost structure. We believe the modifications to our cost structure in response to the sales impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will not impact our ability to service increased customer demand when
economic conditions improve. During the fourth quarter, our gross profit margin improved to 29.6% from the prior year’s fourth quarter of 28.1% and our operating margin improved to 10.6% from the prior year’s fourth quarter of 10.3%.
➣
Capital Expenditures:
We continue to make capital expenditures for operational maintenance purposes, as may be required. Additionally, we will carefully review and make new capital expenditures for equipment to the extent such expenditures make economic sense by improving our operations and not jeopardizing our strong liquidity position.
There continue to be many uncertainties regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the scope of scientific and health issues. The recent approval and distribution of three vaccines in the U.S. have improved the likelihood that the pandemic conditions can be improved or resolved in a more timely fashion, but the logistics of immunizing the U.S. population appear to be challenging. It is likely that the anticipated duration of the pandemic may not be as long as previously feared with the arrival of viable vaccines, but that benefit might be delayed due to the extent of local, regional and economic, social, and political disruption.
The ultimate impact of COVID-19 is difficult to predict, including due to factors discussed under the caption “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Transformation of our portfolio of products - While traditional business documents are essential in order to conduct business, many are being replaced through the use of cheaper paper grades or imported paper, or devalued with advances in digital technologies, causing steady declines in demand for a portion of our current product line. In addition, the impact of COVID-19 on the speed of this transformation is unknown, but it is expected to accelerate the decline for some of our products. Transforming our product offerings in order to continue to provide innovative, valuable solutions through lower labor and fixed charges to our customers on a proactive basis will require us to make investments in new and existing technology and to develop key strategic business relationships, such as print-on-demand services and product offerings that assist customers in their transition to digital business environments. In addition, we will continue to look for new market opportunities and niches through acquisitions, such as the addition of our envelope offerings, tag offerings, folder offerings, healthcare wristbands, specialty packaging, direct mail, pressure seal products, secure document solutions, innovative in-mold label offerings and long-run integrated products with high color web printing, which provide us with an opportunity for growth and differentiate us from our competition. The ability to make investments in new and existing technology and/or to acquire new market opportunities through acquisitions is dependent on the Company’s liquidity and operational results. While currently the pandemic has not materially impacted our liquidity and it is not currently expected to, a protracted delay in the economy recovering could have a negative impact on our continued ability to make the aforementioned investments or to consummate acquisitions.
Production capacity and price competition within our industry - Changes in the value of the U.S. dollar can have a significant impact on the pricing and supply of paper. The weakening of the U.S. dollar will usually result in the dissipation of any pricing advantage that foreign imports have over domestic suppliers, which typically results in lower levels of imported papers and an increase in domestic exports. With increased pricing power, domestic paper producers can better control the supply of paper by eliminating capacity or changing the products produced on their large paper machines. The strengthening of the U.S. dollar usually has the opposite effect: more cheap imported paper; less domestic exports; and lower pricing power in the hands of domestic paper producers. Domestic paper suppliers typically seek to balance supply and demand, including by (if possible) taking capacity out of the market, whether by taking production off-line or switching production to alternative paper products. Generally, if mills are running at high capacity, suppliers are able to raise prices. For the latter part of fiscal year 2020, with the strengthening of the U.S. dollar, imports began to flow back into the domestic marketplace. This development, along with continued slowing of domestic demand, resulted in renewed marketing of certain paper grades that previously had been placed on allocation. Consequently, spot pricing became very competitive earlier this year. The uncoated paper market tightened this quarter as overall capacity reductions improved operating rates, and inventories declined, allowing domestic mills to begin price increases. U.S. mills have moved back to higher operating levels and pulp pricing has increased which will justify such increases. Coated paper has shown some improvement due to several major closures, causing
operating rates to climb. As such, pricing during the second half of fiscal 2021 and into the beginning of fiscal 2022 is currently expected to increase.
The COVID-19 pandemic has reduced the demand for both coated and uncoated papers faster than previously expected in the first quarter of fiscal 2021 and paper companies idled some of their mills or converted to linerboard products to adjust supply and reduce inventory levels. As the economy has improved, demand has increased in the third quarter for coated and uncoated freesheet papers which has reduced the excess inventory in the market. It is unclear whether this is a temporary situation or if conditions could stretch for a more extended amount of time. Regardless of these factors, many of which are cyclical, we continue to believe paper pricing will remain in a range which will not unfavorably impact our margins. Additionally, the possibility of paper shortages in the market is not a major concern due to our primary material supplier’s commitment to the Company. Consistent with our historical practice, we intend to continue to focus on effectively managing and controlling our product costs through the use of forecasting, production and costing models, as well as working closely with our domestic suppliers to reduce our procurement costs, in order to minimize effects on our operational results. In addition, we will continue to look for ways to reduce and leverage our fixed costs.
Continued consolidation of our customers - Our customers are distributors, many of which are consolidating or are being acquired by competitors. We continue to maintain a majority of the business we have had with our customers historically, but it is possible that these consolidations and acquisitions, which we expect to continue in the future, ultimately will impact our margins and sales.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the disclosures and reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis, including those related to allowance for doubtful receivables, inventory valuations, property, plant and equipment, intangible assets, pension plan obligations, accrued liabilities and income taxes. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following accounting policies are the most critical due to their effect on our more significant estimates and judgments used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Pension Plan - We maintain the Pension Plan for employees. Included in our financial results are Pension Plan costs that are measured using actuarial valuations and requires the use of a number of assumptions. Changes in these assumptions can result in different expense and liability amounts and future actual experience may differ significantly from current expectations.
As our Pension Plan assets are invested in marketable securities, fluctuations in market values could potentially impact our funding status and associated liability recorded. The expected rate of return on assets was reduced from 7.00% to 6.50%. The 50 basis point reduction increased the fiscal year ending February 28, 2022 pension expense by approximately $0.3 million
Similar to fluctuations in market values, a drop in the discount rate could potentially negatively impact our funded status, recorded pension liability and future contribution levels. During fiscal year 2021 the discount rate used to determine the net pension obligations for purposes of our Consolidated Financial Statements remained at 2.65%, the same rate used in fiscal year 2020. A drop in the discount rate could potentially negatively impact our funded status, recorded pension liability and future contribution levels. Each 10 basis point change in the discount rate impacts our computed pension liability by about $0.8 million.
Also, continued changes in the mortality tables could potentially impact our funded status. While no change was made to the base mortality table, Pre-2012, we adopted the new MP-2020 mortality improvement scale. The updated mortality improvement scale reflects slightly lower projected mortality improvement in the future compared to the previous assumption resulting in a reduction in the February 28, 2021 pension liability of $0.35 million. Also, continued changes in the mortality tables could potentially impact our funded status.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets - Amounts allocated to intangibles and goodwill are determined based on valuation analysis for our acquisitions. Amortizable intangibles are amortized over their expected useful lives. We evaluate these amounts periodically (at least once a year) to determine whether a triggering event has occurred during the year that would indicate potential impairment.
We assess goodwill for impairment annually as of December 1, or more frequently if impairment indicators are present. The Company uses qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not (likelihood of more than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, including goodwill. Some of the qualitative factors considered in applying this test include consideration of macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors affecting the business, overall financial performance of the business, and performance of the share price of the Company. If qualitative factors are not deemed sufficient to conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, then a one-step approach is applied in making an evaluation. The evaluation utilizes multiple valuation methodologies, including a market approach (market price multiples of comparable companies) and an income approach (discounted cash flow analysis). The computations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, including, among other things, selection of comparable publicly traded companies, the discount rate applied to future earnings reflecting a weighted average cost of capital, and earnings growth assumptions. A discounted cash flow analysis requires management to make various assumptions about future sales, operating margins, capital expenditures, working capital and growth rates. If the evaluation results in the fair value of the reporting unit being lower than the carrying value, an impairment charge is recorded. A goodwill impairment charge was not required for the fiscal years ended February 28, 2021 or February 29, 2020.
Revenue Recognition - We recognize revenues from product sales upon shipment to the customer if the terms of the sale are freight on board (“FOB”) shipping point (and therefore title and all risks of ownership, including risk of loss, passes to the customer upon shipping) or, to a lesser extent, upon delivery to the customer if the terms of the sale are FOB destination (and therefore title and all risks of ownership, including risk of loss, passes to the customer upon delivery). Net sales consist of gross sales invoiced to customers, less certain related charges, including discounts, returns and other allowances. Returns, discounts and other allowances have historically been insignificant. In some cases and upon customer request, we print and store custom print product for customer specified future delivery, generally within twelve months. In this case, risk of loss from obsolescence passes to the customer, the customer is invoiced under normal credit terms and revenue is recognized when manufacturing is complete. Approximately $12.5 million, $11.0 million, and $10.3 million of revenue were recognized under these agreements during fiscal years ended 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We maintain an allowance for doubtful receivables to reflect estimated losses resulting from the inability of customers to make required payments. On an on-going basis, we evaluate the collectability of accounts receivable based upon historical collection trends, current economic factors, and the assessment of the collectability of specific accounts. We evaluate the collectability of specific accounts using a combination of factors, including the age of the outstanding balances, evaluation of customers’ current and past financial condition and credit scores, recent payment history, current economic environment, discussions with our sales managers, and discussions with the customers directly.
Inventories - Our inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We regularly review inventory values on hand, using specific aging categories, and write down inventory deemed obsolete and/or slow-moving based on historical usage and estimated future usage to its estimated net realizable value. As actual future demand or market conditions may vary from those projected by management, adjustments to inventory valuations may be required.
Income Taxes - As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our income taxes in each jurisdiction in which we operate. This process involves estimating our actual current tax exposure together with assessing temporary differences resulting from different treatment of items for tax and financial reporting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in our consolidated balance sheets. We must then assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered based on our history of earnings expectations for future taxable income including taxable income in prior carry-back years, as well as future taxable income. To the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, we must establish a valuation allowance. To the extent we establish a valuation allowance, we must include an expense within the tax provision in the consolidated statements of operations. In the event that actual results differ from these estimates, our provision for income taxes could be materially impacted.
The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic presents various global risks. The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve as of the date of this report, particularly given the large increases of cases in India and South America. Management is actively monitoring the situation as pertains to the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry and workforce. Given the ongoing evolution of the pandemic and the global responses to control its spread, the Company is not able to estimate the ultimate effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on its results of operation, financial condition, or liquidity for fiscal year 2022.
Accrued Medical and Workers Compensation Liabilities - In addition to the assessments described above, we also have to make assessments as to the adequacy of our accrued liabilities, more specifically our liabilities recorded in connection with our workers compensation and health insurance, as these plans are self-funded. To help us in this evaluation process, we routinely get outside third-party assessments of our potential liabilities under each plan.
Results of Operations
The following discussion provides information which we believe is relevant to understanding our results of operations and financial condition. The discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes thereto, which are incorporated herein by reference. Unless otherwise indicated, this financial overview is for the continuing operations of the Company, which are comprised of the production and sales of business forms and other business products The operating results of the Company for fiscal year 2021 and the comparative fiscal years 2020 and 2019 are included in the tables below.
Consolidated Summary
Net Sales. Our net sales decreased from $438.4 million for fiscal year 2020 to $358.0 million for fiscal year 2021, a decrease of 18.3%. Our sales for the period were significantly impacted by economic conditions driven by the COVID-19 pandemic and resulted in a decrease in sales volume. The acquisition of Infoseal, which was completed in December 2020, is an integral part of our strategy to offset normal industry revenue declines due to print attrition and other changes. Our acquisitions during fiscal years 2020 and 2021 positively impacted our net sales by approximately $12.5 million during fiscal year 2021.
Our net sales increased from $400.8 million for fiscal year 2019 to $438.4 million for fiscal year 2020, an increase of 9.4%. The increase in supply of cheaper foreign paper imports, due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar, unseasonal weather conditions in parts of the country and domestic pricing levels, continued to provide the elements for a challenging marketplace. Each of these factors negatively impacted sales. In particular, our competition was able to be more price-competitive due to the availability of cheaper materials, and some of our sales were negatively impacted by weather conditions. The acquisitions of Integrated, which was completed in March 2019, and Flesh, which was completed in July 2019, were integral parts of our strategy to offset normal industry revenue declines due to print attrition and other changes. Our acquisitions during fiscal years 2020 and 2019 positively impacted our net sales by approximately $55.3 million during fiscal year 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold. Our manufacturing costs decreased from $309.5 million for fiscal year 2020 to $254.2 million for fiscal year 2021, or 17.9%. Our gross profit margin (“margin”) decreased slightly from 29.4% for fiscal year 2020 to 29.0% for fiscal year 2021. While our plants have been deemed “essential” and as such have generally remained open, our sales for the fiscal year 2021 were significantly impacted by reduced economic activity due to COVID-19. As such, our reduced production levels adversely impacted our factory utilization and efficiency during the first and second quarters of this fiscal year. Our modification to our cost structure in response to the sales impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the integration of our acquisitions last fiscal year resulted in improvements in our margin as a percentage of sales during the fourth quarter.
Our manufacturing costs increased from $277.4 million for fiscal year 2019 to $309.5 million for fiscal year 2020, or 11.6%. Our margin decreased from 30.8% for fiscal year 2019 to 29.4% for fiscal year 2020. Our margin during the period continued to be impacted for the most part by the dilutive impact of the acquisitions completed in the last year and to a lesser extent to the numerous raw material price increases taken last fiscal year, some of which could not be completely passed through to the customer. During the previous fiscal year, tight supply conditions allowed for multiple price increases on raw materials which could be passed through to the customer due to apportionment of paper, as well as other items in the manufacturing process. Historically price increases have been less frequent, which allowed manufacturers the ability to pass the required pricing adjustments through to the marketplace in a timely manner. However, the size and number of increases impacted manufacturers’ abilities to timely pass these price adjustments to the end-users. Due to pricing levels and the strengthening U.S. dollar, imports had increased and created an excess supply condition domestically. This historically has led to some normalization/stability in the marketplace which started to be seen as material prices became softer. Our acquisitions completed during the previous
year had a dilutive impact on our margins as we transitioned them into our enterprise resource planning system. Without the impact of the acquisitions completed over the previous 18 months, the margins from our other plants continued to be above 30.8% during the period, comparable to historical levels.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses. Our selling, general, and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses decreased approximately 12.7%, from $78.2 million for fiscal year 2020 to $68.3 million for fiscal year 2021. As a percentage of sales, SG&A expenses increased from 17.8% in fiscal year 2020 to 19.1% for fiscal year 2021. We continue to seek ways to more fully leverage our SG&A expenses, and to reduce SG&A expenses following acquisitions through the implementation of our systems and processes, which allows us to integrate many of our acquired companies’ back-office processes.
Our SG&A expenses increased approximately 6.4%, from $73.5 million for fiscal year 2019 to $78.2 million for fiscal year 2020. As a percentage of sales, SG&A expenses declined from 18.3% in fiscal year 2019 to 17.8% for fiscal year 2020. Our acquisitions negatively impacted our SG&A expenses by approximately $6.6 million during fiscal year 2020.
(Gain) loss from disposal of assets. The $0.4 million gain from disposal of assets for fiscal year 2021 is primarily attributed to the $.5 million gain on the sale of land and manufacturing facilities offset by approximately a $0.1 million loss in the sale of manufacturing equipment. The $0.1 million gain from disposal of assets for fiscal year 2020 is primarily attributed to the sale of a manufacturing facility and manufacturing equipment. The $0.2 million gain from disposal of assets for fiscal year 2019 is primarily related to the sale of an unused manufacturing facility and manufacturing equipment.
Income from operations. Primarily due to factors described above, our income from continuing operations for fiscal year 2021 was $35.9 million, or 10.0% of net sales, compared to $50.8 million, or 11.6% of net sales, for fiscal year 2020. Our acquisitions contributed approximately $2.0 million to our operational income during fiscal year 2021.
Our income from continuing operations for fiscal year 2020 was $50.8 million, or 11.6% of net sales, compared to $50.1 million, or 12.5% of net sales, for fiscal year 2019. Our acquisitions contributed approximately $6.2 million to our operational income during fiscal year 2020.
Other income (expense). Other expense was $2.6 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to income of $0.4 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase in expense was primarily the result of an increase in our pension expense of $2.7 million, of which $1.6 million was a settlement charge as a result of the lump sums paid out from our Pension Plan in fiscal year 2021 that were greater than the service cost and interest cost for the fiscal year. Other income was $0.4 million for fiscal year 2020 compared to $0.2 million expense for fiscal year 2019. The decrease in expense related primarily to approximately $0.5 million less in interest expense due to the payoff of the Credit Facility at the end of the second quarter of fiscal year 2020.
Provision for income taxes. Our effective tax rates for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 were 27.6%, 25.3%, and 25.0%, respectively. The higher effective tax rate for fiscal year 2021 was primarily impacted by permanent nondeductible expenses and settlement of certain state and local tax matters. The slightly higher effective tax rate for fiscal year 2020 was primarily due to the establishment of a reserve against our foreign tax credits.
Net earnings. Our net earnings was significantly impacted by COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in pension expense from fiscal year 2020 to 2021 included in other expense impacted our results by $0.07 per diluted share. Net earnings were $24.1 million, or $0.93 per diluted share for fiscal year 2021. Net earnings for fiscal year 2020 was $38.3 million, or $1.47 per diluted share, and $37.4 million, or $1.45 per diluted share for fiscal year 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital. Our working capital increased by approximately $1.1 million, or 1.0%, from $111.9 million at February 29, 2020 to $113.0 million at February 28, 2021. Our current ratio, calculated by dividing our current assets by our current liabilities, increased from 4.0-to-1.0 for fiscal year 2020 to 4.2-to-1.0 for fiscal year 2021. Our working capital and current ratio were positively impacted by a $6.9 million increase in cash and a $3.9 million decrease in accounts payable and employee compensation and benefits. These positive increases were offset by a $5.2 million decrease in accounts receivable, a $2.2 million decrease in prepaid income taxes and a $1.9 million decrease in our inventories.
Our working capital decreased by approximately $22.6 million, or 16.8%, from $134.5 million at February 28, 2019 to $111.9 million at February 29, 2020. Our current ratio, calculated by dividing our current assets by our current liabilities, decreased from 5.3-to-1.0 for fiscal year 2019 to 4.0-to-1.0 for fiscal year 2020. Our working capital and current ratio were negatively impacted by the repayment of long-term debt of $30.0 million and the adoption of Accounting Standards Update No. 2018-11, Leases (ASC 842): Targeted Improvements, which increased our current liabilities by $5.7 million.
Our operations continue to be affected by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The ultimate disruption that may result from the virus is uncertain, but it may result in a material adverse impact on our financial position, operations and cash flows. Possible areas that may be affected include, but are not limited to, disruption to our customers and revenue, labor workforce, and an impairment in the value of our long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, goodwill and other intangible assets.
Cash Flow Components
Cash flows from operating activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $52.8 million for fiscal year 2021 (a decrease of $4.4 million compared to fiscal year 2020), $57.2 million for fiscal year 2020 (an increase of $5.9 million compared to fiscal year 2019) and $51.3 million for fiscal year 2019.
Our decreased operational cash flows in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 was primarily the result of two factors: (i) a 14.2 million decrease in net earnings and (ii) a $0.7 million increase in our accounts payable and accrued expenses. These decreases were offset by a $4.3 million increase in our accounts receivable and a $3.6 million increase in our prepaid expenses and prepaid income taxes.
Our increased operational cash flows in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 was primarily the result of three factors: (i) a $0.9 million increase in net earnings; (ii) a $0.3 million decrease in our accounts receivable; and (iii) a $6.8 million decrease in our inventories. These three positive factors were offset by an increase in our prepaid expenses and prepaid income taxes of $4.9 million.
Cash flows from investing activities. Cash used in investing activities was $21.2 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to 21.4 million in fiscal year 2020 and $31.8 million in fiscal year 2019. Cash used in investing activities remained level for both fiscal year 2021 and 2020. Capital expenditures increased by $0.3 million and the cost to acquire businesses increased by $0.5 million in fiscal year 2021. Both of these increases were offset by a $1.0 million increase in the proceeds from disposal of property. The $10.3 million decrease in cash used in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 was primarily due to a $1.4 million decrease in capital expenditures and an $8.7 million decrease in costs to acquire businesses.
Cash flows from financing activities. Cash used in financing activities was $24.7 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to $56.0 million used in fiscal year 2020 and $27.4 million used in fiscal year 2019.
The decrease in our cash used in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 resulted from two factors: (i) $30.0 million in long-term debt was paid in fiscal year 2020, compared to no long-term debt outstanding and paid in fiscal
year 2021 and (ii) $1.2 million less used to purchase our common stock under our repurchase program in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020.
The increase in our cash used in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 resulted from two factors: (i) the payment of $30.0 million in long-term debt in fiscal year 2020, compared to the payment of no long-term debt in fiscal year 2019; and (ii) the payment of $0.9 million more in dividends in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019.
Stock Repurchase - The Board has authorized the repurchase of the Company’s outstanding common stock through a stock repurchase program, which authorized amount is currently up to $40.0 million in the aggregate. Under the repurchase program, purchases may be made from time to time in the open market or through privately-negotiated transactions, depending on market conditions, share price, trading volume and other factors. Repurchases may be commenced or suspended at any time or from time to time without prior notice, provided that any purchases must be made in accordance with applicable insider trading rules and securities laws and regulations. Since the program’s inception in October 2008, we have repurchased 1,894,350 common shares under the program at an average price of $15.91 per share. During our fiscal year 2021, we repurchased 77,996 shares of common stock at an average price of $15.84 per share. As of February 28, 2021, $9.9 million remained available to repurchase shares of the Company’s common stock under the program. The Company expects to continue to repurchase its shares under the repurchase program during fiscal year 2022 provided that the Board determines such repurchases to be in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders.
Credit Facility - The Company’s Credit Facility, which has been extended to the Company until November 11, 2021, provides the Company and its subsidiaries with up to $100.0 million in revolving credit, as well as a $20.0 million sublimit for the issuance of letters of credit and a $15.0 million sublimit for swing-line loans. Under the Credit Facility, the Company or any of its subsidiaries can request up to three increases in the aggregate commitments in an aggregate amount not to exceed $50.0 million. The terms and conditions of the Credit Facility impose certain restrictions on our ability to incur additional debt, make capital expenditures, acquisitions and asset dispositions, as well as impose other customary covenants, such as requiring that our fixed charge coverage ratio not be less than 1.25:1.00 and our total leverage ratio not exceed 3.00:1.00. The Company may make dividends or distributions to shareholders so long as (i) no event of default has occurred and is continuing and (ii) the Company’s net leverage ratio both before and after giving effect to any such dividend or distribution is equal to or less than 2.50:1.00. All calculations are made based on U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles existing at the time the Credit Facility was entered into. As of February 28, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all terms and conditions of the Credit Facility.
The Credit Facility bears interest at the LIBOR rate plus a spread ranging from 1.85% to 2.5%. The rate is determined by our fixed charge coverage ratio of total funded debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”). As of February 28, 2021, the Company had no outstanding debt, and the Company had $0.6 million outstanding under standby letters of credit arrangements, leaving approximately $99.4 million available in borrowing capacity under the Credit Facility. The Credit Facility is secured by substantially all of our assets (other than real property), as well as all capital securities of each of our subsidiaries.
It is anticipated that, should it be required, the line of credit available under the Credit Facility will be sufficient to cover our working capital needs for the foreseeable future.
Pension Plan - The funded status of our pension plan is dependent on many factors, including returns on invested assets, the level of market interest rates and the level of funding. The assumptions used to calculate the pension funding deficit are different from the assumption used to determine the net pension obligations for purposes of our Consolidated Financial Statements. The funding of our pension plan is governed by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”), as amended, and the Internal Revenue Code and is also subject to the Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act, the Highway and Transportation Funding Act of 2014, and the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015. Under these regulations, the liabilities are discounted using 25-year average corporate bond rates within a specified corridor. For the period ended February 28, 2021, the specified corridor around the 25-year average was 10%. We made contributions of $3.0 million to our Pension Plan in fiscal years 2020 and 2019. There was no contribution required or made in fiscal year 2021. Given our funding status as of February 28, 2021 and absent any significant negative event, we anticipate that our future contributions will be between $1.5 million and $3.0 million per year, depending on our Pension Plan’s funding.
Inventories - We believe our current inventory levels are sufficient to satisfy our customer demands and we anticipate having adequate sources of raw materials to meet future business requirements. We have long-term
contracts in effect with paper suppliers that govern prices, but do not require minimum purchase commitments. Certain of our rebate programs do, however, require minimum purchase volumes. Management anticipates meeting the required volumes.
Capital Expenditures - We expect our capital expenditure requirements for fiscal year 2022, exclusive of capital required for possible acquisitions, will be in line with our historical levels of between $3.0 million and $5.0 million. We expect to fund these expenditures through existing cash flows. We expect to generate sufficient cash flows from our operating activities to cover our operating and other normal capital requirements for the foreseeable future.
Contractual Obligations- There have been no significant changes in our contractual obligations since February 28, 2021 that have, or that are reasonably likely to have, a material impact on our results of operations or financial condition. The following table represents our contractual commitments as of February 28, 2021 (in thousands).