ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should carefully review the "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and "Risk Factors" sections of this annual report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Business Overview
We are a global life sciences company focused on providing to civilian and military populations a portfolio of innovative preparedness and response products and solutions that address accidental, deliberate and naturally occurring PHTs.
We are currently focused on the following five distinct PHT categories: CBRNE, EID, travel health, emerging health crises, acute/emergency care; and CDMO. We have a product portfolio of ten products (vaccines, therapeutics, and drug-device combination products) that contribute a substantial portion of our revenue. We also have two procured product candidates that are procured under special circumstances by certain government agencies, although they are not approved by the FDA or any other health agency. Additionally, we have a development pipeline consisting of a diversified mix of both pre-clinical and clinical stage product candidates (vaccines, therapeutics, devices and combination products). Finally, we have a fully-integrated portfolio of CDMO services. Our CDMO service offerings cover development services, drug substance manufacturing and drug product manufacturing across pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries as well as the USG and non-governmental organizations. The majority of our revenue comes from the following products and procured product candidates:
Vaccines
•Anthrax vaccines, including our AV7909 (Anthrax Vaccine adsorbed with Adjuvant) procured product candidate being developed as a next-generation anthrax vaccine for post-exposure prophylaxis and BioThrax® (Anthrax Vaccine adsorbed), the only vaccine licensed by the FDA for the general use prophylaxis and post-exposure prophylaxis of anthrax disease;
•ACAM2000® (Smallpox (Vaccinia) Vaccine, Live), the only single-dose smallpox vaccine licensed by the FDA for active immunization against smallpox disease for persons determined to be at high risk for smallpox infection;
•Vivotif® (Typhoid Vaccine Live Oral Ty21a), the only oral vaccine licensed by the FDA for the prevention of typhoid fever; and
•Vaxchora® (Cholera Vaccine, Live, Oral), the only single-dose oral vaccine approved by the FDA and EMA for the prevention of cholera.
Devices
•NARCAN® (naloxone HCl) Nasal Spray, the first needle-free formulation of naloxone approved by the FDA and Health Canada, for the emergency treatment of known or suspected opioid overdose as manifested by respiratory and/or central nervous system depression;
•RSDL® (Reactive Skin Decontamination Lotion Kit), the only medical device cleared by the FDA to remove or neutralize the following chemical warfare agents from the skin: tabun, sarin, soman, cyclohexyl sarin, VR, VX, mustard gas and T-2 toxin; and
•Trobigard®, a combination drug-device auto-injector procured product candidate that contains atropine sulfate and obidoxime chloride. It has not been approved by the FDA or any similar health regulatory body, but is procured by certain authorized government buyers under special circumstances for potential use as a nerve agent countermeasure.
Therapeutics
•raxibacumab (Anthrax Monoclonal), the first fully human monoclonal antibody therapeutic licensed by the FDA for the treatment and prophylaxis of inhalational anthrax;
•Anthrasil® (Anthrax Immune Globulin Intravenous (Human)), the only polyclonal antibody therapeutic licensed by the FDA and Health Canada for the treatment of inhalational anthrax;
•BAT® (Botulism Antitoxin Heptavalent (A,B,C,D,E,F,G)-(Equine)), the only heptavalent antibody therapeutic licensed by the FDA and Health Canada for the treatment of botulism; and
•VIGIV (Vaccinia Immune Globulin Intravenous (Human)), the only polyclonal antibody therapeutic licensed by the FDA and Health Canada to address certain complications from smallpox vaccination.
Contract Development and Manufacturing Services
Our CDMO business unit consists of a fully integrated molecule-to-market CDMO services business, with offerings across development services, drug substance and drug product manufacturing and packaging and fill, finish services. Our customers for such services include pharmaceutical and biotechnology organizations as well as governments and non-governmental organizations ranging from small to mid to large pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies whose programs range from clinical stage to commercial stage. We compete for CDMO service business with a number of biopharmaceutical product development organizations, contract manufacturers of biopharmaceutical products and university research laboratories. We also compete with in-house research, development and support service departments of other biopharmaceutical companies.
Highlights and Business Accomplishments for 2020
•On January 13, 2020, received agreement from the EMA and FDA on the Company’s proposed development plan to use Serum Neutralizing Antibodies (SNA) as surrogate endpoint to predict likely clinical benefit of CHIKV VLP, the Company’s chikungunya virus virus-like particle (VLP) vaccine candidate, in a Phase 3 safety and immunogenicity study anticipated in the second quarter of 2021.
•On January 31, 2020, received positive opinion and subsequent approval from EMA of Vaxchora® (Cholera Vaccine, Live, Oral), the Company’s cholera vaccine, making it the only single-dose oral vaccine indicated for active immunization against disease caused by Vibrio cholerae serogroup 01 in adults and children from 6 years of age across all 27
member states of the European Union and the European Economic Area countries.
•On March 10, 2020, signed a development and manufacturing agreement with Novavax, Inc. for an experimental vaccine candidate for COVID-19.
•On March 11, 2020, initiated development of two investigational plasma-derived therapies. COVID-Human Immune Globulin (COVID-HIG) is being developed as a human plasma-derived therapy candidate for potential treatment of COVID-19 in severe hospitalized and high-risk patients, and COVID-Equine Immune Globulin (COVID-EIG) is being developed as an equine plasma-derived therapy candidate for potential treatment of severe disease in humans.
•On March 18, 2020, signed a development and manufacturing agreement with Vaxart, Inc. to produce its experimental oral vaccine candidate for COVID-19.
•On March 31, 2020, signed an agreement with Novavax, Inc. to manufacture NanoFluTM, its seasonal influenza vaccine candidate.
•On April 2, 2020, announced HHS funding valued at $14.5 million to support the development of COVID-HIG for treatment, which will be included in at least one of the studies of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), part of the National Institutes of Health, evaluating potential treatments for COVID-19.
•On April 23, 2020, announced an initial agreement, valued at $135 million, to be the U.S. manufacturing partner of Johnson & Johnson's lead COVID-19 vaccine candidate.
•On May 28, 2020, announced the exercise by the HHS of the first of nine annual contract options, valued at $176 million, to procure doses of ACAM2000® (Smallpox (Vaccine, Live) into the U.S. Strategic National Stockpile (SNS).
•On June 1, 2020, announced an agreement to join the USG's Warp Speed Program in public-private CDMO partnership for COVID-19 vaccine development and manufacturing. The agreement has a contract value of $628 million and includes manufacturing capacity valued at $542.7 million and $85.5 million for expansion of viral and non-viral CDMO drug product fill/finish capacity.
•On June 11, 2020, announced an agreement to be the U.S. manufacturing partner for AstraZeneca's COVID-19 vaccine candidate to provide large-scale manufacturing capacity through 2020. The agreement has a contract value of $87 million.
•On June 18, 2020, announced a $75 million planned expansion of a property adjacent to our Canton, Massachusetts live viral drug substance development and manufacturing facility. The expansion will increase advanced therapy (viral vector and gene therapy) capability, which is expected to be available beginning in 2023.
•On July 2, 2020, further announced signing a large scale drug substance manufacturing agreement for Johnson & Johnson's lead COVID-19 vaccine candidate for up to five years beginning in 2021. The first two years are valued at approximately $480 million, with the remaining three years providing flexible capacity.
•On July 6, 2020, announced the award of approximately $34.6 million by the U.S. Department of Defense Joint Program Executive Office and formed collaboration with Mount Sinai Health System and ImmunoTek Bio Centers to advance COVID-HIG for potential post-exposure prophylaxis in populations at high risk of COVID-19.
•On July 14, 2020, announced the exercise by BARDA of the contract option, valued at $258 million, to procure additional doses of AV7909 (anthrax vaccine adsorbed with adjuvant) for delivery into the SNS over 12 months.
•On July 27, 2020, further announced the signing of a large-scale drug substance manufacturing agreement for AstraZeneca's COVID-19 vaccine candidate, valued at approximately $174 million through 2021.
•On August 7, 2020, announced the completion of an offering of $450 million in aggregate principal amount 3.875% Senior Unsecured Notes due in 2028. The Company utilized the proceeds from the offering to repay $353 million outstanding under its revolving credit facility with the remainder to be utilized for general corporate purposes.
•On October 8, 2020, announced the initiation of a Phase 3 clinical trial to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of hyperimmune globulin products, including our COVID-19 Human Immune Globulin, as a potential treatment in adult patients hospitalized with COVID-19.
•On December 29, 2020, announced the initiation of the clinical program to evaluate the Company's COVID-HIG product candidate in the first of two Phase 1 studies to support its use for potential post-exposure prophylaxis in individuals at high risk of exposure to SARS-CoV-2.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenues
We generate product revenues from the sale of our marketed products and procured product candidates which include vaccines, therapeutics and devices which have been described above. The USG is the largest purchaser of our CBRNE products and primarily purchases our products for the SNS, a national repository of medical countermeasures including critical antibiotics, vaccines, chemical antidotes, antitoxins, and other critical medical supplies. The USG primarily purchases our products under long-term, firm fixed price procurement contracts. Our opioid overdose reversal product, NARCAN® Nasal Spray and our travel health products, comprising Vivotif and Vaxchora, are sold commercially through wholesalers and distributors, physician-directed or standing order prescriptions at retail pharmacies, as well as to other state and local community healthcare agencies, practitioners and hospitals.
We also generate revenue from our CDMO business unit, which is based on our established development and manufacturing infrastructure, technology platforms and expertise. Our services include a fully integrated molecule-to-market CDMO services business offering across development services, drug substance and drug product for small to mid to large pharmaceutical and biotechnology industry and government agencies/non-governmental organizations.
We have received contracts and grants funding from the USG and other non-governmental organizations to perform research and development activities, particularly related to programs addressing certain CBRNE threats and EIDs.
Our revenue, operating results and profitability vary quarterly based on the timing of production and deliveries and the nature of our business to provide
large scale bundles of products and services as needs arise. During 2020, our revenues have increased due largely to the contribution of CDMO arrangements with industry and government customers to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. This increase in CDMO revenues has been offset by reduced sales of our vaccine products that target travelers which have declined due to the reduction of international travel caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect continued variability in our quarterly financial statements.
Cost of Product Sales and CDMO Services
The primary expenses that we incur to deliver our products and to perform CDMO services consist of fixed and variable costs. We determine the cost of product sales for products sold during a reporting period based on the average manufacturing cost per unit in the period those units were manufactured. Fixed manufacturing costs include facilities, utilities and amortization of intangible assets. Variable manufacturing costs primarily consist of costs for materials and personnel-related expenses for direct and indirect manufacturing support staff, contract manufacturing operations, sales-based royalties, shipping and logistics. In addition to the fixed and variable manufacturing costs described above, the cost of product sales depends on utilization of available manufacturing capacity. For our commercial sales, other associated expenses include sales-based royalties (which include fair value adjustments associated with contingent consideration), shipping, and logistics.
We use the same manufacturing facilities and methods of production for our own products as well as for fulfillment of our CDMO service contracts. We operate nine manufacturing facilities, five of which perform manufacturing activities for CDMO services customers. As a result, management reviews expenses associated with manufacturing our own products as well CDMO service contracts on an aggregate basis when analyzing the financial performance of its manufacturing and development facilities. Our manufacturing process for our own products and our CDMO service business includes the production of bulk material and performing “fill finish” work for containment and distribution of biological products. For “fill finish” customers, we receive work in process inventory to be prepared for distribution. When producing bulk material, we generally procure raw materials, manufacture the product and retain the risk of loss through the manufacturing and review process until delivery.
Research and Development Expenses
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of:
▪personnel-related expenses;
▪fees to professional service providers for, among other things, analytical testing, independent monitoring or other administration of our clinical trials and obtaining and evaluating data from our clinical trials and non-clinical studies;
▪costs of CDMO services for clinical trial material; and
▪costs of materials used in clinical trials and research and development.
In many cases, we plan to seek funding for development activities from external sources and third parties, such as governments and non-governmental organizations, or through collaborative partnerships. We expect our research and development spending will be dependent upon such factors as the results from our clinical trials, the availability of reimbursement of research and development spending, the number of product candidates under development, the size, structure and duration of any clinical programs that we may initiate, the costs associated with manufacturing and development of our product candidates on a large-scale basis for later stage clinical trials, and our ability to use or rely on data generated by government agencies.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs and professional fees in support of our executives, sales and marketing, business development, government affairs, finance, accounting, information technology, legal, human resource functions and other corporate functions. Other costs include facility costs not otherwise included in cost of product sales and CDMO services or research and development expense.
Income Taxes
Uncertainty in income taxes is accounted for using a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We recognize in our financial statements the impact of a tax position if that position is more likely than not of being sustained on audit, based on the technical merits of the position.
Management believes that the assumptions and estimates related to the provision for income taxes are critical to the Company’s results of operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, income tax expense totaled $102.1 million. For every 1% change in the 2020 effective rate, income tax expense would have changed by approximately $4.1 million.
For additional information on our uncertain tax positions and income tax expense, please see note
12, Income taxes to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Results of Operations
Total Revenues
Product Sales, net
Anthrax Vaccines
The increase in anthrax vaccine sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the transition of SNS deliveries from BioThrax to a more consistent cadence of deliveries of AV7909. There were lower sales of anthrax vaccines during the year ended December 31, 2019 as the USG transitioned from BioThrax to AV7909. Deliveries of AV7909 began in September of 2019.
NARCAN Nasal Spray
The increase in NARCAN Nasal Spray sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in sales to the public interest markets in the United States and Canada and to a lesser extent an increase in commercial sales.
ACAM2000
The decrease in ACAM2000 sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to timing of deliveries to the SNS partially offset by standard inflationary rate increases. ACAM2000 product sales are made under a long-term procurement contract. The fluctuations in ACAM2000 revenue are dictated by the timing and delivery of orders to the USG.
Other Product Sales
The decrease in the Company's other product sales during the year ended December 31, 2020, was mostly due to a decline in sales of raxibacumab, and Vaxchora and Vivotif due to the reduction of global travel.
Contract Development and Manufacturing Services
The increase in CDMO services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 is due to the Company's public-private partnership with BARDA in support of the USG's efforts to address the COVID-19 pandemic and arrangements with AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson.
Contracts and Grants
The decrease in contracts and grants revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 is due to the completion of developmental activities associated with our AV7909 procured product candidate partially offset by increases in development awards related to the Company's COVID related product candidates and other product candidates.
Cost of Product Sales and CDMO Services
Cost of product sales and CDMO services increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to an increase in product sales and CDMO services. Additionally, the increase in the cost of product sales and CDMO services was impacted due to a write-down of travel health vaccine inventory and contingent consideration charges.
Research and Development Expenses (Gross and Net)
The increase in research and development expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 is due to the impairment of our IPR&D intangible asset of $29 million. Excluding the impacts of the IPR&D impairment charge research and development expenses decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to a decline in spending associated with the Company's AV7909 product candidate offset by increased spending related to the Company's COVID-HIG and other product candidates.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an increase in staffing costs to support the Company's growth as well as a special broad-based, immediately vested equity award granted to employees below the senior vice president level offset by a decrease in travel expenses.
Amortization of intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 was consistent with the year ended December 31, 2019.
Total Other Income (Expense), Net
Total other expense, net decreased primarily due to a decrease in interest expense. The decrease in interest expense was driven by a decline in the average interest rates during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 partially offset by an increase in average outstanding debt during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019.
Income Taxes
During the year ended December 31, 2020, income taxes increased largely due to an increase in income before income taxes. The effective tax rate was 25% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 30% in 2019. The effective tax rate decreased largely due to a decrease in the rate impact of non-deductible expenses as a percent of income before income taxes. Excluding these non-deductible expenses, the effective tax rate was approximately 23% in both 2020 and 2019.
Discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 is included under the heading "Item 7 Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the SEC on February 25, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
The Company has historically financed our operating and capital expenditures through cash on hand, cash from operations, debt financing and development funding. We also obtain financing from the sale of our common stock upon exercise of stock options. We have operated profitably for each of the last five annual periods. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $621.3 million and capacity under our revolving credit facility of $597.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, we believe that we have sufficient liquidity to fund our operations over the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Certain significant cash flows were as follows:
Operating Activities:
Net cash provided by operating activities of $536.0 million in 2020 was due to net income excluding non-cash items of $527.2 million and working capital changes of $8.8 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $188.0 million in 2019 was primarily due to net income excluding non-cash items of $230.4 million offset by negative working capital changes of $42.4 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $41.8 million in 2018 was primarily due to our net income excluding non-cash items of $160.9 million, offset by $119.1 million of negative changes in working capital.
Investing Activities:
Net cash used in investing activities of $151.0 million in 2020 largely relates to purchases of property, plant and equipment. We also made a milestone payment related to an asset acquisition of $10.0 million from our acquisition of raxibacumab in October 2017. The cash used in investing activities increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 largely due to infrastructure and equipment investments related to our CDMO arrangements and the purchase of a building near our Canton, Massachusetts facility.
Net cash used in investing activities of $96.9 million in 2019 was primarily due to infrastructure and equipment investments.
Net cash used in investing activities of $897.2 million in 2018 was primarily due to our acquisitions of Adapt and PaxVax, along with software, infrastructure and equipment investments.
Financing Activities:
Net cash provided by financing activities of $69.5 million in 2020 was primarily due to proceeds from the $450.0 million Senior Unsecured Notes and net
employee share-based compensation activity of $17.8 million offset by payments of $387.1 million on the term loan and revolving credit facility and $8.4 million of debt issuance costs.
Net cash used in financing activities of $35.9 million in 2019 was primarily due to contingent consideration payments of $50.4 million mostly in relation to our recent acquisition of Adapt offset by $13.7 of net proceeds from debt.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $788.7 million in 2018 was primarily due to $798.0 million of proceeds from long-term debt borrowings used to finance a portion of the Adapt and PaxVax acquisitions and for general corporate purposes and $15.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock pursuant to our employee equity awards plan, partially offset by $6.6 million associated with the taxes paid on behalf of employees for equity activity.
Long-term debt
Funding Requirements
We expect to continue to fund our anticipated operating expenses, capital expenditures, debt service requirements and any future repurchase of our common stock from the following sources:
▪existing cash and cash equivalents;
▪net proceeds from the sale of our products and CDMO services;
▪development contracts and grants funding; and
▪our Senior Secured Credit Facilities and any other lines of credit we may establish from time to time.
There are numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product sales and with the development and commercialization of our product candidates. We may seek additional external financing to provide additional financial flexibility. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including (but not limited to):
▪the level, timing and cost of product sales and CDMO services;
▪the extent to which we acquire or invest in and integrate companies, businesses, products or technologies;
▪the acquisition of new facilities and capital improvements to new or existing facilities;
▪the payment obligations under our indebtedness;
▪the scope, progress, results and costs of our development activities;
▪our ability to obtain funding from collaborative partners, government entities and non-
governmental organizations for our development programs;
▪the costs of commercialization activities, including product marketing, sales and distribution.
If our capital resources are insufficient to meet our future capital requirements, we will need to finance our cash needs through public or private equity or debt offerings, bank loans or collaboration and licensing arrangements.
If we raise funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience dilution. Public or bank debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants, like those contained in our Senior Unsecured Notes due 2028 and the Senior Secured Credit Facilities, which could limit or restrict our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures, pursuing acquisition opportunities, buying back shares or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through collaboration and licensing arrangements with third parties, it may be necessary to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Economic conditions, including market volatility and adverse impacts on financial markets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, may make it more difficult to obtain financing on attractive terms, or at all. If financing is unavailable or lost, our business, operating results, financial condition and cash flows would be adversely affected, and we could be forced to delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate many of our planned activities.
Amended and Restated Credit Agreement
See further discussion around the amended and restated credit agreement in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Note 9 Long-term debt.
Unused Credit Capacity
Available room under the revolving credit facility for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was:
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures are prepared in accordance with US GAAP, which requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the amounts reported. Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management considers an accounting policy to be critical if it is important to reporting our financial condition and results of operations, and if it requires significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in its application. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, contingent consideration, and income taxes.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when or as the customer obtains control of the promised product or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration in which the Company expects to receive in exchange for the product or services. The Company's products are typically recognized when the customer obtains control of the product, which occurs at a point-in-time, typically upon delivery to the customer. The Company's services are recognized either over-time as the service is being performed or at a point-in-time generally upon delivery to the customer, depending on the performance obligation which the Company is delivering.
For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the Company allocates the contract price to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis using the Company’s best estimate of the standalone selling price of each distinct product or service in the contract. The primary method used to estimate standalone selling price is the price observed in standalone sales to customers, however when prices in standalone sales are not available the Company may use third-party pricing for similar products or services or estimate the
standalone selling price based on the best available information.
Revenues are recorded net of reserves established for applicable discounts and allowances that are offered within contracts with customers. The Company makes estimates of the transaction price, including variable consideration that is subject to a constraint. Estimates of variable consideration includes allowances for returns, specialty distributor fees, wholesaler fees, prompt payment discounts, government rebates, chargebacks and rebates under managed care plans. Revenues from sales of products is recognized to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with such variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Provisions for variable consideration revenues from sales of products are recorded at the net sales price. For additional information on our revenues, please read Note 2, Revenue Recognition, of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Contingent Consideration
In connection with the Company's acquisitions accounted for as business combinations, the Company records contingent consideration associated with sales-based royalties, sales-based milestones and development and regulatory milestones at fair value, as applicable. The fair value model used to calculate these obligations is based on the income approach (a discounted cash flow model) that has been risk adjusted based on the probability of achievement of net sales and achievement of the milestones. The inputs the Company uses for determining the fair value of the contingent consideration associated with sales-based royalties, sales-based milestones and development and regulatory milestones are Level 3 fair value measurements. The Company re-evaluates the fair value on a quarterly basis. Changes in the fair value can result from adjustments to the discount rates and updates in the assumed timing of or achievement of net sales and/or the achievement of development and regulatory milestones. A one-percent change in the discount rate would result in an approximate $0.5 million change in the fair value of the Company’s contingent consideration as of December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and net operating loss and research and development tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using
enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Valuation allowances are recorded as appropriate to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount considered likely to be realized.
The Company’s income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best assessment of estimated current and future taxes to be paid. As tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations, significant management judgement is required in (1) calculating the Company's income tax expense, deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities, (2) determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets and (3) evaluating the amount of unrecognized tax benefits, as well as the interest and penalties related to such uncertain tax positions. The Company's estimates and assumptions may differ from tax benefits ultimately realized.