Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management's discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Company's (also referred to herein as "Enterprise," "us," "we," or "our") consolidated financial statements and notes thereto, contained in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," and the other financial and statistical information contained in this Form 10-K.
Throughout this Management Discussion & Analysis we have noted certain balances, ratios or other measures of the Company’s performance which exclude the impact of Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans originated by the Company, which we expect to be short-term in nature. We refer to any balance, ratio or measure that excludes PPP loans as "core." The core balances, ratios and measures were derived in order to provide more meaningful comparisons to prior periods as the majority of PPP loans outstanding are expected to pay off shortly. See the table below under the heading "Non-GAAP Measurers" which provides a reconciliation of the non-GAAP measures to the information presented under GAAP.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-K contains certain forward-looking statements concerning plans, objectives, future events or performance and assumptions and other statements. These statements are not statements of historical fact. Forward-looking statements may be identified by reference to a future period or periods or by use of forward-looking terminology such as "will," "should," "could," "anticipates," "believes," "expects," "intends," "may," "plans," "pursue," "views" and similar terms or expressions.
Various statements contained in Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," and Item 7A, "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk," of this Form 10-K are forward-looking statements, including, but not limited to statements related to management's views on:
•the banking environment and the economy;
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic ("pandemic") and the Company’s participation in and execution of government programs related to the pandemic;
•competition and market expansion opportunities;
•the interest-rate environment, credit risk and the level of future non-performing assets and charge-offs;
•potential asset and deposit growth, future non-interest expenditures and non-interest income growth;
•expansion strategy; and
•borrowing capacity.
The Company cautions readers that such forward-looking statements reflect numerous assumptions that management believes to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and beyond the Company's control. Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause the Company's actual results to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, the forward-looking statement. Accordingly, we caution you that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance. Any forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K are based on information available to the Company as of the date of this Form 10-K, and the Company undertakes no obligation to publicly update or otherwise revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by applicable law. Therefore, the Company cautions readers not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking information and statements. The following important factors, among others, including those listed in our Item 1A - Risk Factors of this Form 10-K could cause the Company's results for subsequent periods to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statement made herein:
(i)failure of risk management controls and procedures;
(ii)adequacy of the allowance for loan losses;
(iii)risk specific to commercial loans and borrowers;
(iv)changes in the business cycle and downturns in the local, regional, or national economies, including changes in consumer spending and deterioration in the local real estate market, could negatively impact credit and/or asset quality and result in credit losses and increases in the Company's allowance for loan losses;
(v)deterioration of securities markets could adversely affect the value or credit quality of the Company's assets and the availability of funding sources necessary to meet the Company's liquidity needs;
(vi)changes in interest rates could negatively impact net interest income;
(vii)liquidity risks;
(viii)technology-related risk, including technological changes and technology service interruptions or failure could adversely impact the Company's operations and increase technology-related expenditures;
(ix)cybersecurity risk including security breaches and identity theft could impact the Company's reputation, increase regulatory oversight, and impact the financial results of the Company;
(x)increasing competition from larger regional and out-of-state banking organizations as well as non-bank providers of various financial services could adversely affect the Company's competitive position within its market area and reduce demand for the Company's products and services;
(xi)our ability to retain and increase our aggregate assets under management;
(xii)our ability to enter new markets successfully and capitalize on growth opportunities, including the receipt of required regulatory approvals;
(xiii)damage to our reputation in the markets we serve;
(xiv)exposure to legal claims and litigation;
(xv)the inability to raise capital, on terms favorable to us, could cause us to fall below regulatory minimum capital adequacy levels and consequently restrict our business and operations;
(xvi)changes in laws and regulations that apply to the Company's business and operations, and any additional regulations, or repeals that may be forthcoming as a result thereof, could cause the Company to incur additional costs and adversely affect the Company's business environment, operations and financial results;
(xvii)future regulatory compliance costs, including any increase caused by new regulations imposed by the government's current administration;
(xviii)changes in accounting and/or auditing standards, policies and practices, as may be adopted or established by the regulatory agencies, FASB, or the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board could negatively impact the Company's financial results; and
(xix)the risks and uncertainties described in the documents that the Company files or furnishes to the SEC, including those discussed above in Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of this Form 10-K which could have a material adverse effect on the Company's business, financial condition, and results of operations.
Overview
Executive Summary
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $31.5 million, a decrease of $2.7 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Diluted earnings per share were $2.64 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.89 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The decrease in net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was driven primarily by an increase in the provision for loan losses and to a lesser extent an increase in non-interest expense, partially offset by growth in net interest income. The increase in net interest income was due mainly from income from the Company's participation in the PPP and lower deposit interest expense. The provision for loan losses increased in 2020 over the prior year periods as the Company added to general reserves to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s loan portfolio and from an increase in impaired loan reserves.
For 2020, total assets, total loans and total customer deposits increased 24%, 20% and 25%, respectively, compared to December 31, 2019, with loan growth principally coming from PPP loans, which also positively impacted deposit growth. Total core assets and total core loans increased 10% and 3%, respectively, compared to December 31, 2019. Deposit growth in 2020 additionally benefited from government stimulus checks and customers proactively building liquidity in response to the economic uncertainty caused by the pandemic. We anticipate that as the majority of outstanding PPP loans are forgiven or paid off, which we believe will occur principally within the next 6 to 12 months, and as customers spend down their PPP funds, we will experience a reduction in assets, loans, and deposits.
Overall, the Company strategically operates with a long-term mindset that is focused on organic growth and supporting such growth by continually investing in our people, products, services, technology, digital evolution, and both new and existing branches. Our 25th branch located in Lexington, Massachusetts opened in the first quarter of 2020, our 26th branch located in North Andover, Massachusetts opened on January 4, 2021 and our 27th branch located in Londonderry, New Hampshire is expected to open in late 2021 or early 2022, subject to regulatory approval.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The pandemic and its effects have impacted the Company’s financial condition and results of operations, as discussed in this Management Discussion & Analysis. Management underscores that the pandemic may continue to impact the Company's financial condition and results of operations in the coming quarters, particularly due to the economic uncertainty and its potential impact on interest rates, organic growth opportunities and the quality of our loan portfolio. However, the long-term impact of the pandemic on the Company cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
The Company activated its pandemic response team in January 2020, in response to the emergence of the pandemic and has continued to adjust its operations as the pandemic has evolved. For updated information on business and operating changes impacting customers, please visit our website at www.Enterprisebanking.com.
Paycheck Protection Program
As previously noted, the PPP was created by the CARES Act and implemented by the SBA in order to provide loans to help businesses keep their workforce employed during the COVID-19 Pandemic. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company originated 2,762 PPP loans totaling $510.1 million. All qualifying PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the SBA and are included in total loans outstanding. In the fourth quarter, the Company began to receive PPP loan forgiveness payments from the SBA and as of December 31, 2020, 2,633 PPP loans were outstanding totaling $453.1 million. (See Item 1. Business, under the heading "Lending Products," for further information regarding PPP terms)
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had received $17.2 million in PPP related SBA fees and is accreting these fees into interest income over the life of the applicable loans. If a PPP loan is forgiven or paid off before maturity, the remaining unearned fee is recognized into income at that time. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company has recognized $7.2 million in PPP related SBA fees through interest income. The majority of the remaining $10.0 million in fees are expected to be recognized as the PPP loans are forgiven, which we expect to occur over the next several quarters.
In January 2021, the Company is participating in the new round of the PPP authorized by The Economic Aid Act, signed into law on December 27, 2020, which extended the authority of lenders to make PPP loans through March 31, 2021. Through March 1, 2021, the SBA has approved $144.8 million of our customer requests for PPP loans as part of round three of the PPP.
Credit Quality
At December 31, 2020, the Company determined its allowance for loan losses using the incurred loss methodology. The allowance for loan losses totaled $44.6 million, or 1.45%, of total loans outstanding at December 31, 2020, compared to $33.6 million, or 1.31%, at December 31, 2019. The allowance for loan losses to total core loans was 1.69% at December 31, 2020. Total core loans excludes PPP loans, as all qualifying PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the SBA. See "Accounting Policies/Critical Accounting Estimates" below under the heading "Accounting Implications of the Pandemic" information regarding the Company's deferral of the CECL allowance for loan loss methodology.
Management has been proactive with customers since the onset of the pandemic and granted short term payment deferrals to those requesting financial assistance. As of December 31, 2020, short-term payment deferrals due to the COVID-19 pandemic remained active on 47 loans, amounting to $46.7 million, or 2%, of total core loans, compared to 178 loans amounting to $104.1 million, or 4%, of total core loans, as of September 30, 2020 and 1,130 loans amounting to $594.8 million, or 22%, of total core loans, as of June 30, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 50% of the deferred balance consisted of loans that were paying monthly interest and were current. The remaining balance, which amounted to less than 1% of total core loans, was deferred for principal and interest. Of the $46.7 million on active short-term payment deferral at December 31, 2020, $16.6 million were on non accrual. As allowed under the CARES Act and extended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, these short-term deferrals are not included in Trouble Debt Restructurings disclosures.
Non-performing assets are comprised of non-accrual loans and other real estate owned (“OREO”). The Company had no OREO at December 31, 2020, September 30, 2020, or December 31, 2019. Non-performing assets to total core assets amounted to 1.07% at December 31, 2020, compared to 0.61% and 0.46% at September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Non-performing loans to total core loans amounted to 1.45% at December 31, 2020 compared to 0.81% and 0.58% at September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The increase at December 31, 2020, compared to September 30, 2020, consisted of a net increase of $16.4 million, largely related to three commercial relationships which are in industries that have been highly impacted by the pandemic. The Company’s credit rating review and analysis process resulted in these relationships being classified as impaired and non-accrual with a specific reserve allocation of $3.2 million.
Composition of Earnings
The Company's earnings are largely dependent on its net interest income, which is primarily the difference between interest earned on loans and investments and the cost of funding (primarily deposits and borrowings). Net interest income expressed as a percentage of average interest-earning assets is referred to as net interest margin ("margin"). Margin is presented on a tax equivalent basis by
factoring in adjustments associated with tax exempt loans and investments interest income, calculated using the corresponding U.S federal income tax rate, is referred to as tax equivalent net interest margin ("T/E margin").
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $130.1 million, an increase of $14.3 million, or 12%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net interest income was due largely to interest-earning asset growth, primarily in PPP loans, and lower deposit interest expense, partially offset by a decline in T/E margin. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net interest income included $3.5 million in PPP interest income and $7.2 million in PPP related SBA fees.
Average loan balances increased $553.8 million, or 23%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Average core loan balances increased $217.3 million, or 9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
T/E margin was 3.59% and 3.95% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Core net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 3.64%. The lower margin results in 2020 reflected primarily the significant decline in interest rates since the comparable periods that resulted in interest-earning asset yields declining faster than the cost of funding. Interest-earning asset yields were impacted by a 150 basis-point decrease in the Federal Funds rate since December 31, 2019. Term interest rates have also fallen significantly over the respective periods and collectively these interest rate decreases have reduced yields on loan repricing, short-term and overnight investments and interest-earning asset growth. The Company funds these interest-earning assets principally through non-term customer deposits, which were less impacted by the interest rate declines. In addition, T/E margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by a significantly higher year-to-date average balance in lower-yielding short-term and overnight investments of $189.2 million, compared to $80.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The re-pricing frequency of the Company's assets and liabilities are not identical, and therefore subject the Company to the risk of adverse changes in interest rates. This is often referred to as "interest-rate risk" and is reviewed in more detail in Item 7A, "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk," of this Form 10-K.
The allowance for loan losses to total loans ratio was 1.45% at December 31, 2020, compared to 1.31% at December 31, 2019. The allowance for loan losses to total core loans was 1.69% at December 31, 2020. Total core loans excludes PPP loans, as all qualifying PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the SBA. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the provision for loan losses amounted to $12.5 million, compared to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $6.2 million in general reserve factor increases related primarily to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on credit quality, $4.5 million related to net changes in classified and impaired loans and $1.8 million related to loan growth, changes in loan mix and net charge-offs.
See also "Credit Risk," "Asset Quality," and "Allowance for Loan Losses," included in the "Loans" section within "Financial Condition" below, for further information regarding loan quality statistics and the allowance for loan losses.
Non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020, amounted to $17.2 million, an increase of $928 thousand, or 6%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Non-interest income increased in 2020 due primarily to increases in net gains on sales of loans and wealth management fees, partially offset by a decrease in deposit and interchange fees.
Non-interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, amounted to $93.3 million, an increase of $6.8 million, or 8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Increases in non-interest expense in 2020 related primarily to the Company’s strategic growth initiatives, particularly salaries and employee benefits, and to a lesser extent technology and telecommunications expenses. Additionally, FDIC deposit insurance premiums increased primarily because the 2019 expense was positively impacted by a $683 thousand credit from the FDIC Deposit Insurance Fund. The non-interest expense increase was partially offset by lower expenses for advertising and public relations and other operating expenses that decreased because of the pandemic’s impact on business operations.
Sources and Uses of Funds
The Company's primary sources of funds are customer deposits, FHLB borrowings, current earnings and proceeds from the sales, maturities and pay-downs on loans and investment securities. The Company may also, from time to time, utilize brokered deposits, overnight borrowings from correspondent banks and borrowings from the FRB. Additionally, funding for the Company may be generated through equity transactions, including the dividend reinvestment and direct stock purchase plan or exercise of stock options, and occasionally the issuance of debt securities or common stock. The Company's sources of funds are intended to be used to conduct operations and to support growth, by funding loans, and investing in securities, to expand the branch network, and to pay dividends to stockholders.
The investment portfolio is used primarily to provide liquidity, manage the Company's asset-liability position and to invest excess funds, providing additional sources of revenue. Total investments at fair value, a component of interest-earning assets, amounted to $583.0 million at December 31, 2020, an increase of $77.8 million, or 15%, since December 31, 2019 and comprised 15% of total assets at December 31, 2020 and 16% of total assets at December 31, 2019. Total investments at fair value comprised 16% of total core assets at December 31, 2020.
Enterprise's main asset strategy is to grow loans, the largest component of interest-earning assets, with a focus on high quality commercial lending relationships. Total loans, comprising 77% of total assets at December 31, 2020 and 79% of total assets at December 31, 2019, amounted to $3.07 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $2.57 billion at December 31, 2019, an increase of $508.4 million, or 20%, due largely to PPP loan growth. Total core loans, comprising 74% of total core assets at December 31, 2020, amounted to $2.63 billion at December 31, 2020 an increase of $65.3 million, or 3% since December 31, 2019. Total commercial loans amounted to $2.74 billion, or 89% of gross loans, at December 31, 2020, compared to 86% at December 31, 2019. Total core commercial loans amounted to $2.29 billion, or 87% of gross core loans, at December 31, 2020.
Management's preferred strategy for funding asset growth is to grow relationship-based customer deposit balances, preferably comprised of non-interest checking accounts, interest-bearing checking accounts and traditional savings accounts. Asset growth in excess of transactional deposits is typically funded through non-transactional deposits (comprised of money market accounts, commercial tiered rate or "investment savings" accounts and term CDs) and wholesale funding (brokered deposits and borrowed funds).
At December 31, 2020, customer deposits (total deposits excluding brokered deposits) amounted to $3.48 billion, or 87% of total assets, compared to $2.79 billion, or 86% of total assets at December 31, 2019. Since December 31, 2019, customer deposits increased $689.5 million, or 25%, primarily in checking accounts and to a lesser extent money markets. Management believes the deposit growth since December 31, 2019 was due in large part to customers depositing funds received from PPP loan advances and stimulus checks, and generally maintaining higher liquidity in response to the pandemic. See "Deposits" under "Financial Condition" contained in this Item 7 of this Form 10-K for a further breakdown of deposit growth.
Wholesale funding, which may be comprised of brokered deposits and FHLB advances, amounted to $79.8 million at December 31, 2020, or 2% of total assets and total core assets, compared to $96.2 million at December 31, 2019, or 3% of total assets, a decrease of $16.4 million, or 17%. At December 31, 2020, wholesale funding consisted of FHLB advances of $4.8 million, primarily in short-term borrowings and brokered CDs of $75.0 million. At December 31, 2019, wholesale funding included FHLB overnight and short-term advances of $96.2 million. The Company's level of wholesale funding has decreased since December 31, 2019 as increases in customer deposit balances have exceeded loan growth.
On July 7, 2020, the Company issued $60.0 million of fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes. These notes, with an initial fixed rate of 5.25%, are due in 2030 and redeemable at the option of the Company beginning on or after July 15, 2025. Subordinated debt, net of deferred issuance costs, amounted to $73.7 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $14.9 million at December 31, 2019.
Selected Financial Ratios
The following table summarizes a selection of financial ratios identified by the Company as key performance indicators:
_________________________________________
(1) Tax equivalent net interest margin is net interest income adjusted for the tax equivalent effect associated with tax exempt loan and investment income, expressed as a percentage of average interest-earning assets.
Non-GAAP Measures
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. However, certain financial measures and ratios we present, including PPP-adjusted metrics are supplemental measures that are not required by, or are not presented in accordance with, GAAP. These non-GAAP measures are intended to provide the reader with additional supplemental perspectives on operating results, performance trends, and financial condition. Non-GAAP financial measures are not a substitute for GAAP measures; they should be read and used in conjunction with the Company’s GAAP financial information. In addition, the non-GAAP financial measures we present may differ from non-GAAP financial measures used by our peers or other companies.
Certain non-GAAP measures provided in this Form 10-K exclude the outstanding balance of PPP loans that the Company began originating in April 2020, and which are expected to be short-term in nature. We refer to any balance, ratio or measure that excludes PPP loans as “core.” The Company normalized for this activity by excluding PPP loans from the calculations below in order to provide a more meaningful comparison to prior periods.
The following tables summarize the reconciliation of GAAP items to non-GAAP items (1):
_________________________________________
(1) PPP loan adjustments include an elimination of PPP loans, net of unearned SBA fees, as well as interest income on PPP loans and related SBA fee accretion, included in interest income. Period end and average balances were adjusted as applicable.
(2) Total average loans include loans held for sale.
Culture and Organic Growth Strategy
Management's present priorities continue to be the safety and wellness of our team members and customers and on managing through the pandemic and its economic impact. Looking beyond the pandemic, management's priority is on long-term strategic growth initiatives, including investments in employee training and development, fostering diversity, equity and inclusion, cultivating strong community relationships in all markets that we serve, and loan growth funded by customer deposits.
The Company's business model is to provide a full range of diversified financial products and services through a highly trained team of knowledgeable banking professionals, who have an in-depth understanding of our markets and a commitment to open and honest communication with clients. Management believes the Company has differentiated itself from the competition by building a strong reputation within the local market as a customer-centric, and commercially focused, community rooted bank, offering robust product and service lines, including commercial lending, cash management, wealth management and trust services and commercial insurance, delivered by a knowledgeable and dedicated team of community bankers through traditional in-person service and multiple digital delivery channels offering 24/7 remote banking capabilities.
The Company's banking professionals are dedicated to upholding the Company's core values, including significant and active involvement in many charitable and civic organizations, and community development programs throughout our service area. This long-held commitment to community not only contributes to the welfare of the communities we serve, it also helps to fuel the local economy, creating new businesses and jobs, and has led to a strong referral network with local businesses, non-profit organizations and community leaders.
As we face the current period of economic uncertainty, management is committed to utilizing its disciplined and reliable credit management approach, which has served to provide consistent quality asset growth over varying economic cycles during the Company's history. The Company's loan growth initiatives are executed through strong business development and referral efforts, by a seasoned lending team possessing a broad breadth of business acumen and lending experience, supported by a highly qualified and experienced commercial credit review function.
The Company has an ongoing commitment to use scalable technology and digitization to continually improve the customer experience and internal efficiencies and productivity. As part of the Company's multi-year digital evolution strategy, new technology-driven products, services, delivery channels, and process automation are continually introduced. These investments have proved invaluable in keeping our business operating efficiently and effectively for our customers during the pandemic.
Branch evolution includes enhancing our highly-personalized customer interactions, updating technology and delivery methods, and ongoing facility improvements and renovations. New and renovated branches exhibit a modern, open-concept lobby with advanced technology. These branches are supported by our "Relationship Bankers," who are cross trained to fully serve customer needs, and each branch has on-site commercial lenders.
The Company also continually looks to develop new branch locations within, and to complement, our existing footprint. In early March 2020, Enterprise opened its new Lexington, Massachusetts location. Additionally, our 26th branch opened in North Andover, Massachusetts in early 2021 and our 27th branch located in Londonderry, New Hampshire is expected to open in late 2021 or early 2022, subject to regulatory approvals.
While management recognizes that such investments increase expenses in the short term, Enterprise believes that such initiatives are a critical investment in the long-term growth and earnings potential of the Company and will help the Company to capitalize on current opportunities in the marketplace for community banks such as Enterprise. However, lower than expected returns on these investments, such as slower than anticipated loan and deposit growth in new branches, a delay in the timeline for such initiatives due to the current pandemic, or other reasons, and/or lower than expected adoption rates or income generated from new technology or initiatives, could decrease anticipated revenues and net income on such investments in the future.
Financial Condition
Total assets increased $779.3 million, or 24%, since December 31, 2019, to $4.01 billion at December 31, 2020. Total core assets have increased $336.2 million, or 10%, since December 31, 2019. The balance sheet composition and changes since December 31, 2019 are discussed below.
Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents may be comprised of cash on hand and cash items due from banks, interest-earning deposits (deposit accounts, excess reserve cash balances, money markets, and money market mutual funds accounts) and federal funds sold ("fed funds"). Cash and cash equivalents increased $190.0 million since December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents amounted to 6% of total assets and 2% of total assets at December 31, 2019. Cash and cash equivalents amounted to 7% of total core assets at December 31, 2020. Balances in cash and cash equivalents will fluctuate due primarily to the timing of net cash flows from deposits, borrowings, loans and investments, and the immediate liquidity needs of the Company. Management believes customers are generally maintaining higher liquidity in response to the pandemic and have increased cash balances since December 31, 2019. As customer deposit growth outpaced the Company's loan and investments growth during 2020, the excess was held primarily in cash equivalents.
Investments
At December 31, 2020, the fair value of the investment portfolio amounted to $583.0 million, an increase of $77.8 million, or 15%, since December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the investment of funds from growth in customer deposits and increases in market values. The investment portfolio represented 15% of total assets at December 31, 2020 and 16% of total assets at December 31, 2019. The investments portfolio represented 16% of total core assets at December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the investment portfolio was primarily comprised of debt securities, with a small portion of the portfolio invested in equity securities. At both December 31, 2020 and 2019, all investments were carried at fair value and debt securities were classified as available-for-sale.
See Note 2, "Investment Securities," and Note 17, "Fair Value Measurements," to the Company's consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for further information regarding the Company's unrealized gains and losses on debt securities, including information about investments in an unrealized loss position for which impairment has or has not been recognized, and investments pledged as collateral, as well as the Company's fair value measurements for investments.
Debt Securities
The following table summarizes the fair value of debt securities at the dates indicated:
_________________________________________
(1) These categories may include investments issued or guaranteed by government sponsored enterprises such as Fannie Mae ("FNMA"), Freddie Mac ("FHLMC"), Federal Farm Credit Bank ("FFCB"), or one of several Federal Home Loan Banks, as well as investments guaranteed by Ginnie Mae ("GNMA"), a wholly-owned government entity.
(2) CDs represent term deposits issued by banks that are subject to FDIC insurance and purchased on the open market.
Table of Content
As of the dates reflected in the table above, the majority of investments in the residential and commercial federal agency MBS categories were collateralized mortgage obligations ("CMOs") issued by U.S. government agencies. The remaining MBS investments totaled $18.7 million, $23.5 million, and $23.9 million at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Net unrealized gains on the debt securities portfolio amounted to $31.1 million at December 31, 2020 compared to net unrealized of $13.5 million at December 31, 2019. The Company attributes the large increase in net unrealized gains as compared to December 31, 2019 to significant decreases in market yields. Unrealized gains or losses on debt securities are carried on the balance sheet and will be recognized in the statements of income if the investments are sold. Should an investment be deemed to have other than temporary impairment or "OTTI", the Company is required to write-down the fair value of the investment. See "Impairment Review of Investment Securities" under the heading "Accounting Policies/Critical Accounting Estimates" in this Item 7 of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding the accounting for OTTI.
In 2020 and 2019, the Company purchased debt securities totaling $144.5 million and $120.0 million, respectively. The Company also had principal pay downs, calls and maturities totaling $77.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $48.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company realized net gains of $227 thousand on sales of debt securities with an amortized cost of approximately $5.7 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company realized net gains of $146 thousand on sales of debt securities with an amortized cost of approximately $11.6 million.
The contractual maturity distribution as of December 31, 2020 of the debt securities portfolio with the weighted average tax equivalent yield for each category is set forth below:
Scheduled contractual maturities shown above may not reflect the actual maturities of the investments. The actual MBS/CMO cash flows likely will be faster than presented above due to prepayments and amortization. Similarly, included in the table above are callable securities, comprised of municipal securities and corporate bonds, with a fair value of $127.0 million, which can be redeemed by the issuer prior to the maturity presented above. Management considers these factors when evaluating the interest-rate risk in the Company's asset-liability management program.
Equity Securities
The Company held equity securities with a fair value of $746 thousand and $467 thousand at December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded net losses on equity securities of $49 thousand in the Consolidated Statement of Income. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded net gains on equity securities of $367 thousand in the Consolidated Statement of Income. The amount recognized in "Other Income" related to equity securities is dependent primarily on the amount of dollars invested in equities and the magnitude of changes in equity market values.
Table of Content
Federal Home Loan Bank Stock
The Bank is required to purchase stock of the FHLB at par value in association with advances from the FHLB; this stock is classified as a restricted investment and carried at cost, which management believes approximates fair value. The Company's investment in FHLB stock was $1.9 million and $4.5 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
See also Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," Item (d) "Restricted Cash and Investments" to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," of this Form 10-K below, for further information regarding the Company's investment in FHLB stock.
Loans
This discussion should be read in conjunction with the material presented in Item 1, "Business," under the heading "Lending Products" of this Form 10-K.
Total loans represented 77% of total assets at December 31, 2020 and 79% of total assets at December 31, 2019. Total core loans represented 74% of total core assets at December 31, 2020. Total loans increased $508.4 million, or 20%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. PPP loan production, which began in April 2020, accounted for $453.1 million in growth through December 31, 2020. Total core loans increased $65.3 million, or 3% since December 31, 2019. The mix of loans within the portfolio remained relatively unchanged with the core commercial loan portfolio comprising approximately 87% of total core loans at December 31, 2020, compared to 86% at December 31, 2019.
At December 31, 2020, within the commercial loan portfolio, there has been a slight shift as commercial and industrial loans have declined 13% while commercial real estate increased 6%, and commercial construction increased 18%, compared to the respective December 31, 2019 balances.
The following table sets forth the loan balances by certain loan categories at the dates indicated and the percentage of each category to gross loans:
As of December 31, 2020, commercial real estate loans increased $84.1 million, or 6%, compared to December 31, 2019. Commercial real estate loans are typically secured by a variety of owner-use and non-owner occupied (investor) commercial and industrial property types including one-to-four and multi-family apartment buildings, office, industrial or mixed-use facilities, strip shopping centers or other commercial properties and are generally guaranteed by the principals of the borrower.
Commercial and industrial loan balances, excluding PPP loans, decreased $65.6 million, or 13%, as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. The decrease reflects a decline in line utilization on revolving lines as business customers made use of alternative government sponsored funding sources and declines in business activity as a result of the pandemic, as well as general pay downs, maturities, and reduction in originations. These loans include seasonal and formula-based revolving
Table of Content
lines of credit, working capital loans, equipment financing, and term loans. Also included in commercial and industrial loans are loans partially guaranteed by the SBA under various long-established programs (see below regarding the separately disclosed SBA PPP loan portfolio). Commercial and industrial credits may be unsecured loans and lines to financially strong borrowers, loans secured in whole or in part by real estate unrelated to the principal purpose of the loan or secured by inventories, equipment, or receivables, and are generally guaranteed by the principals of the borrower.
Commercial construction loans increased by $55.8 million, or 18%, as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. Commercial construction loans include the development of residential housing and condominium projects, the development of commercial and industrial use property and loans for the purchase and improvement of raw land. These loans are secured in whole or in part by underlying real estate collateral and are generally guaranteed by the principals of the borrowers. In many cases, these loans move into the permanent commercial real estate portfolio when the construction phase is completed. The increase since December 31, 2019 was due primarily to active local construction markets fueled by strong demand for residential and multi-family housing and increased commercial development activity.
As previously noted in Item 1. Business under the heading "Lending Products," the Company is supporting businesses in our communities by participation in the SBA's PPP. All qualifying PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the SBA and are included in total loans outstanding. The SBA began processing forgiveness payments for Bank's customers in October. In 2020, the Company originated 2,762 PPP loans amounting to $510.1 million. Through December 31, 2020, the Company received $53.6 million of forgiveness payments and recognized $10.7 million of interest income, including $7.2 million in PPP related SBA fees.
Total retail loan balances decreased by $8.7 million, or 2%, as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, primarily in home equity loans and lines, partially offset by an increase in residential mortgages. Residential secured one-to-four family mortgage loans continue to make up the largest portion of the retail segment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company originated $59.6 million of residential mortgage loans for sale in the secondary market, receiving gains on loan sales of $1.4 million, compared to originations of $25.6 million and gains of $469 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019.
At December 31, 2020, commercial loan balances participated out to various banks amounted to $65.3 million, compared to $80.2 million at December 31, 2019. These balances participated out to other institutions are not carried as assets on the Company's financial statements. Commercial loans originated by other banks in which the Company is a participating institution are carried at the pro-rata share of ownership and amounted to $77.1 million and $104.3 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In each case, the participating bank funds a percentage of the loan commitment and takes on the related pro-rata risk. The rights and obligations of each participating bank are divided proportionately among the participating banks in an amount equal to their share of ownership and with equal priority among all banks. Each participation is governed by individual participation agreements executed by the lead bank and the participant at loan origination. Participating loans with other institutions provide banks the opportunity to retain customer relationships and reduce credit risk exposure among each participating bank, while providing customers with larger credit vehicles than the individual bank might be willing or able to offer independently.
See also Note 3, "Loans," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for information on related party loans, loans serviced for others and loans pledged as collateral.
Table of Content
The following table sets forth the scheduled maturities of commercial real estate, commercial and industrial and commercial construction loans in the Company's portfolio at December 31, 2020. The table also sets forth the dollar amount of loans which are scheduled to mature after one year which have fixed or adjustable rates.
_________________________________________
(1) Scheduled contractual maturities may not reflect the actual maturities of loans. The average maturity of loans may be shorter than their contractual terms principally due to prepayments and demand features.
(2) Adjustable rate loans may have fixed initial periods before periodic rate adjustments begin.
(3) PPP loan maturities are two or five years; however SBA forgiveness is expected within one year.
Credit Risk
Inherent in the lending process is the risk of loss due to customer non-payment, or "credit risk." The Company's commercial lending focus may entail significant additional credit risks compared to long-term financing on existing, owner-occupied residential real estate. The Company seeks to lessen its credit risk exposure by managing its loan portfolio to avoid concentration by industry, relationship size and source of repayment, and through sound underwriting practices and the credit risk management function; however, management recognizes that loan losses will occur and that the amount of these losses will fluctuate depending on the risk characteristics of the loan portfolio and economic conditions.
The credit risk management function focuses on a wide variety of factors, including, among others, current and expected economic conditions, the real estate market, the financial condition of borrowers, the ability of borrowers to adapt to changing conditions or circumstances affecting their business and the continuity of borrowers' management teams. Early detection of credit issues is critical to minimize credit losses. Accordingly, management regularly monitors these factors, among others, through ongoing credit reviews by the Credit Department, an external loan review service, reviews by members of senior management, as well as reviews by the Loan Committee and the Board. This review includes the assessment of internal credit quality indicators such as, among others, the risk classification of individual loans, individual review of larger and higher risk problem assets, the level of delinquent loans and non-performing loans, impaired and restructured loans, the level of foreclosure activity, net charge-offs, commercial concentrations by industry and property type and by real estate location, as well as trends in the general levels of these indicators and the growth and composition of the loan portfolio. In addition, management monitors expansion in the Company's geographic market areas, the experience level of lenders and any changes in underwriting criteria, and the strength of the local and national economy, including general conditions in the multi-family, commercial real estate and development and construction markets in the Company's local region.
The Company's loan risk rating system classifies loans depending on risk of loss characteristics. The classifications range from "substantially risk free" for the highest quality loans and loans that are secured by cash collateral, through a satisfactory range of "minimal," "moderate," "better than average," and "average" risk, to the regulatory problem-asset classifications of "criticized," for loans that may need additional monitoring, and the more severe adverse classifications of "substandard," "doubtful," and "loss" based on criteria established under banking regulations. Loans which are evaluated to be of weaker credit quality are placed on the "watch credit list" and reviewed on a more frequent basis by management. Loans classified as "substandard" include those characterized by the distinct possibility that the Company will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected. Loans classified as "doubtful" have all the weaknesses inherent in a substandard rated loan with the added characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or full payment from liquidation, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions, and values, highly questionable and improbable. Loans classified as "loss" are generally considered uncollectible at present, although long term recovery of part or all of loan proceeds may be possible. These "loss" loans would require a specific
Table of Content
loss reserve or charge-off. Adversely classified loans may be accruing or in non-accrual status and may be additionally designated as impaired or restructured, or some combination thereof.
Loans on which the accrual of interest has been discontinued are designated as non-accrual loans and the classified portions are credit downgraded to one of the adversely classified categories noted above. Accrual of interest on loans is generally discontinued when a loan becomes contractually past due, with respect to interest or principal, by 90 days, or when reasonable doubt exists as to the full and timely collection of interest or principal. When a loan is placed on non-accrual status, all interest previously accrued but not collected is reversed against current period interest income. Interest accruals are resumed on such loans only when payments are brought current and have remained current for a period of 180 days or when, in the judgment of management, the collectability of both principal and interest is reasonably assured. Interest payments received on loans in a non-accrual status are generally applied to principal on the books of the Company.
Impaired loans are individually significant loans for which management considers it probable that not all amounts due (principal and interest) will be collected in accordance with the original contractual terms. Impaired loans include loans that have been modified in a troubled debt restructuring ("TDR"), see "TDR" below. Impaired loans are individually evaluated and exclude large groups of smaller-balance homogeneous loans, such as residential mortgage loans and consumer loans, which are collectively evaluated for impairment, and loans that are measured at fair value, unless the loan is amended in a TDR.
Management does not set any minimum delay of payments as a factor in reviewing for impaired classification. Management considers the individual payment status, net worth and earnings potential of the borrower, and the value and cash flow of the collateral as factors to determine if a loan will be paid in accordance with its contractual terms.
Loans are designated as a TDR when, as part of an agreement to modify the original contractual terms of the loan as a result of financial difficulties of the borrower, the Bank grants the borrower a concession on the terms that would not otherwise be considered. Typically, such concessions may consist of one or a combination of the following: a reduction in interest rate to a below market rate, taking into account the credit quality of the note, extension of additional credit based on receipt of adequate collateral, or a deferment or reduction of payments (principal or interest), which materially alters the Bank's position or significantly extends the note's maturity date, such that the present value of cash flows to be received is materially less than those contractually established at the loan’s origination. All loans that are modified are reviewed by the Company to identify if a TDR has occurred. TDR loans are included in the impaired loan category and as such, these loans are individually reviewed and evaluated.
In accordance with the provision of the CARES Act and subsequent extension by the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, management has chosen to suspend TDR accounting under GAAP in certain circumstances. See the discussion below regarding Section 4013 of the CARES Act.
Impaired loans are individually evaluated for credit loss and a specific allowance reserve is assigned for the amount of the estimated probable credit loss. When a loan is deemed to be impaired, management estimates the probable credit loss by comparing the loan's carrying value against either: (i) the present value of the expected future cash flows discounted at the loan's effective interest rate; (ii) the loan's observable market price; or (iii) the expected realizable fair value of the collateral, in the case of collateral dependent loans. Impaired loans are charged-off, in whole or in part, when management believes that the recorded investment in the loan is uncollectible.
An impaired or TDR loan classification will be considered for upgrade based on the borrower's sustained performance over time and their improving financial condition. Consistent with the criteria for returning non-accrual loans to accrual status, the borrower must demonstrate the ability to continue to service the loan in accordance with the original or modified terms and, in the judgment of management, the collectability of the remaining balances, both principal and interest, are reasonably assured. In the case of TDR loans having had a modified interest rate, that rate must be at, or greater than, a market rate for a similar credit at the time of modification for an upgrade to be considered.
Real estate acquired by the Company through foreclosure proceedings, or the acceptance of a deed in lieu of foreclosure, is classified as OREO. When property is acquired, it is recorded at the estimated fair value of the property acquired, less estimated costs to sell, establishing a new cost basis. The estimated fair value is based on market appraisals and the Company's internal analysis. Any loan balance in excess of the estimated realizable fair value on the date of transfer is charged to the allowance for loan losses on that date. All costs incurred thereafter in maintaining the property, as well as subsequent declines in fair value are charged to non-interest expense.
Table of Content
Non-performing assets are comprised of non-accrual loans, deposit account overdrafts that are more than 90 days past due and OREO. The designation of a loan or other asset as non-performing does not necessarily indicate that loan principal and interest will ultimately be uncollectible. However, management recognizes the greater risk characteristics of these assets and therefore considers the potential risk of loss on assets included in this category in evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses. The level of delinquent and non-performing assets is largely a function of economic conditions and the overall banking environment and the individual business circumstances of borrowers. Despite prudent loan underwriting, adverse changes within the Company's market area, or deterioration in local, regional, or national economic conditions, could negatively impact the Company's level of non-performing assets in the future.
Section 4013 of the CARES Act provides financial institutions the option to suspend TDR accounting under GAAP in certain circumstances, during the period beginning March 1, 2020 and ending on the earlier of (i) January 1, 2022 (as amended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021), or (ii) the date that is 60 days after the date on which the national emergency concerning the pandemic declared under the National Emergencies Act terminates. The Company has elected to suspend TDR accounting in accordance with the CARES Act, which impacts primarily financial statement disclosure, for loans that have had a short-term payment deferral related to the pandemic, as long as those loans were current and risk rated as “pass” as of December 31, 2019.
Management has been proactive with customers since the onset of the pandemic and granted short term payment deferrals to those requesting financial assistance due to the impact of the pandemic. As of June 30, 2020, at the height of the customer deferral requests, short-term payment deferrals due to the COVID-19 pandemic were granted on 1,130 loans amounting to $594.8 million, or 22% of the portfolio, excluding PPP loans.
As of December 31, 2020, short term payment deferrals were active on 47 loans amounting to $46.7 million, or 2% of the Company's core loan portfolio. The majority of the active deferrals are for loans that were granted subsequent deferrals after the initial three-month deferral period ended. The majority of these loans continue to accrue interest in accordance with their initial terms and are not reported as TDRs.
The following table provides information on loans with short-term payment deferrals as of December 31, 2020, by loan segment.
_________________________________________
(1) Core loans are gross loans excluding PPP loans (a non-GAAP measure)
(2) See loan category balances and percentage of each category to gross loans in table above
Approximately 81% of the loan balances with short-term payment deferrals are included in commercial real estate, commercial construction, residential mortgages, and home equity loans in the table above and are secured primarily by real estate. Commercial and industrial loans with short-term payment deferrals are not secured primarily by real estate but consist generally of smaller balances. At December 31, 2020, the average loan size for commercial and industrial loans with a short-term payment deferral was $400 thousand.
Based on management's review of the loan portfolio and underlying credits, the industries that management considers generally to be most At-Risk from the impact of the pandemic are: retail trade, non-owner occupied-non-residential property, restaurants, hotels, and fitness centers. Collectively, active loan deferrals to these industries amounted to $28.5 million, or 1% of total core gross loans at December 31, 2020, and comprised 61% of the total active deferred balances. These industries are highly impacted by COVID-19 industry specific safety measures and the phased re-opening approaches mandated within our market areas. In addition, loans secured by 1-4 family residential homes or to lessors of residential dwellings had active deferrals of
Table of Content
$3.8 million and comprised 8% of active deferrals at December 31, 2020. These loans may be more impacted by unemployment levels and vacancy rates within the Company’s market areas.
The following table provides information on balances as of December 31, 2020 for industries considered At-Risk.
_________________________________________
(1) Core loans are gross loans excluding PPP loans (a non-GAAP measure)
Management is closely monitoring all deferrals and loans that have recently completed their deferral period and returned to regular payments and highlights that the loans are generally secured by real estate, usually have personal guarantees, and typically are managed by experienced operators. Management will also continue to maintain frequent contact with our commercial customers and to closely evaluate the effect on credit quality across all industry sectors in our diversified loan portfolio as the results of the pandemic unfold in future quarters. The credit quality of our loans could be further impacted, and additional provisions may be necessary.
Table of Content
Asset Quality
The following table sets forth information regarding non-performing assets, TDR loans and delinquent loans 60-89 days past due as to interest or principal, held by the Company at the dates indicated:
As of December 31, 2020, the ratio of adversely classified loans to total core loans was 2.09%, the non-performing loans to total core loans ratio was 1.45% and the non-performing assets to total core assets ratio was 1.07%. Additionally, the allowance for loan losses to total core loans ratio was 1.69% at December 31, 2020. Total core loans excludes PPP loans, as all qualifying PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the SBA.
The majority of non-accrual loans were also carried as adversely classified loans during the periods noted. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company had adversely classified loans (loans carrying "substandard," "doubtful" or "loss" classifications) amounting to $54.9 million and $37.1 million, respectively. The net increase of $17.8 million in adversely classified loans was largely due to downgrades of three commercial relationships amounting to $20.2 million in the aggregate, which are in industries that have been highly impacted by the pandemic, as well as four commercial relationships amounting to $6.6 million, down graded during the year due to their individual business circumstances unrelated to the pandemic. These additions to adversely classified loans were partially offset by payoffs, credit upgrades and charge-offs during the year. Total adversely classified loans amounted to 1.79% of total loans at December 31, 2020, compared to 1.45% at December 2019. Total adversely classified loans amounted to 2.09% of total core loans at December 31, 2020.
Adversely classified loans included in the balances above that were performing but possessed potential weaknesses and, as a result, could ultimately become non-performing loans amounted to $17.0 million at December 31, 2020 and $22.4 million December 31, 2019. The remaining balance of adversely classified loans that were also on non-accrual amounted to $37.9 million and $14.7 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The increase in adversely classified, non-performing loans at December 31, 2020 was due primarily to the increase in non-accruing commercial relationships
Table of Content
discussed above. A small portion of non-accrual loans were not adversely classified and represented balances guaranteed by the SBA.
The increase in adversely classified, non-performing loans at December 31, 2020 was due primarily to an increase in non-accruing commercial relationships, which consisted of the downgrades noted above, partially offset by payoffs, credit upgrades and charge-offs. These relationships were also included in impaired loans at December 31, 2020.
Total impaired loans amounted to $48.3 million and $31.9 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Total accruing impaired loans amounted to $10.3 million and $17.1 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, while non-accrual impaired loans amounted to $38.0 million and $14.8 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
In management's opinion, the majority of impaired loan balances at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were supported by expected future cash flows or, for those collateral dependent loans, the net realizable value of the underlying collateral. Based on management's assessment at December 31, 2020, impaired loans totaling $23.4 million required no specific reserves and impaired loans totaling $24.9 million required specific reserve allocations of $6.2 million. At December 31, 2019, impaired loans totaling $29.5 million required no specific reserves and impaired loans totaling $2.4 million required specific reserve allocations of $1.0 million. The increase in specific reserves since December 31, 2019 was due primarily to four of the newly adverse classified commercial relationships noted above, for which management determined that the additional provisions were necessary based on a review of underlying collateral values, individual business circumstances, and credit metrics. Management closely monitors all impaired relationships for the individual business circumstances, and underlying collateral or credit deterioration to determine if additional reserves are necessary.
Total TDR loans included in the impaired loan amounts above as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were $17.7 million and $21.1 million, respectively. TDR loans on accrual status amounted to $10.3 million and $17.1 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. TDR loans included in non-performing loans amounted to $7.5 million and $4.0 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The Company continues to work with customers and enters into loan modifications (which may or may not be TDRs) to the extent deemed to be necessary or appropriate while attempting to achieve the best mutual outcome given the individual financial circumstances and prospects of the borrower. See the discussion above regarding Section 4013 of the CARES Act that provides financial institutions the option to suspend TDR accounting under GAAP in certain circumstances, which impacts TDR disclosures for loans that have had a short-term payment deferral related to the pandemic.
The Company carried no OREO at December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, there were no additions or sales of OREO. During the year ended December 31, 2019, there was one addition and subsequent sale of OREO. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, there were no write downs of OREO.
Allowance for Loan Losses
As noted above, the Company has elected to delay the implementation of CECL and expects to adopt CECL in 2021.
The allowance for loan losses is an estimate of probable credit loss inherent in the loan portfolio as of the specified balance sheet dates. On a quarterly basis, management prepares an estimate of the allowance necessary to cover estimated probable credit losses. The Company maintains the allowance at a level that it deems adequate to absorb all reasonably anticipated probable losses from specifically known and other probable credit risks associated with the portfolio.
Except for loans specifically identified as impaired, as discussed above, the estimate is a two-tiered approach that allocates loan loss reserves to "regulatory problem asset" loans by classified credit rating and to non-classified loans by credit type. The general loss allocations take into account quantitative historic loss experience, qualitative factors, as well as regulatory guidance and industry data. The allowance for loan losses is established through a provision for loan losses, which is a direct charge to earnings. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when management believes that the collectability of the loan principal is unlikely. Recoveries on loans previously charged-off are credited to the allowance.
In making its assessment on the adequacy of the allowance, management considers several quantitative and qualitative factors that could have an effect on the credit quality of the portfolio. Management closely monitors the credit quality of individual delinquent and non-performing relationships, the levels of impaired and adversely classified loans, net charge-offs, the growth
Table of Content
and composition of the loan portfolio, expansion in geographic market area, the experience level of lenders and any changes in underwriting criteria, and the strength of the local and national economy, among other factors.
The level of delinquent and non-performing assets is largely a function of economic conditions and the overall banking environment and the individual business circumstances of borrowers. Despite prudent loan underwriting, adverse changes within the Company’s market area, or deterioration in local, regional, or national economic conditions, could negatively impact management's estimate of probable credit losses.
Management continues to closely monitor the necessary allowance levels, including specific reserves. The allowance for loan losses to total loans ratio was 1.45% at December 31, 2020 compared to 1.31% at December 31, 2019. The allowance for loan losses to total core loans was 1.69% at December 31, 2020. Total core loans excludes PPP loans, as all qualifying PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the SBA. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the provision for loan losses amounted to $12.5 million, compared to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $6.2 million in general reserve factor increases related primarily to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on credit quality, $4.5 million related to net changes in classified and impaired loans and $1.8 million related to loan growth, changes in loan mix and net charge-offs.
Based on the foregoing, as well as management's judgment as to the existing credit risks inherent in the loan portfolio, as discussed above under the headings "Credit Risk" and "Asset Quality," management believes that the Company's allowance for loan losses is adequate to absorb probable losses from specifically known and other probable credit risks associated with the portfolio as of December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth the allocation of the Company's allowance for loan losses among the categories of loans and the percentage of loans in each category to gross loans for the periods ending on the respective dates indicated:
The allocation of the allowance for loan losses above reflects management's judgment of the relative risks of the various categories of the Company's loan portfolio. This allocation should not be considered an indication of the future amounts or types of possible loan charge-offs. Management believes the SBA PPP portfolio to be of minimal credit risk, the average loan size was approximately $180 thousand, and Management expects that, based on its due diligence at origination and in the forgiveness application process, the majority of balances will be forgiven, with any remaining balance guaranteed by the SBA.
See also Note 4, "Allowance for Loan Losses," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for further information regarding credit quality and the allowance for loan losses. See also Item 1A. "Risk Factors" for additional information on credit risks.
Table of Content
The following table summarizes the activity in the allowance for loan losses for the periods indicated:
Deposits
Total deposits amounted to $3.55 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $764.5 million, or 27%, compared to December 31, 2019. Total deposits as a percentage of total assets were 88% at December 31, 2020 and 86% at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, customer deposits amounted to $3.48 billion, an increase of $689.5 million, or 25%, since December 31, 2019.
Table of Content
The following table sets forth the deposit balances by certain categories at the dates indicated and the percentage of each category to total deposits:
_________________________________________
(1) Brokered CDs which are individually $250,000 and under.
As of December 31, 2020, customer deposits increased $689.5 million, or 25%, since December 31, 2019, and $968.3 million, or 39%, since December 31, 2018. Since December 31, 2019, the largest growth occurred in checking accounts and to a lesser extent money markets and was due in large part to customers depositing funds received from PPP loan advances and stimulus checks, and generally maintaining higher liquidity in response to the pandemic. We anticipate that as customers spend down their PPP loan funds, this will result in a reduction in deposits.
The Company offers its customers the ability to enhance FDIC insurance coverage by electing to participate a portion of their deposit balance into nationwide deposit networks, with an equal and reciprocal balance deposited to the Company through the network. The Company’s total customer deposit balances reflect the reciprocal deposits received from other banks' customers participating in the programs. Essentially, the equivalent of the original customers' deposited funds comes back to the Company and are carried within the appropriate category under total customer deposits. The Company's balances in these reciprocal products were $508.4 million, $419.7 million, and $342.4 million at December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019, and December 31, 2018, respectively. Savings accounts are not eligible for this program.
Management may, from time-to-time utilize brokered deposits as a cost effective wholesale funding source to support continued loan growth. Brokered deposits may be comprised of non-reciprocal insured overnight deposits and term funding gathered from nationwide bank networks or term deposits from large money center banks. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2018, brokered deposits amounted to $75.0 million and $56.8 million, respectively. At December 31, 2019, the Company had no brokered deposits. Brokered deposits at December 31, 2020 were comprised of short-term brokered CDs utilized to hedge against adverse interest rate movements through interest-rate swaps.
The following table shows the scheduled maturities of CDs greater than $250,000:
Table of Content
The table below sets forth a comparison of the Company's average deposits and average rates paid for the periods indicated, as well as the percentage of each deposit category to total average deposits. The annualized average rate on total deposits reflects both interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing deposits.
Borrowed Funds
Borrowed funds, comprised of FHLB borrowings and other borrowings, amounted to $4.8 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $96.2 million at December 31, 2019, decreasing $91.4 million, or 95%. The Company's primary borrowing source is the FHLB, but the Company may choose to borrow from other established business partners. Outstanding borrowings from the FHLB typically have been comprised of overnight or short-term borrowings and term advances linked to outstanding commercial loans under various community reinvestment programs of the FHLB, which represents the majority of the balance at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, borrowed funds consisted of FHLB borrowings only. The majority of the FHLB advances outstanding at December 31, 2019 were overnight advances, which the Company paid down in 2020 as the Bank's liquidity increased.
The Company may also from time-to-time use interest-rate swaps to hedge against adverse interest rate movements of short-term FHLB advances.
At December 31, 2020, the Bank had the capacity to borrow additional funds from the FHLB of up to approximately $500.0 million and the capacity to borrow from the FRB Discount Window of approximately $215.0 million.
In April 2020, the Company established access to the PPPLF, which provides funding secured by PPP pledged loans. Advances issued under the PPPLF are non-recourse. The amount and term of an advance matches the amount and remaining term of the PPP loans pledged. Due to deposit growth in large part from customers depositing funds received from PPP loan advances and generally maintaining higher liquidity in response to the pandemic, the Company did not have any borrowings outstanding under the PPPLF at December 31, 2020. The Bank had the ability to borrow up to approximately $453.1 million under the PPPLF at December 31, 2020, in addition to the Discount Window capacity noted above.
Table of Content
The table below shows the comparison of the Company's average borrowed funds and average rates paid for the periods indicated:
The category "Other borrowed funds" represents overnight advances from the FRB Discount Window, or borrowings from correspondent banks, advanced as part of our annual test of these external funding facilities.
For additional information on the composition of borrowed funds, including weighted average rates and maturities, and maximum borrowing outstanding at any month end, see Note 8, "Borrowed Funds and Subordinated Debt," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Subordinated Debt
The Company had outstanding subordinated debt, net of deferred issuance costs, of $73.7 million at December 31, 2020 and $14.9 million at December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018.
The Company has two subordinated note issuances outstanding, $15.0 million fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes issued in January 2015 (the "2015 Notes") and $60.0 million of fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes issued on July 7, 2020 (the "2020 Notes").
The 2020 Notes carry an initial fixed rate of 5.25%, are due in 2030 and are redeemable at the option of the Company beginning on or after July 15, 2025.
The 2015 Notes carry an initial fixed rate of 6.00% per annum through January 30, 2025, after which the notes will adjust monthly, the notes are due 2030 and are currently callable by the Company at a premium.
See also Note 8, "Borrowed Funds and Subordinated Debt," to the Company's consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for further information regarding the Company's subordinated notes' rates and call features.
Derivatives and Hedging
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company entered into three pay fixed, receive float interest rate swaps to hedge the variable cash flows associated with the Company's short-term wholesale funding to add stability to interest expense and to manage its exposure to interest rate movements. The combined notional value of these swaps, maturing in three to five years, was $75.0 million at December 31, 2020 and the fair value carried as a liability on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheet was $2.8 million.
The Company also has a "Back-to-Back Swap" program whereby the Bank enters into an interest-rate swap with qualified commercial banking customers and simultaneously enters into an equal and opposite interest-rate swap with a swap counterparty. The customer interest-rate swap agreement allows commercial banking customers to convert a floating-rate loan payment to a fixed-rate payment. The notional value of interest-rate swaps with customers increased to $38.0 million at December 31, 2020 from $22.8 million at December 31, 2019. The fair value of assets and corresponding liabilities associated with these swaps and carried on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets was $2.3 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $625 thousand at December 31, 2019.
See also Note 9, "Derivatives and Hedging Activities," to the Company's consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for further information regarding the Company's derivatives and hedging.
Table of Content
Liquidity
Liquidity is the ability to meet cash needs arising from, among other things, fluctuations in loans, investments, deposits, and borrowings. Liquidity management is the coordination of activities so that cash needs are anticipated and met readily and efficiently. The Company's liquidity policies are set and monitored by the Company's Board. The duties and responsibilities related to asset-liability management matters are also covered by the Board. The Company's asset-liability objectives are to engage in sound balance sheet management strategies, maintain liquidity, provide and enhance access to a diverse and stable source of funds, provide competitively priced and attractive products to customers and conduct funding at a low-cost relative to current market conditions. Funds gathered are used to support current commitments, to fund earning asset growth, and to take advantage of selected leverage opportunities.
The Company's liquidity is maintained by projecting cash needs, balancing maturing assets with maturing liabilities, monitoring various liquidity ratios, monitoring deposit flows, maintaining cash flow within the investment portfolio, and maintaining wholesale funding resources.
At December 31, 2020, the Company's primary wholesale funding sources were collateralized borrowing capacity at the FHLB and brokered deposits markets. In addition, the Company maintains secondary wholesale funding resources comprised of uncommitted overnight fed fund purchase arrangements with correspondent banks, access to collateralized line of credit with the FRB Discount Window and access to the PPPLF, which provides funding secured by PPP loans pledged as collateral.
Management believes that the Company has adequate liquidity to meet its obligations. However, if general economic conditions, the pandemic, or other events, cause these sources of external funding to become restricted or are eliminated, the Company may not be able to raise adequate funds or may incur substantially higher funding costs or operating restrictions in order to raise the necessary funds to support the Company's operations and growth.
The Company has in the past also increased capital and liquidity by offering for sale shares of the Company's common stock and through the issuance of subordinated debt. On July 7, 2020, the Company issued $60.0 million of fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes. For additional information on the Company's capital planning, see the section entitled "Capital Resources" contained in Item 1, "Business," of this Form 10-K.
Capital Adequacy
The Company is subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. The Company's capital policies and capital levels are monitored internally on a quarterly basis and capital planning is reviewed at least annually by the Board.
Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate or result in certain mandatory and possible additional discretionary supervisory actions by regulators, which if undertaken, could have a material adverse effect on the Company's consolidated financial condition. At December 31, 2020, the capital levels of both the Company and the Bank complied with all applicable minimum capital requirements of the Federal Reserve Board and the FDIC, respectively. Additionally, the Company met the definition of "well-capitalized" under the applicable Federal Reserve Board regulations and the Bank qualified as "well-capitalized" under the prompt corrective action regulations of Basel III and the FDIC.
Table of Content
The Company's and the Bank's actual capital amounts and ratios are presented as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 in the tables below:
_________________________________________
(1) Before application of the capital conservation buffer of 2.50% as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. See Note 12, "Stockholders' Equity." to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for further information regarding the capital conservation buffer.
(2) For the Bank to qualify as "well-capitalized," it must maintain at least the minimum ratios listed under the regulatory prompt corrective action framework. This framework does not apply to the Company.
On July 7, 2020, the Company issued $60.0 million of fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due in 2030 and redeemable at the option of the Company beginning on or after July 15, 2025. The notes are classified as Tier 2 regulatory capital for the Company. The Company invested $53.0 million of the net proceeds from the issuance into the Bank, where it is classified as Tier 1 regulatory capital.
Table of Content
See also "Capital Resources," and within the "Supervision and Regulation," section "Capital Requirements," "Capital Requirements under Basel III," and for the Bank, "Capital Adequacy Requirements," all contained in Item 1 of this Form 10-K, and Note 12, "Stockholders' Equity," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for additional information regarding the capital requirements applicable to the Company and the Bank and their respective capital levels at December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The Company is required to make future cash payments under various contractual obligations. The following table summarizes the contractual cash obligations at December 31, 2020:
See also Note 7, "Deposits," Note 8, "Borrowed Funds and Subordinated Debt," Note 6, "Leases," and Note 13, "Employee Benefit Plans," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for further information regarding non-term deposits and CDs, FHLB borrowings and subordinated debt, operating lease obligations, and supplement retirement plans.
The Company is also party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers. The instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk in excess of the amount recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The contractual amounts of these instruments reflect the extent of involvement the Company has in the particular classes of financial instruments.
The following table summarizes the contractual commitments at December 31, 2020:
_________________________________________
(1) Offsetting positions to these interest-rate swaps offered to commercial loan customers are entered into with a counterparty. Notional principal amounts are not actually exchanged.
See also Note 10, "Commitments, Contingencies and Financial Instruments with Off-Balance Sheet Risk and Concentrations of Credit Risk," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for further information regarding unadvanced loans and lines, commitments to originate loans, letters of credit and commitments to
Table of Content
originate loans for sale or to sell loans. See Note 9, "Derivatives and Hedging Activities," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for further information regarding customer related interest-rate swaps.
Assets Under Management
Total assets under management, include total assets, loans serviced for others and investment assets under management. Loans serviced for others and investment assets under management are not carried as assets on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheet, and as such, total assets under management is not a financial measurement recognized under GAAP, however management believes its disclosure provides information useful in understanding the trends in total assets under management.
The Company provides a wide range of wealth management and wealth services, including brokerage, trust, and investment management. Also included in the investment assets under management total are customers' commercial sweep arrangements that are invested in third-party money market mutual funds.
Investment assets under management, which are reflected at fair market value, increased $87.2 million, or 10%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 since December 31, 2019 and increased $203.1 million, or 25%, since December 31, 2018. The increase since December 31, 2019 in investment assets under management was due primarily to asset growth from market appreciation along with strong new customer growth.
Total assets under management increased $849.6 million, or 20%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 since December 31, 2019 and $1.2 billion, or 32% since December 31, 2018. Total core assets under management increased $406.5 million, or 10%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 since December 31, 2019 and $799.7 million, or 21% since December 31, 2018.
The following table sets forth the value of assets under management and its components at the dates indicated:
Table of Content
Results of Operations
COMPARISON OF YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 AND 2019
Unless otherwise indicated, the reported results are for the year ended December 31, 2020 with the "same period," the "comparable year" and "prior year" being the year ended December 31, 2019. Average yields are presented on a tax equivalent basis.
Certain balances, ratios or other measures of the Company’s performance have been adjusted to exclude the impact of PPP loans in order to provide more meaningful comparisons to prior periods as the majority of PPP loans outstanding are expected to be short-term in nature. We refer to the measures adjusted to exclude PPP loans as "core." See the table under the heading "Non-GAAP Measurers" above which provides a reconciliation of the non-GAAP measures to the information presented under GAAP.
Net Income
The Company's net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $31.5 million, a decrease of $2.7 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Diluted earnings per share were $2.64 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $2.89 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Interest Income and Margin
The Company's net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $130.1 million, an increase of $14.3 million, or 12%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net interest income was due largely to interest-earning asset growth, primarily in PPP loans, and lower deposit interest expense, partially offset by a decline in margin. Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020, included $3.5 million in PPP interest income and $7.2 million in PPP related SBA fees. The Company's margin was 3.55% for years ended December 31, 2020 and was 3.89% for year ended December 31, 2019.
Tax equivalent net interest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 was $131.6 million compared to $117.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $14.1 million, or 12%. T/E Margin was 3.59% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 3.95% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Core T/E margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 3.64%. The lower margin results in 2020 reflected primarily the significant decline in interest rates since the comparable periods that resulted in interest-earning asset yields declining faster than the cost of funding. Interest-earning asset yields were impacted by a 150 basis-point decrease in the Federal Funds rate since December 31, 2019. Term interest rates have also fallen significantly over the respective periods and collectively these interest rate decreases have reduced yields on loan repricing, short-term and overnight investments and interest-earning asset growth. The Company funds these interest-earning assets principally through non-term customer deposits, which were less impacted by the interest rate declines. In addition, T/E margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by a significantly higher year-to-date average balance in lower-yielding short-term and overnight investments of $189.2 million, compared to $80.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest and Dividend Income
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total interest and dividend income amounted to $144.8 million, an increase of $7.7 million, or 6%, compared to the prior year. The increase was due largely to interest-earning asset growth, primarily in PPP loans, partially offset by a decline in loan yields. Average balances of interest-earning assets increased $688.4 million, or 23%, while the average yields on interest-earning assets decreased 67 basis points. The decrease in loan yields since the prior period is due primarily to the significant decline in interest rates since the comparable period as discussed above.
Interest Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total interest expense amounted to $14.7 million, a decrease of $6.5 million, or 31%, compared to the prior year, due primarily to decreases in deposit market rates during 2020. The average cost of funding, including the impact of non-interest deposit accounts, decreased 34 basis points. The average cost of checking, saving and money market accounts decreased 49 basis points and the average cost of CDs decreased 33 basis points. Partially offsetting the decrease in interest expense were higher average balances of interest-bearing deposits. Non-term customer deposits were less impacted than the interest-earning assets by the interest rate declines discussed above.
Table of Content
Non-interest deposit accounts are an important component of the Company's core funding strategy. The average balance of non-interest checking deposits increased $330.0 million, or 42%, as compared to the same period in 2019. This non-interest-bearing funding source represented 33% of total average deposit balances for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 29% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest rate risk is reviewed in detail under the heading Item 7A, "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk," of this Form 10-K below.
Table of Content
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table sets forth, on a tax-equivalent basis, the extent to which changes in interest rates and changes in the average balances of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities have affected interest income and expense for the period indicated. For each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, information is provided on changes attributable to: (i) volume (change in average portfolio balance multiplied by prior year average rate); and (ii) interest rate (change in average interest rate multiplied by prior year average balance). Changes attributable to the combined impact of volume and rate have been allocated proportionately based on absolute value to the changes due to volume and the changes due to rate.
_________________________________________
(1) Income on other interest-earning assets includes interest on deposits, and fed funds sold, and dividends on FHLB stock.
The table on the following page presents the Company's average balance sheet, net interest income and average rates for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Table of Content
_______________________________________
(1)Average yields and interest income are presented on a tax equivalent basis, calculated using a U.S federal income tax rate of 21% in 2020, 2019 and 2018, based on tax equivalent adjustments associated with tax exempt loans and investments interest income.
(2)Average loans and loans held for sale include non-accrual loans and are net of average deferred loan fees.
(3)Average investment balances are presented at average amortized cost.
(4)Average other interest-earning assets includes interest-earning deposits, fed funds sold, and FHLB stock.
(5)The subordinated debt is net of average deferred debt issuance costs.
Table of Content
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses amounted to $12.5 million and $1.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $11.3 million compared to 2019. The provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $6.2 million in general reserve factor increases related primarily to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on credit quality, $4.5 million related to net changes in classified and impaired loans and $1.8 million related to loan growth, changes in loan mix and net charge-offs. The 2019 provision was impacted by generally positive credit metrics, partially offset by loan growth during the year.
In determining the provision to the allowance for loan losses, management takes into consideration the level of loan growth and an estimate of credit risk, which includes such items as adversely classified and non-performing loans, the estimated specific reserves needed for impaired loans, the level of net charge-offs, and the estimated impact of current economic conditions on credit quality. The provision reflects management’s estimate of the loan loss allowance necessary to support the level of credit risk inherent in the portfolio during the period.
See also "Credit Risk," "Asset Quality," and "Allowance for Loan Losses" included in the section entitled "Financial Condition," contained in this Item 7 of this Form 10-K above, for further information regarding the provision for loan losses.
Non-Interest Income
Non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $17.2 million, an increase of $928 thousand, or 6%, compared to 2019.
The following table sets forth the components of non-interest income and the related changes for the periods indicated:
Net gains on sales of loans increased due to the higher volume of loans originated for sale in 2020, due primarily to lower interest rates as compared to 2019.
Wealth management fee increases were primarily attributable to asset growth from market appreciation along with strong new customer growth.
Deposit and interchange fees decreased due primarily to lower deposit overdraft fees from customers maintaining higher deposit balances.
Non-Interest Expense
Non-interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $93.3 million, an increase of $6.8 million, or 8%, compared to the prior year.
Table of Content
The following table sets forth the components of non-interest expense and the related changes for the periods indicated:
Salaries and employee benefits increased since the prior year primarily to support the Company's strategic growth and market expansion initiatives. During 2020, there were also several pandemic associated expenditures.
The increase in technology and telecommunications expenses compared to the prior year was primarily due to higher infrastructure costs and expenses associated with the Company's multi-year digital transformation strategy to enhance operating efficiency, product delivery, and customer experience.
Deposit insurance premiums increased during 2020 due to the Company's growth, and due to the 2019 expense having been positively impacted by a $683 thousand credit from the FDIC Deposit Insurance Fund.
Other operating expenses decreased due primarily to the pandemic resulting in lower employee-related expenses such as training, dues and entertainment, and travel.
Income Tax Expense
The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 24.4% and for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 23.3%. Refer to Note 15, "Income Taxes," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, for additional information about the Company's tax positions.
Results of Operations Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For a comparison of the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, see Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with SEC on March 10, 2020.
Accounting Policies/Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company's significant accounting policies are described in Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," of this Form 10-K. In applying these accounting policies, management is required to exercise judgment in determining many of the methodologies, assumptions and estimates to be utilized. Certain of the critical accounting estimates are more dependent on such judgment and in some cases may contribute to volatility in the Company's reported financial performance should the assumptions and estimates used be incorrect or change over time due to changes in circumstances. The three most significant areas in which management applies critical assumptions and estimates include the areas described further below.
Table of Content
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is an estimate of probable credit loss inherent in the loan portfolio as of the specified balance sheet dates. The allowance for loan losses is established through a provision for loan losses, a direct charge to earnings. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when management believes that the collectability of the loan principal is unlikely. Recoveries on loans previously charged-off are credited to the allowance. The Company maintains the allowance at a level that it deems adequate to absorb all reasonably anticipated probable losses from specifically known and other credit risks associated with the portfolio. Arriving at an appropriate level of allowance for loan losses involves a high degree of management judgment.
The Company uses a systematic methodology to measure the amount of estimated loan loss exposure inherent in the portfolio for purposes of establishing a sufficient allowance for loan losses. The methodology makes use of specific reserves for loans individually evaluated and deemed impaired, and general reserves for larger groups of homogeneous loans, which are collectively evaluated relying on a combination of qualitative and quantitative factors that may affect credit quality of the pool.
Management believes that the Company's allowance for loan losses is adequate to absorb probable losses from specifically known and other probable credit risks associated with the portfolio as of the balance sheet dates reflected in this annual report. While management uses available information to recognize losses on loans, future additions to the allowance may be necessary. In addition, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review the Company's allowance for loan losses. Such agencies may require the Company to recognize additions to the allowance based on judgments different from those of management.
Management's assessment of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses is contained under "Loans" with the subheadings "Credit Risk," "Asset Quality," and "Allowance for Loan Losses," included in the section "Financial Condition," contained in this Item 7 of this Form 10-K.
Accounting Implications of the Pandemic
In the first quarter of 2020, the Company, in accordance with the provisions of the CARES Act, chose to delay its implementation of the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Update 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, including the CECL methodology for estimating the allowance for credit losses. Under the CARES Act, companies could delay the implementation of CECL until the earlier of (i) the date on which the national emergency concerning the COVID-19 pandemic terminates, or (ii) December 31, 2020.
The Consolidated Appropriation Act, which was signed into law on December 27, 2020, extended the period during which companies may delay the implementation of CECL until the earlier of (i) the first day of the fiscal year that begins after the national emergency termination date or (ii) January 1, 2022.
While the Company has not yet adopted the CECL methodology for estimating the allowance for credit losses, it estimates that as of December 31, 2020, under the CECL methodology, the total allowance for credit loan losses, including the reserve for unfunded commitments, would have amounted to approximately $53.0 to $55.0 million and increased the total allowance for credit losses to total core loans ratio from 1.69% to a range of 2.00% to 2.10%. The Company expects to adopt CECL in 2021. The estimated total increase in the allowance for credit losses is approximately $6.0 million to $8.0 million, net of taxes, that will be recorded through equity as the CECL day one implementation adjustment.
See Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," Item (w) "Recent Accounting Pronouncements," under the heading "Accounting pronouncements not yet adopted by the Company" to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for information regarding the Company's adoption of CECL.
Impairment Review of Investment Securities
There are inherent risks associated with the Company's investment activities that could adversely impact the fair value and the ultimate collectability of the Company's investments. The Company primarily invests in debt securities. At December 31, 2020, the Company also held immaterial amounts of equity securities and FHLB stock.
Management regularly reviews the portfolio for debt securities with unrealized losses to determine if any of the unrealized losses are OTTI. The determination of OTTI involves a high degree of judgment. While management uses available information
Table of Content
to measure OTTI at the balance sheet date, future write-downs may be necessary based on extended duration of current unrealized losses, changing market conditions, or circumstances surrounding individual issuers.
If a debt investment is deemed to have an unrealized loss that is OTTI, the Company is required to write-down the investment. For debt securities, OTTI is generally recognized through a charge to earnings as of the balance sheet date, while non-OTTI unrealized losses are recognized in other comprehensive income. Unrealized losses on debt securities are deemed OTTI if (i) the Company intends to sell the security, (ii) it is more likely than not that the Company will be required to sell the security before recovery, or (iii) a credit loss exists, and the Company does not expect to recover the entire amortized cost. For debt securities that have a credit loss, any portion of the loss related to other factors is recorded in other comprehensive income. Once written down, the previous charge may not be recovered through earnings until sale or maturity, if in excess of its new cost basis. Any OTTI charges, depending upon the magnitude of the charges, could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations.
Based on this impairment review, management determined that there were no debt securities carried in the Company's investment securities portfolio at December 31, 2020 that were deemed other-than-temporarily impaired.
Management's assessment of impairment of the unrealized losses on debt securities in the investment portfolio is contained in Note 2, "Investment Securities," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below.
For information of the Company's OTTI assessment of FHLB stock, see Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," Item (d), "Restricted Cash and Investments," to the Company’s consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below for further information.
Impairment Review of Goodwill
In accordance with GAAP, the Company does not amortize goodwill and instead, at least annually, evaluates whether the carrying value of goodwill has become impaired. A determination that goodwill has become impaired results in an immediate write-down of goodwill to its determined value with a resulting charge to the Company's Consolidated Statement of Income. Goodwill is evaluated at the reporting unit level. In the case of the Company, the services offered through the Bank and subsidiaries are managed as one strategic unit and represent the Company's only reportable operating segment.
The Company has the option to perform either (i) a qualitative assessment of whether it is "more likely than not" that the reporting unit's fair value is less than its book value, or (ii) a quantitative assessment.
1.Management's qualitative assessment would take into consideration, among other items, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost or margin factors, financial performance and share price. Based on the qualitative assessment, if the Company were to conclude: (a) it is "more likely than not" that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its book value, goodwill is deemed not impaired, or (b) it is "more likely than not" that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its book value, a quantitative goodwill analysis must be performed.
2.The Company may elect to forgo the qualitative assessment and perform the quantitative analysis even if management does not believe that is "more likely than not" that goodwill is impaired. The quantitative goodwill analysis compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its book value, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit equals or exceeds its book value, goodwill is deemed not impaired. If the book value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, a goodwill impairment loss is recognized for the difference between these amounts, not exceeding the goodwill carrying amount.
At December 31, 2020, based on the Company's qualitative analysis, goodwill was deemed not to be impaired.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," Item (w) "Recent Accounting Pronouncements," to the Company's consolidated financial statements, contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K below, for information regarding recent accounting pronouncements.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The Company's asset and liability structure is substantially different from that of an industrial company in that virtually all assets and liabilities of the Company are monetary in nature. Management believes the impact of inflation on financial results depends upon the Company's ability to react to changes in interest rates and by such reaction, reduce the inflationary impact on performance. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction, or at the same magnitude, as the prices of other goods and services. As discussed previously, management seeks to manage the relationship between interest rate-sensitive assets and liabilities in order to protect against wide net interest income fluctuations, including those resulting from inflation.
Various information shown elsewhere in this annual report will assist in the understanding of how well the Company is positioned to react to changing interest rates and inflationary trends. In particular, additional information related to the margin sensitivity analysis is contained in