Item 7. Trustee’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This document contains forward-looking statements, which describe current expectations or forecasts of future events. Please refer to “Forward-Looking Statements” which follows the Table of Contents of this report for an explanation of these types of statements and their limitations. All information regarding operations has been provided by Greylock Energy.
Overview
The Trust is a statutory trust created under the Delaware Statutory Trust Act. The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A. serves as Trustee. The Trust does not conduct any operations or activities. The Trust’s purpose is, in general, to hold the Royalty Interests, to distribute to the Trust unitholders cash that the Trust receives in respect of the Royalty Interests after payment of Trust expenses, and to perform certain administrative functions in respect of the Royalty Interests and the Trust units. The Trustee has no authority or responsibility for, and no involvement with, any aspect of the oil and gas operations on the properties to which the Royalty Interests relate. The Trust derives all or substantially all of its income and cash flows from the Royalty Interests. The Trust is treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes.
The Trust’s reserves and quarterly cash distributions are highly dependent upon the prices realized from the sale of natural gas. The markets for these commodities are volatile, as demonstrated by significant price swings experienced during 2019 and in 2020, which was attributable primarily to the economic effects of the global outbreak of the novel form of coronavirus known as COVID-19.
In November 2017, Greylock Energy, LLC and certain of its wholly owned subsidiaries (“Greylock Energy”), including Greylock Production, LLC (“Greylock Production”), which serves as operator of the subject wells, and Greylock Midstream, LLC (“Greylock Midstream”), whose subsidiaries market and gather certain of the gas, acquired substantially all of the gas production and midstream assets of Legacy ECA, including all of Legacy ECA’s interests in certain natural gas properties that are subject to royalty interests held by the Trust (the “Acquisition”).
In connection with the Acquisition, Greylock Production assumed all of Legacy ECA’s obligations under the Trust Agreement and other instruments to which Legacy ECA and the Trustee were parties at the time of the transaction, including (1) the Administrative Services Agreement by and among Legacy ECA, the Trust and the Trustee dated July 7, 2010, and (2) a letter agreement between Legacy ECA and the Trustee regarding certain loans to be made by Legacy ECA to the Trust as necessary to enable the Trust to pay its liabilities as they become due (the “Letter Agreement”). In addition, Legacy ECA, Greylock Production, and the Trustee entered into a Reaffirmation and Amendment of Mortgage, Assignment of Leases, Security Agreement, Fixture Filing and Financing Statement (the “Reaffirmation Agreement”), pursuant to which, among other things, Greylock Production (1) reaffirmed the liens and the security interest granted pursuant to the existing mortgage securing the interests in the subject properties, as well as the mortgage and the obligations of Legacy ECA under the mortgage, and (2) assumed the obligations of Legacy ECA under the Letter Agreement.
As part of the initial acquisition of substantially all of Legacy ECA’s assets, neither Greylock Energy nor Greylock Production acquired title ownership of Legacy ECA’s working interest in two wells in which the Trust also had an interest, the Penneco Morrow #1MH and Penneco Morrow #2MH wells. In March 2019, Legacy ECA sold the title ownership and working interest in these two wells to Greylock Production.
Legacy ECA completed its drilling obligation to the Trust under the Development Agreement as of November 30, 2011. Consequently, no additional wells will be drilled for the Trust. All trust units share in all cash distributions on a pro rata basis. As of December 31, 2020 the Trust owned Royalty Interests in the 14 Producing Wells and the 40 development wells (52.06 Equivalent PUD Wells calculated in accordance with the Development Agreement) that are now completed and in production.
The Royalty Interests were conveyed from Legacy ECA’s working interest in the Producing Wells and the PUD Wells limited to the Underlying Properties. The PDP Royalty Interest entitles the Trust to receive 90% of the proceeds (exclusive of any production or development costs but after deducting post-production costs and any applicable taxes) from the sale of production of natural gas attributable to the Sponsor’s
interest in the Producing Wells for a period of 20 years commencing on April 1, 2010 and 45% thereafter. The PUD Royalty Interest entitles the Trust to receive 50% of the proceeds (exclusive of any production or development costs but after deducting post-production costs and any applicable taxes) from the sale of production of natural gas attributable to the Sponsor’s interest in the PUD Wells for a period of 20 years commencing on April 1, 2010 and 25% thereafter. Approximately 50% of the originally estimated natural gas production attributable to the Royalty Interests was hedged through March 31, 2014.
Legacy ECA was obligated to drill all of the PUD Wells by March 31, 2014. As of November 30, 2011, Legacy ECA had fulfilled its drilling obligation to the Trust by drilling 40 development wells (52.06 Equivalent PUD Wells), calculated as provided in the Development Agreement. Consequently, no additional wells will be drilled for the Trust. The Trust was not responsible for any costs related to the drilling of development wells or any other development or operating costs. As of December 31, 2020, the Trust owned Royalty Interests in the 14 Producing Wells and the 40 development wells (52.06 Equivalent PUD Wells) that are now completed and in production. The Trust’s cash receipts in respect of the Royalty Interests are determined after deducting post-production costs and any applicable taxes associated with the Royalty Interests, and the Trust’s cash available for distribution is reduced by Trust administrative expenses. Post-production costs generally consist of costs incurred to gather, compress, transport, process, treat, dehydrate and market the natural gas produced. Charges payable to Legacy ECA for such post-production costs on the related GCGS were limited to $0.52 per MMBtu gathered until Legacy ECA fulfilled its drilling obligation in 2011; since then the Sponsor has been permitted to increase the Post-Production Services Fee to the extent necessary to recover certain capital expenditures in the GCGS.
Generally, the percentage of production proceeds to be received by the Trust with respect to a well equals the product of (i) the percentage of proceeds to which the Trust is entitled under the terms of the conveyances (90% for the Producing Wells and 50% for the PUD Wells) multiplied by (ii) Greylock Production’s net revenue interest in the well. Greylock Production on average owns an 81.53% net revenue interest in the Producing Wells. Therefore, the Trust is entitled to receive on average 73.37% of the proceeds of production from the Producing Wells. With respect to the PUD Wells, the conveyance related to the PUD Royalty Interest provides that the proceeds from the PUD Wells will be calculated on the basis that the underlying PUD Wells are burdened only by interests that in total would not exceed 12.5% of the revenues from such properties, regardless of whether the royalty interest owners are actually entitled to a greater percentage of revenues from such properties. As an example, assuming Greylock Production owns a 100% working interest in a PUD Well, the applicable net revenue interest is calculated by multiplying Greylock Production’s percentage working interest in the 100% working interest well by the unburdened interest percentage (87.5%), and such well would have a minimum 87.5% net revenue interest. Accordingly, the Trust is entitled to a minimum of 43.75% of the production proceeds from the well provided in this example. To the extent Greylock Production’s working interest in a PUD Well is less than 100%, the Trust’s share of proceeds would be proportionately reduced.
The Trust makes quarterly cash distributions of substantially all of its cash receipts, after deducting Trust administrative expenses and costs and reserves therefor, on or about 60 days following the completion of each quarter. Unless sooner terminated, the Trust will begin to liquidate in March 2030 and will soon thereafter wind up its affairs and terminate.
The amount of Trust revenues and cash distributions to Trust unitholders depends on, among other things:
•
natural gas prices received;
•
the volume and Btu rating of natural gas produced and sold;
•
post-production costs and any applicable taxes; and
•
administrative expenses of the Trust including expenses incurred as a result of being a publicly traded entity, and any changes in amounts reserved for such expenses.
The markets for natural gas are volatile, as demonstrated by significant price swings experienced during 2019 and further declines in 2020 attributable primarily to the economic effects of the global outbreak of the novel form of coronavirus known as COVID-19 and its development into a global pandemic. COVID-19 and the responses by federal, state and local governmental authorities to the pandemic have also resulted in
significant business and operational disruptions, including business closures, supply chain disruptions, travel restrictions, stay-at-home orders and limitations on the availability of workforces. The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is unknown and is rapidly evolving. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacts Greylock Production will depend on the severity, location and duration of the effects and spread of COVID-19, the actions undertaken by federal, state and local governments and health officials to contain the virus or treat its effects, and how quickly and to what extent economic conditions improve and normal business and operating conditions resume. A prolonged period of low natural gas prices will adversely affect Greylock Energy. As a result, prices for natural gas, and therefore the Trust’s quarterly cash distributions, might not be maintained for any significant period of time. There were no distributions to unitholders for the quarters ended March 31, 2020 or June 30, 2020, as Trust expenses exceeded net revenues to the Trust; however, the Trust made a quarterly cash distribution of $0.009 per Trust unit on February 26, 2021. Nevertheless, low natural gas prices will reduce revenues to the Trust, which will reduce the amount of cash available for distribution to unitholders and in certain periods could result in no distributions to unitholders.
The effective date of the Trust was April 1, 2010, meaning the Trust has received the proceeds of production attributable to the PDP Royalty Interest from that date even though the PDP Royalty Interest was not conveyed to the Trust until July 7, 2010. The amount of the quarterly distributions fluctuates from quarter to quarter, depending on the proceeds received by the Trust, among other factors. There is no minimum required distribution.
Pursuant to IRC Section 1446, withholding tax on income effectively connected to a United States trade or business allocated to non-U.S. persons (“ECI”) should be made at the highest marginal rate. Under IRC Section 1441, withholding tax on fixed, determinable, annual, periodic income from United States sources allocated to non-U.S. persons should be made at a 30% rate unless the rate is reduced by treaty. Nominees and brokers should withhold at the highest marginal rate on the distribution made to non-U.S. persons. As a result of the TCJA enacted in December 2017, a non-U.S. holder’s gain on the sale of Trust units is now treated as ECI to the extent such holder would have had ECI if the Trust had sold all of its assets at fair market value on the date of the exchange. The TCJA also requires a transferee of units to withhold 10% of the amount realized on the sale of exchange of units (generally, the purchase price) unless the transferor certifies that it is not a nonresident alien individual or foreign corporation or other exception is available. Pursuant to final Treasury Regulations issued on October 7, 2020, this new withholding obligation will become applicable to transfers of units in publicly traded partnerships such as the Trust (which is classified as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes) occurring on or after January 1, 2022.
Results of Trust Operations
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to twelve months ended December 31, 2019
Distributable income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $0.1 million from $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, royalty income decreased $2.4 million and general and administrative expenses decreased $0.1 million.
Royalty income decreased from $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $2.4 million. This was due to a decrease in the average realized price as well as a decrease in production.
The average price realized for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $0.72 per Mcf to $0.66 per Mcf as compared to $1.38 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the average sales price for gas production was due primarily to a decrease in the weighted average monthly closing NYMEX price as well a decrease to the average Basis. The average sales price, before post-production costs, decreased from $2.35 per Mcf for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.64 per Mcf for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease in price was primarily the result of a decrease in the weighted average monthly closing NYMEX price for the current period to $2.08 per MMBtu compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 weighted average monthly closing NYMEX price of $2.64 per MMBtu, and to a lesser extent to a $0.13 per MMbtu decrease in the average Basis to $(0.49) per MMbtu in the current period compared to the prior period Basis of $(0.36) per MMbtu.
Post-production costs consist of a post-production services fee together with a charge for electricity used in lieu of gas for compression on the gathering system and firm transportation charges on interstate gas pipelines. Overall, average post-production costs increased to $0.98 per Mcf for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $0.97 per Mcf for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Production decreased 14.4% from 3,007 MMcf for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 2,573 MMcf for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decreased production was primarily a result of natural production declines that occur during the life of a well.
General and administrative expenses paid by the Trust decreased slightly to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Trustee established cash reserves of $0.4 million for each year, for use in paying future liabilities of the Trust as they become due. The addition to the cash reserve decreased distributable income for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
At December 31, 2019, the Underlying Properties were impaired by approximately $25 million primarily as a result of the decrease in the futures prices of natural gas as well as a decrease in Basis. This impairment did not reduce Distributable Income, although it reduced Trust Corpus. No impairment in the Underlying Properties had been recognized during the period ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Trust has no source of liquidity or capital resources other than cash flows from the Royalty Interests. Other than Trust administrative expenses, including, if applicable, expense reimbursements to Greylock Production and any reserves established by the Trustee for future liabilities, the Trust’s only use of cash is for distributions to Trust unitholders. Administrative expenses include payments to the Trustee and the Delaware Trustee as well as a quarterly fee of $15,000 to Greylock Production pursuant to the ASA. Each quarter, the Trustee determines the amount of funds available for distribution. Available funds are the excess cash, if any, received by the Trust from the Royalty Interests and other sources (such as interest earned on any amounts reserved by the Trustee) that quarter, over the Trust’s expenses for that quarter. Available funds are reduced by any cash the Trustee determines to hold as a reserve against future expenses or liabilities. The Trustee may borrow funds required to pay expenses or liabilities if the Trustee determines that the cash on hand and the cash to be received are insufficient to cover the Trust’s expenses or liabilities. If the Trustee borrows funds, the Trust unitholders will not receive distributions until the borrowed funds are repaid.
Commencing with the distribution paid to unitholders in the first quarter of 2019, the Trustee has been gradually building a cash reserve for the payment of future expenses and liabilities to approximately $1.8 million by withholding cash reserve amounts from each quarterly distribution equal to the greater of $90,000 or 10% of the amount distributable to unitholders. Accordingly, in addition to previously withheld funds of $220,634, in 2020 and 2019 the Trustee withheld $360,000 and $395,916, respectively, from the funds otherwise available for distribution, for an aggregate amount of $976,550. These withholdings are in addition to the existing cash reserve of $0.5 million, which is determined prior to the payments of quarterly expenses. The Trustee may increase or decrease the targeted amount at any time, and may increase or decrease the rate at which it is withholding funds to build the cash reserve at any time, without advance notice to the unitholders. After the approximately $1.8 million has been withheld, the Trustee will have cash reserves of approximately $2.3 million. Cash held in reserve will be invested as required by the trust agreement. Any cash reserved in excess of the amount necessary to pay or provide for the payment of future known, anticipated or contingent expenses or liabilities eventually will be distributed to unitholders, together with interest earned on the funds.
Payments to the Trust in respect of the Royalty Interests are based on the complex provisions of the various conveyances held by the Trust, copies of which are filed as exhibits to this report, and reference is hereby made to the text of the conveyances for the actual calculations of amounts due to the Trust.
The Trust does not have any transactions, arrangements or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or persons that could materially affect the Trust’s liquidity or the availability of capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
Pursuant to the terms of the ASA, the Trust is obligated to pay Greylock Production an annual administrative services fee of $60,000 for accounting, bookkeeping and informational services relating to the Royalty Interests to be performed by Greylock Production on behalf of the Trust throughout the term of the Trust. Pursuant to the Trust Agreement, the Trustee is to be paid an annual administrative fee, which may be adjusted annually, up or down, by the amount of the change in the All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) - US City Average for the immediately preceding calendar year, not to exceed +/− 3% in any one year. This fee was raised from $154,605 in 2019 to $158,752 in 2020. The Trust is also obligated to pay the Delaware Trustee a fee of $2,500 per year, throughout the term of the Trust.
Greylock Production and the Trustee each may terminate the provisions of the ASA relating to Greylock Production’s provision of administrative services at any time following delivery of notice no less than 90 days prior to the date of termination; provided, however, that Greylock Production may not terminate the ASA except in connection with Greylock Production’s transfer of some or all of the Subject Interests, as defined in the Conveyances, and then only with respect to the services to be provided with respect to the Subject Interests being transferred, and only upon the delivery to the Trustee of an agreement of the transferee of such Subject Interests reasonably satisfactory to the Trustee in which such transferee assumes the responsibility to perform the services relating to the Subject Interests being transferred.
Significant Accounting Policies
The financial statements of the Trust differ from financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”) because certain cash reserves may be established for contingencies, which would not be accrued in financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. Amortization of the investment in overriding royalty interests calculated on a unit-of-production basis is charged directly to Trust Corpus. This comprehensive basis of accounting other than GAAP corresponds to the accounting permitted for royalty trusts by the SEC as specified by FASB ASC Topic 932 Extractive Activities - Oil and Gas: Financial Statements of Royalty Trusts.
Income determined on the basis of GAAP would include all expenses incurred for the period presented. However, the Trust serves as a pass-through entity, with expenses for depreciation, depletion, and amortization, interest and income taxes being based on the status and elections of the Trust unitholders. General and administrative expenses, production taxes or any other allowable costs are charged to the Trust only when cash has been paid for those expenses. In addition, the Royalty Interests are not burdened by field and lease operating expenses. Thus, the statement shows distributable income, defined as income of the Trust available for distribution to the Trust unitholders before application of those unitholders’ additional expenses, if any, for depreciation, depletion, and amortization, interest and income taxes. The revenues are reflected net of existing royalties and overriding royalties and have been reduced by gathering/post-production expenses.
Revenue and Expenses:
The Trust serves as a pass-through entity, with items of depletion, interest income and expense, and income tax attributes being based upon the status and election of the unitholders. Thus, the Statements of Distributable Income show Income available for distribution before application of those unitholders’ additional expenses, if any, for depletion, interest income and expense, and income taxes.
The Trust uses the accrual basis to recognize revenue, with royalty income recorded as reserves are extracted from the Underlying Properties and sold. Expenses are recognized when paid.
Royalty Interest in Gas Properties:
The Royalty interests in gas properties is assessed to determine whether the net capitalized cost is impaired, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying amount may not be recoverable, pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification 360, Property, Plant and Equipment (“ASC 360”). The Trust determines whether an impairment charge is necessary to its investment in the Royalty Interests in gas properties if total capitalized costs, less accumulated amortization, exceed undiscounted future net revenues attributable to proved gas reserves of the Underlying Properties.
Determination as to whether and how much an asset is impaired involves estimates of highly uncertain matters such as future commodity prices, the effects of inflation, weighted average cost of capital, and technology improvements on post-production costs and the outlook for national or regional market supply and demand conditions. Estimates of undiscounted future net revenues attributable to proved gas reserves utilize NYMEX forward pricing curves. At December 31, 2019, such undiscounted future net revenues were less than the net royalty interest in gas properties. As required, the Trust has therefore recognized an impairment charge to the extent that the net capitalized costs exceeded the discounted fair value of the investment in net profits interests attributable to proved gas reserves of the Underlying Properties. At December 31, 2019, the Underlying Properties were impaired by approximately $25 million primarily as a result of the decrease in the futures prices of natural gas. In determining the impairment charge, the Trust utilized a 12.0% market weighted average cost of capital for use in the calculation of the discounted fair value. The trust engaged an independent third party valuation firm to assist in the development of the weighted average cost of capital. This impairment did not reduce Distributable Income, although it reduced Trust Corpus. At December 31, 2020, the undiscounted future net revenues exceeded the Net royalty interest in gas properties, and therefore no impairment was necessary. Significant dispositions or abandonment of the Underlying Properties, if necessary, are charged to Royalty Interests and the Trust Corpus.
Amortization of the Royalty interest in gas properties is calculated on a units-of-production basis, whereby the Trust’s cost basis in the properties is divided by Trust total proved reserves to derive an amortization rate per reserve unit. Such amortization does not reduce Distributable Income, rather it is charged directly to Trust Corpus. Revisions to estimated future units-of-production are treated on a prospective basis beginning on the date significant revisions are known.
The conveyance of the Royalty Interests to the Trust was accounted for as a purchase transaction. The $352,100,000 reflected in the Statements of Assets, Liabilities and Trust Corpus as Royalty interest in gas properties represents 17,605,000 Trust units valued at $20.00 per unit. The carrying value of the Trust’s investment in the Royalty Interests is not necessarily indicative of the fair value of such Royalty Interests.