ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Overview
We are a global provider of specialty catalysts, chemicals and services with leading supply positions across our portfolio. We compete in the global specialty chemicals and materials industry where we seek to focus on attractive, high-growth applications. Our products and services provide critical performance to our customers’ products and we are able to offer many of our customers regionally sourced materials to reduce costs and improve delivery logistics. We provide our customers with a combination of product technology and applications knowledge, global supply chain capabilities, and local production and logistical support.
We conduct operations through three reporting segments: (1) Refining Services, (2) Catalysts (including our 50% interest in the Zeolyst Joint Venture) and (3) Performance Chemicals.
Refining Services: We are the leading provider of sulfuric acid recycling services to North American refineries for the production of alkylate, an essential gasoline component for lowering vapor pressure and increasing octane to meet stringent gasoline specifications and fuel efficiency standards. We are also a leading North American producer of on-purpose virgin sulfuric acid for water treatment, mining, and industrial applications.
Catalysts: We are a global supplier of finished silica catalysts and catalyst supports necessary to produce high strength and high stiffness plastics used in packaging films, bottles, containers, and other molded applications. We are also a leading global supplier of zeolites used for catalysts that remove nitrogen oxides from diesel engine emissions as well as sulfur from fuels during the refining process.
Performance Chemicals: We are a leading global supplier of silicate and derivative products which serve as an environmentally friendly substitute for materials used in a variety of applications. These include end uses such as matting agents in surface coatings, clarifying agents for edible oils and beverages, additives for paints and coatings, and in cosmetics to improve feel attributes.
In 2020, we served over 2,000 customers globally across many end uses and, as of December 31, 2020, operated out of 40 manufacturing facilities, which are strategically located across five continents.
On December 14, 2020, we completed the sale of our Performance Materials business to Potters Buyer, LLC (the “Purchaser”), an affiliate of The Jordan Company, L.P., for a purchase price of $650 million, which was subject to certain adjustments for indebtedness, working capital and cash at the closing of the transaction. The results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows for the Performance Materials businesses are presented herein as discontinued operations. Refer to Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Recent Developments
On March 1, 2021, we announced that we entered into a definitive agreement to sell our Performance Chemicals business for a purchase price of $1.1 billion. We expect to use after-tax cash proceeds from the sale to reduce debt and return capital to our shareholders, subject to board approval and declaration. The transaction is expected to close by the end of 2021, subject to regulatory approvals and customary closing conditions. Beginning in the first quarter of 2021, we expect to present the financial results of the Performance Chemicals business as discontinued operations.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business and Results
In March 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 was declared a national emergency by the United States. COVID-19 continues to spread throughout the world and has adversely impacted economic activity and contributed to volatility in financial markets. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the federal government, various states, local and foreign governments have issued decrees and orders that have disrupted many businesses and implemented social distancing, travel and other restrictions. In response to these restrictions, we have taken a variety of actions, including an international travel ban, distribution of personal protective equipment to employees, and work-at-home requirements for many of our employees who are not an integral part of our manufacturing operations. We have also implemented and refined our existing business continuity plans in an effort to minimize disruptions to our operations. These measures remain in place as of December 31, 2020.
Recent and Near Term Trends on Business Segment End Uses
The COVID-19 pandemic led to unprecedented disruptions within the macro economy, with lower sales volume demand during 2020, including the fourth quarter. The timing and magnitude of the impact to sales volume demand varied across our portfolio of businesses due to the many end uses.
Most of PQ’s end use customers experienced improved demand during the fourth quarter, largely driven by a recovery of consumer products ranging from packaged products to automotive sales. The construction and mining segments also demonstrated improving demand. The company continues to match costs and production with the pattern and pace of demand recovery, which remains variable across end use subsectors.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 we took actions to mitigate the slowdown in our business as a result of the effects of COVID-19, including adjusting our production levels to meet anticipated customer demand, reducing discretionary spending, furloughs, delaying headcount additions and deferring capital maintenance expenditures.
Key end use trends in our business segments during the year and expectations are described below:
•Refining Services: This business segment was impacted the quickest by COVID-19, but began to see a significant rebound in demand through the fourth quarter of 2020. Stay-at-home mandates during the first and second quarters led to rapid and significant reductions in gasoline demand in the U.S. As stay-at-home restrictions were lifted near the end of the second quarter, gasoline consumption recovered to approximately 90% of 2019 levels during the third and fourth quarters. Apart from weather events, we expect refinery utilization to continue to improve through 2021. Once demand is restored to 2019 levels, PQ believes alkylate production will continue to grow, driven by higher octane fuel blending. Virgin sulfuric acid demand from industrial and mining customers began to rebound during the third quarter and reached 2019 demand levels by year end. We expect demand for virgin sulfuric acid to grow in 2021.
•Catalysts: We experienced strong demand for hydrocracking catalysts, which we sold through our Zeolyst Joint Venture during the first half of the year. During the second half of 2020, some customers deferred catalyst bed change-outs due to lower refinery utilization rates. We expect a rebound in the second half of 2021 with demand for hydrocracking catalysts improving as the year progresses. Demand for our emission control catalysts used in heavy-duty diesel vehicles decreased during the second and third quarters as our customers temporarily curtailed their production to align with lower demand. Demand for emission control catalysts began to improve near year end and the improvement is continuing into 2021. Polyethene catalyst demand remains strong due to increased consumer consumption of films and packaging. Demand for catalysts used to make polyethylene improved in 2020 and we expect it to continue to improve in 2021. Overall, we expect the strong polyolefin catalyst demand and recovering emission catalyst demand to be more than offset by lower refinery catalyst demand during the first half of 2021. During the second half of the year we also expect to see improvement in refinery catalyst demand.
•Performance Chemicals: We experienced lower demand for sodium silicate used in industrial applications and chemical manufacturing beginning in the second quarter of 2020. By year end, we experienced recovery of demand across multiple end uses including automotive, coatings and fuel efficient tires. Consumption for our products sold to the personal care and consumer cleaning experienced steady demand during the pandemic.
Operations and Supply
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, our manufacturing facilities have continued to operate and have been providing critical materials necessary to aid in combating the COVID-19 pandemic and products we manufacture for other essential businesses. Our manufacturing plants require a limited number of on-site employees in order to continue to operate effectively. We have not experienced any material production issues to date, but have had limited and temporary shutdowns or slowdowns in some of our facilities. We have also seen limited disruptions in the availability of certain of our raw materials and other supplies, which to date have not had a material impact on production.
Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law. The provisions of the CARES Act provide substantial stimulus and financial assistance measures intended to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including certain tax relief provisions. As permitted within the CARES Act, we began deferring payment of the employer portion of social security taxes in the second quarter and continued to defer through the end of 2020, with 50% of the deferred amount due December 31, 2021 and the remaining 50% due December 31, 2022. This deferral provided approximately $4.5 million in additional liquidity in 2020.
The impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and associated containment and remediation efforts is rapidly evolving. We expect the duration and magnitude of the virus’s impact on the levels of economic activity in the United States and globally to affect the magnitude of its impact on our results of operations, which could be material.
Basis of Presentation
Our zeolite catalysts product group operates through the Zeolyst Joint Venture, which we account for as an equity method investment in accordance with GAAP. We do not record sales by the Zeolyst Joint Venture as revenue and such sales are not consolidated within our results of operations. However, Adjusted EBITDA reflects our share of the earnings of the Zeolyst Joint Venture that have been recorded as equity in net income from affiliated companies in our consolidated statements of income and includes Zeolyst Joint Venture adjustments on a proportionate basis based on our 50% ownership interest.
Key Performance Indicators
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income
Adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income are financial measures that are not prepared in accordance with GAAP and that we use to evaluate our operating performance, for business planning purposes and to measure our performance relative to that of our competitors. Adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income are presented as key performance indicators as we believe these financial measures will enhance a prospective investor’s understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. EBITDA consists of net income (loss) attributable to continuing operations before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA consists of EBITDA adjusted for (i) non-operating income or expense, (ii) the impact of certain non-cash, nonrecurring or other items included in net income (loss) and EBITDA that we do not consider indicative of our ongoing operating performance, and (iii) depreciation, amortization and interest of our 50% share of the Zeolyst Joint Venture. Adjusted net income consists of net income (loss) attributable to PQ Group Holdings adjusted for (i) non-operating income or expense and (ii) the impact of certain non-cash, nonrecurring or other items included in net income (loss) that we do not consider indicative of our ongoing operating performance. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures provide investors with useful financial metrics to assess our operating performance from period-to-period by excluding certain items that we believe are not representative of our core business.
You should not consider adjusted EBITDA or adjusted net income in isolation or as alternatives to the presentation of our financial results in accordance with GAAP. The presentation of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income financial measures may differ from similar measures reported by other companies and may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures. In evaluating adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income, you should be aware that we are likely to incur expenses similar to those eliminated in this presentation in the future and that certain of these items could be considered recurring in nature. Our presentation of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or nonrecurring items. Reconciliations of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income to GAAP net income (loss) are included in the results of operations discussion that follows for each of the respective periods.
Key Factors and Trends Affecting Operating Results and Financial Condition
Sales
Our Refining Services and Catalysts segments' sales have grown primarily due to expansion into new end applications, including emission control catalysts, polymer catalysts, and refining catalysts, as well as continued supply share gains. Sales in our Refining Services and Catalysts segments are made on both a purchase order basis and pursuant to long-term contracts.
Historically, our Performance Chemicals segment has experienced relatively stable demand throughout economic cycles, due to the diverse consumer and industrial end uses that our products serve. Expansions into new applications, including personal care and consumer cleaning, as well as share gains in existing end uses, have added to our sales growth. Product sales from our Performance Chemicals segment are made on both a purchase order basis and pursuant to long-term contracts.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consists of variable product costs, fixed manufacturing expenses, depreciation expense and freight expenses. Variable product costs include all raw materials, energy and packaging costs that are directly related to the manufacturing process. Fixed manufacturing expenses include all plant employment costs, manufacturing overhead and periodic maintenance costs. The primary raw materials for our Refining Services segment include spent sulfuric acid, sulfur, sodium silicates, acids, bases, and certain metals. The primary raw materials used in the manufacture of products in our Performance Chemicals and Catalysts segments include soda ash, industrial sand, aluminum trihydrate and sodium hydroxide (also known as "caustic soda").
Most of our Refining Services contracts feature take-or-pay volume protection and/or quarterly price adjustments for commodity inputs, labor, the Chemical Engineering Index (U.S. chemical plant construction cost index) and natural gas. Spent acid for our Refining Services segment is supplied by customers for a nominal charge as part of their contracts. Over 80% of our Refining Services segment sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were under contracts featuring quarterly price adjustments. The price adjustments generally reflect actual costs for producing acid and tend to protect us from volatility in labor, fixed costs and raw material pricing.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 50% of our North American silicate sales, which is a significant portion of our Performance Chemicals segment sales, were derived from contracts that included raw material pass-through clauses. Under these contracts, there generally is a time lag of three to nine months for price changes to pass through, depending on the magnitude of the change in cost and other market dynamics. Freight expenses are generally passed through directly to customers.
While natural gas is not a direct feedstock for any product, all businesses use natural gas powered furnaces to heat raw materials and create the chemical reactions necessary to produce end-products. We maintain multiple suppliers wherever possible, hedge exposure to fluctuations in prices for natural gas purchases in the United States, make forward purchases of natural gas in the United States, Canada, and Europe to mitigate our exposure to price volatility, and structure our customer contracts when possible to allow for the pass-through of raw material and natural gas costs.
Joint Ventures
We account for our investments in our equity joint ventures under the equity method. Our largest joint venture, the Zeolyst Joint Venture, manufactures high performance, specialty, zeolite-based catalysts for use in the emission control industry, the petrochemical industry and other areas of the broader chemicals industry. We share proportionally in the management of our joint ventures with the other parties to each such joint venture.
Seasonality
Our Refining Services segment typically experiences seasonal fluctuations as a result of higher demand for gasoline products in the summer and lower demand in the winter months. These demand fluctuations results in higher sales and working capital requirements in the second and third quarter.
Foreign Currency
As a global business, we are subject to the impact of gains and losses on currency translations, which occur when the financial statements of foreign operations are translated into U.S. dollars. We operate a geographically diverse business with approximately 40% of our sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Because our consolidated financial results are reported in U.S. dollars, sales or earnings generated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar can result in a significant increase or decrease in the amount of those sales and earnings when translated to U.S. dollars. The foreign currencies to which we have the most significant exchange rate exposure include the Euro, British pound, Canadian dollar, Brazilian real and the Mexican peso.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Highlights
The following is a summary of our financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2019.
Sales
• Sales decreased $92.5 million to $1,107.4 million. The decrease in sales was primarily due to lower sales volumes, the unfavorable effects of foreign currency translation, and pass-through of lower sulfur pricing.
Gross Profit
• Gross profit decreased $25.0 million to $273.4 million. The decrease in gross profit was primarily due to lower sales volumes and the unfavorable effects of foreign currency translation, partly offset by favorable fixed manufacturing costs.
Operating (Loss) Income
• Operating (loss) income decreased $310.4 million to $162.9 million. The decrease in operating (loss) income was primarily due to a goodwill impairment charge of $260.0 million related to our Performance Chemicals segment, a decrease in gross profit and an increase in transaction-related charges for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Equity in Net Income from Affiliated Companies
• Equity in net income of affiliated companies for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $21.2 million, compared with net income of $46.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to lower earnings of $24.6 million generated by the Zeolyst Joint Venture during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following is our consolidated statement of income and a summary of financial results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Sales
Refining Services: Sales in Refining Services for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $401.9 million, a decrease of $45.2 million, or 10.1%, compared to sales of $447.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in sales was primarily due to lower sales volumes of $26.7 million and lower average selling price from pass-through costs of $18.5 million.
The decrease in volumes was due to lower regeneration services demand from refinery utilization rates driven by COVID-19. The unfavorable pricing was driven by pass-through of lower sulfur costs.
Catalysts: Sales in Catalysts for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $94.0 million, an increase of $8.3 million, or 9.7%, compared to sales of $85.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in sales was primarily due to higher sales volumes of $10.6 million, partly offset by lower average selling price from product mix of $1.2 million and the unfavorable effects of foreign currency translation of $1.1 million.
The increase in sales was due to higher customer demand within our polyolefin catalysts product line.
Performance Chemicals: Sales in Performance Chemicals for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $614.7 million, a decrease of $55.8 million, or 8.3%, compared to sales of $670.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in sales was primarily due to lower sales volumes driven by COVID19 of $48.6 million and the unfavorable effects of foreign currency translation of $15.0 million, which was partially offset by higher average selling price and favorable mix of $7.8 million.
The decrease in sales was a result of lower volumes sold for consumer products and industrial and process chemicals applications and the unfavorable effects of foreign currency translation driven by the stronger U.S. dollar.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $273.4 million, a decrease of $25.0 million, or 8.4%, compared with $298.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in gross profit was due to lower volumes of $37.7 million, unfavorable average selling price of $11.9 million, and the unfavorable effects of foreign currency translation of $4.2 million, partly offset by favorable manufacturing costs of $30.9 million.
The decrease in volumes was due to a decline in sulfuric acid sales and lower sales for consumer and industrial products applications. Unfavorable customer pricing was primarily a result of pass-through of lower sulfur costs. The unfavorable effects of foreign currency were driven by the stronger U.S. dollar. The favorable change in manufacturing costs were driven by lower labor costs and the timing of plant maintenance projects.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $125.3 million, a decrease of $4.2 million, or 3.2%, compared with $129.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses was due to lower discretionary spending and lower research and development expenditures partially offset by an increase in stock compensation expense.
Goodwill Impairment Charge
We assess goodwill for impairment annually, or more frequently, if events or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying amount. We perform our annual impairment test of goodwill as of October 1 of each year. As a result of our annual test, we determined that the fair value of our Performance Chemicals reporting unit was lower than its carrying value. This resulted in a $260.0 million charge for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Operating Expense, Net
Other operating expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $51.0 million, an increase of $29.6 million, or 138.3%, compared with $21.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in other operating expense, net was primarily due to current year restructuring costs incurred on asset disposals and business divestiture costs associated with our pending sale of our Performance Chemicals business. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we realized a gain of $11.0 million on the disposition of assets related to a non-core product line as well a gain of $7.1 million on the sale of property.
Equity in Net Income of Affiliated Companies
Equity in net income of affiliated companies for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $21.2 million, a decrease of $24.8 million, compared with income of $46.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to $26.7 million of earnings generated by the Zeolyst Joint Venture during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $52.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was a result of the timing of hydrocracking catalyst change-outs and lower demand for custom catalysts and emission control catalysts in heavy duty diesel production driven by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $67.0 million, a decrease of $20.1 million, as compared with $87.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense was due to lower interest rates on our variable rate debt along with lower average debt balances and a favorable increase in variable versus fixed rate debt.
Debt Extinguishment Costs
Debt extinguishment costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $25.0 million and $3.4 million, respectively.
On December 14, 2020, we completed the sale of our Performance Materials business which triggered an obligation to provide partial payment under our existing senior secured term loan facility and our new senior secured term loan facility. As a result of the required payments, previous unamortized deferred financing costs of $2.7 million and original issue discount of $5.8 million were written off as debt extinguishment costs.
On July 22, 2020, we entered into an agreement for a new senior secured term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $650.0 million, which was used to repay the remaining outstanding balance of $625.0 million on the 6.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2022. In conjunction with the issuance of the senior secured term loan facility, we paid $10.6 million in prepayment premiums and recorded $0.1 million of new creditor and third-party financing fees as debt extinguishment costs. In addition, previous unamortized deferred financing costs of $2.1 million and original issue discount of $1.2 million associated with the 6.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2022 were written off as debt extinguishment costs.
On February 7, 2020, we amended our existing senior secured term loan facility to reduce the applicable interest rates and extend the maturity of the facility to February 2027. We recorded $2.2 million of new creditor and third-party financing fees as debt extinguishment costs. In addition, previously unamortized deferred financing costs of $0.1 million and original issue discount of $0.2 million associated with the existing senior secured term loan facility were written off as debt extinguishment costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we prepaid $210.0 million of outstanding principal balance on the Term Loan Facility (as defined below). In connection with this prepayment, we wrote off $1.0 million of previously unamortized deferred financing costs and original issue discount of $2.4 million as debt extinguishment costs.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Other (income) expense, net was income of $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a favorable change of $3.7 million, compared with income of $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change primarily related to $4.2 million of foreign currency gains on the non-permanent intercompany debt denominated in local currency and translated to U.S. dollars and transactional currency translation in the current year period as compared to foreign currency losses of $2.4 million in the prior year period.
(Benefit) Provision for Income Taxes
The (benefit) provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a $48.1 million benefit compared to a $39.7 million provision for the year ended December 31, 2019. The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 21.1% compared to 37.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The difference between the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate and our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly due to the impact of the Global Intangible Low Taxed Income (“GILTI”) provisions of U.S. tax reform, foreign tax credit benefit and goodwill impairment. The difference between the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate and our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly due to the impact of the GILTI provisions of U.S. tax reform, the effect of permanent differences related to foreign currency exchange gain or loss, differing tax rates in foreign jurisdictions as compared to the U.S. statutory tax rate, tax rate changes and state taxes.
Net (Loss) Income Attributable to PQ Group Holdings
For the foregoing reasons and after the effect of the non-controlling interest in earnings of subsidiaries for each period presented, net loss attributable to PQ Group Holdings was $278.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to net income of $79.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA
Summarized Segment Adjusted EBITDA information is shown below in the following table:
(1)We define Segment Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted for certain items as noted in the reconciliation below. Our management evaluates the performance of our segments and allocates resources based primarily on Segment Adjusted EBITDA. Segment Adjusted EBITDA does not represent cash flow for periods presented and should not be considered as an alternative to net income as an indicator of our operating performance or as an alternative to cash flows as a source of liquidity. Segment Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable with EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA as defined by other companies.
(2)The Adjusted EBITDA from the Zeolyst Joint Venture included in the Catalysts segment is $42.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which includes $21.2 million of equity in net income, excluding $6.6 million of amortization of investment in affiliate step-up, plus $14.7 million of joint venture depreciation, amortization and interest. The Adjusted EBITDA from the Zeolyst Joint Venture included in the Catalysts segment is $68.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which includes $45.9 million of equity in net income, excluding $7.5
million of amortization of investment in affiliate step-up, plus $14.7 million of joint venture depreciation, amortization and interest.
(3)Our total Segment Adjusted EBITDA differs from our total consolidated Adjusted EBITDA due to unallocated corporate expenses.
Refining Services: Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $157.2 million, a decrease of $18.4 million, or 10.5%, compared with $175.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Refining Services adjusted EBITDA decreased due to lower regeneration services demand as a result of reduced refinery utilization rates, partially offset by fixed and SG&A related cost savings.
Catalysts: Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $74.5 million, a decrease of $33.3 million, or 30.9%, compared with $107.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA decreased due to lower volumes in the Zeolyst joint venture and unfavorable inventory absorption due to lower production and inventory depletion to align with expected lower demand.
Performance Chemicals: Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $142.4 million, a decrease of $9.1 million, or 6.0%, compared with $151.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA was due to lower volumes of product sold for industrial and consumer product applications and the strengthening of the U.S. dollar, which was partially offset by fixed and selling, general and administrative related cost savings.
A reconciliation of net (loss) income attributable to PQ Group Holdings to Segment Adjusted EBITDA is as follows:
(a)We use Adjusted EBITDA as a performance measure to evaluate our financial results. Because our Catalysts segment includes our 50% interest in the Zeolyst Joint Venture, we include an adjustment for our 50% proportionate share of depreciation, amortization and interest expense of the Zeolyst Joint Venture.
(b)Represents the amortization of the fair value adjustments associated with the equity affiliate investment in the Zeolyst Joint Venture as a result of the Business Combination. We determined the fair value of the equity affiliate investment and the fair value step-up was then attributed to the underlying assets of the Zeolyst Joint Venture. Amortization is primarily related to the fair value adjustments associated with fixed assets and intangible assets, including customer relationships and technical know-how.
(c)When asset disposals occur, we remove the impact of net gain/loss of the disposed asset because such impact primarily reflects the non-cash write-off of long-lived assets no longer in use. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, the net gain on asset disposals includes the gains related to the sale of a non-core product line and sale of property.
(d)Reflects the exclusion of the foreign currency transaction gains and losses in the statements of income primarily related to the non-permanent intercompany debt denominated in local currency translated to U.S. dollars.
(e)Represents non-cash adjustments to the Company’s LIFO reserves for certain inventories in the U.S. that are valued using the LIFO method, which we believe provides a means of comparison to other companies that may not use the same basis of accounting for inventories.
(f)Represents the costs related to several transactions that are completed, pending or abandoned and that we believe are not representative of our ongoing business operations.
(g)Includes the impact of restructuring, integration and business optimization expenses which are incremental costs that are not representative of our ongoing business operations.
(h)Represents adjustments for defined benefit pension plan costs in our statement of income. More than two-thirds of our defined benefit pension plan obligations are under defined benefit pension plans that are frozen, and the remaining obligations primarily relate to plans operated in certain of our non-U.S. locations that, pursuant to jurisdictional requirements, cannot be frozen. As such, we do not view such expenses as core to our ongoing business operations.
(i)Other costs consist of certain expenses that are not core to our ongoing business operations, including environmental remediation-related costs associated with the legacy operations of our business prior to the Business Combination, capital and franchise taxes and non-cash asset retirement obligation accretion. Included in this line-item are rounding discrepancies that may arise from rounding from dollars (in thousands) to dollars (in millions).
Adjusted Net Income
Summarized adjusted net income information is shown below in the following table:
(1)We define adjusted net income as net (loss) income attributable to PQ Group Holdings adjusted for non-operating income or expense and the impact of certain non-cash or other items that are included in net income that we do not consider indicative of our ongoing operating performance. Adjusted net income is presented as a key performance indicator as we believe it will enhance a prospective investor’s understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. Adjusted net income may not be comparable with net income or adjusted net income as defined by other companies.
(2)Refer to the Adjusted EBITDA notes above for more information with respect to each adjustment.
(3)Amount represents the impact to tax expense in net income before non-controlling interest and the related adjustments to net income associated with the GILTI provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (“TCJA”). We are required to record the incremental tax provision impact with respect to GILTI as a result of having historical U.S. net operating loss (“NOL”) amounts to offset the GILTI taxable income inclusion. This NOL utilization precluded us from recognizing GILTI credits which would otherwise help offset the tax impacts of GILTI. During the fourth quarter of 2020, as a result of the sale of the Performance Materials business, our NOL balance will be fully utilized. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, we are no longer adjusting for the impact of the GILTI provisions of the TCJA since the NOLs have been fully utilized and GILTI now represents a cash tax impact.
(4)Represents the transition tax adjustment for the impact of the TCJA and the rate change in the Netherlands related to the Dutch Tax Plan 2019 recorded in net income.
The adjustments to net (loss) income attributable to PQ Group Holdings Inc. are shown net of applicable statutory tax rates.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Highlights
The following is a summary of our financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with the year ended December 31, 2018.
Sales
• Sales decreased $29.0 million to $1,199.9 million. The decrease in sales was primarily due to lower sales volumes and the unfavorable effects of foreign currency translation, which was partially offset by higher average customer prices and favorable mix.
Gross Profit
• Gross profit decreased $5.0 million to $298.4 million. Our decrease in gross profit was primarily due to lower sales volumes, unfavorable manufacturing costs and the unfavorable effects of foreign currency translation, which was partially offset by favorable customer pricing.
Operating Income
• Operating income decreased by $8.1 million to $147.5 million. Our decrease in operating income was primarily due to a decrease in gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Equity in Net Income from Affiliated Companies
• Equity in net income of affiliated companies for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $46.0 million, compared with net income of $37.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to higher earnings of $9.3 million generated by the Zeolyst Joint Venture during the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
The following is our consolidated statement of income and a summary of financial results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Sales
Refining Services: Sales in Refining Services for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $447.1 million, a decrease of $8.5 million, or 1.9%, compared to sales of $455.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in sales was primarily due to lower sales volumes of $30.4 million, which was partially offset by favorable customer mix driving higher average selling prices of $21.9 million.
The decrease in volumes was due to lower demand for virgin sulfuric acid and unexpected customer plant outages. The favorable customer mix was driven by the roll-off of a below-market contract and other contract renewals in our regenerated sulfuric acid and virgin sulfuric acid product lines.
Catalysts: Sales in Catalysts for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $85.7 million, an increase of $13.6 million, or 18.9%, compared to sales of $72.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in sales was primarily due to higher sales volumes of $11.6 million and higher average selling price from product mix of $3.3 million.
The increase in sales was due to the timing of customer orders for methyl methacrylate catalyst and higher customer demand and pricing within our polyolefin catalysts product line.
Performance Chemicals: Sales in Performance Chemicals for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $670.5 million, a decrease of $33.9 million, or 4.8%, compared to sales of $704.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in sales was primarily due to lower sales volumes of $36.4 million and the unfavorable effects of foreign currency translation of $17.5 million, which was partially offset by higher average selling price and favorable mix of $20.0 million.
The decrease in sales was a result of lower volumes sold to the consumer products and industrial and process chemicals industries and the unfavorable effects of foreign currency translation driven by the stronger U.S. dollar, which was partially offset by higher pricing to cover raw material cost increases.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $298.4 million, a decrease of $5.0 million, or 1.6%, compared with $303.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in gross profit was due to lower volumes of $31.7 million, unfavorable manufacturing costs of $22.0 million, and unfavorable foreign currency translation of $5.2 million, which was partially offset by favorable customer pricing of $45.1 million and favorable product mix of $8.3 million.
The decrease in volumes was due to a decline in sulfuric acid sales and lower sales to the consumer and industrial products industries. The unfavorable change in manufacturing costs was driven by the higher labor costs, timing of plant maintenance projects and increased transportation costs during the year ended December 31, 2019. The unfavorable effects of foreign currency were driven by the stronger U.S. dollar. Favorable customer pricing was primarily a result of a roll-off of a below-market contract in our virgin sulfuric acid product line. Favorable product mix was driven by increased volumes of higher-margin Silica Catalysts products.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $129.5 million, a decrease of $1.9 million, or 1.4%, compared with $131.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses was due to lower research and development expenditures and a decrease in professional fees, which was partially offset by an increase in compensation-related costs.
Other Operating Expense, Net
Other operating expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $21.4 million, an increase of $5.0 million, or 30.5%, compared with $16.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in other operating expense, net was primarily due to the impact of non-recurring gains in the current year as compared to the prior year. During the year ended December 31, 2019 we realized a gain of $11.0 million on the disposition of assets related to a non-core product line as well as a gain of $7.1 million on the sale of property. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized non-recurring gains on the termination of a customer supply contract of $20.6 million and insurance recoveries totaling $6.5 million related to losses sustained as a result of Hurricane Harvey in August 2017 (of which $5.5 million was recorded in other operating expense, net).
Equity in Net Income of Affiliated Companies
Equity in net income of affiliated companies for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $46.0 million, an increase of $8.4 million, compared with income of $37.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to $52.2 million of earnings generated by the Zeolyst Joint Venture during the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $42.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 which was a result of higher year-over-year growth in hydrocracking catalyst and specialty chemical event-driven sales.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $87.1 million, a decrease of $3.7 million, as compared with $90.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in interest expense was due to lower average debt balances.
Debt Extinguishment Costs
Debt extinguishment costs for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were $3.4 million and $7.8 million, respectively.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we prepaid $210.0 million of outstanding principal balance on the Term Loan Facility (as defined below). In connection with this prepayment, we wrote off $1.0 million of previously unamortized deferred financing costs and original issue discount of $2.4 million as debt extinguishment costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we prepaid $100.0 million of outstanding principal balance on the Term Loan Facility (as defined below). In connection with this prepayment, we wrote off $0.6 million of previously unamortized deferred financing costs and original issue discount of $1.3 million as debt extinguishment costs.
On February 8, 2018 we refinanced our existing senior secured term loan facility with a $1,267.0 million senior secured term loan facility to reduce the applicable interest rates. We recorded $2.1 million of new creditor and third-party financing fees as debt extinguishment costs. In addition, previously unamortized deferred financing costs of $1.4 million and original issue discount of $2.4 million associated with the existing senior secured term loan facility were written off as debt extinguishment costs.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Other (income) expense, net was income of $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a favorable change of $13.0 million, compared with expense of $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The change primarily consisted of $2.3 million in sales and use tax refunds received during the year ended December 31, 2019 and $10.1 million of lower foreign currency losses primarily related to the non-permanent intercompany debt denominated in local currency and translated to U.S. dollars.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $39.7 million compared to a $33.6 million provision for the year ended December 31, 2018. The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 37.6% compared to 40.0% for the year ended December 31, 2018. The difference between the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate and our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly due to the impact of the GILTI provisions of U.S. tax reform, the effect of permanent differences related to foreign currency exchange gain or loss, differing tax rates in foreign jurisdictions compared to the U.S. statutory tax rate, tax rate changes and state taxes. The difference between the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate and our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2018 was mainly due to the impact of the GILTI provisions of U.S. tax reform, the effect of permanent differences related to foreign currency exchange gain or loss, changes in valuation allowances, differing tax rates in foreign jurisdictions as compared to the U.S. statutory tax rate and tax rate changes.
Net Income Attributable to PQ Group Holdings
For the foregoing reasons and after the effect of the non-controlling interest in earnings of subsidiaries for each period presented, net income attributable to PQ Group Holdings was $79.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to a net income of $58.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Adjusted EBITDA
Summarized Segment Adjusted EBITDA information is shown below in the following table:
(1)We define Segment Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted for certain items as noted in the reconciliation below. Our management evaluates the performance of our segments and allocates resources based primarily on Segment Adjusted EBITDA. Segment Adjusted EBITDA does not represent cash flow for periods presented and should not be considered as an alternative to net income as an indicator of our operating performance or as an alternative to cash flows as a source of liquidity. Segment Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable with EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA as defined by other companies.
(2)The Adjusted EBITDA from the Zeolyst Joint Venture included in the Catalysts segment is $68.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which includes $45.9 million of equity in net income, excluding $7.5 million of amortization of investment in affiliate step-up plus $14.7 million of joint venture depreciation, amortization and interest. The Adjusted EBITDA from the Zeolyst Joint Venture included in the Catalysts segment is $56.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, which includes $37.5 million of equity in net income, excluding $6.6 million of amortization of investment in affiliate step-up plus $12.6 million of joint venture depreciation, amortization and interest.
(3)Our total Segment Adjusted EBITDA differs from our total consolidated Adjusted EBITDA due to unallocated corporate expenses.
Refining Services: Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $175.6 million, a decrease of $0.9 million, or 0.5%, compared with $176.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Refining Services adjusted EBITDA was consistent with the prior year, and negatively impacted by decreased demand for virgin sulfuric acid, unexpected customer plant outages, timing of plant turnaround costs and the absence of a gain from insurance proceeds related to Hurricane Harvey, which was offset by the roll-off of a below-market contract and other contract renewals in our regenerated sulfuric acid and virgin sulfuric acid product lines.
Catalysts: Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $107.8 million, an increase of $26.7 million, or 32.9%, compared with $81.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Adjusted EBITDA increased due to favorable costs from building inventories to meet future sales commitments, higher polyolefin catalysts product group sales and increased sales of chemical synthesis catalysts sold to the methyl methacrylate end market.
Performance Chemicals: Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $151.5 million, a decrease of $16.7 million, or 9.9%, compared with $168.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA was due to lower volumes of product sold to the industrial and consumer product industries and the strengthening of the U.S. dollar, which was partially offset by favorable product mix.
A reconciliation of net income attributable to PQ Group Holdings to Segment Adjusted EBITDA is as follows:
(a)We use Adjusted EBITDA as a performance measure to evaluate our financial results. Because our Catalysts segment includes our 50% interest in the Zeolyst Joint Venture, we include an adjustment for our 50% proportionate share of depreciation, amortization and interest expense of the Zeolyst Joint Venture.
(b)Represents the amortization of the fair value adjustments associated with the equity affiliate investment in the Zeolyst Joint Venture as a result of the Business Combination. We determined the fair value of the equity affiliate investment and the fair value step-up was then attributed to the underlying assets of the Zeolyst Joint Venture. Amortization is primarily related to the fair value adjustments associated with inventory, fixed assets and intangible assets, including customer relationships and technical know-how.
(c)When asset disposals occur, we remove the impact of net gain/loss of the disposed asset because such impact primarily reflects the non-cash write-off of long-lived assets no longer in use. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the net gain on asset disposals includes the gains related to the sale of a non-core product line and sale of property.
(d)Reflects the exclusion of the foreign currency transaction gains and losses in the statements of income primarily related to the Euro-denominated term loan (which was settled as part of the February 2018 term loan refinancing) and the non-permanent intercompany debt denominated in local currency translated to U.S. dollars.
(e)Represents non-cash adjustments to the Company’s LIFO reserves for certain inventories in the U.S. that are valued using the LIFO method, which we believe provides a means of comparison to other companies that may not use the same basis of accounting for inventories.
(f)Represents the costs related to several transactions that are completed, pending or abandoned and that we believe are not representative of our ongoing business operations.
(g)Includes the impact of restructuring, integration and business optimization expenses which are incremental costs that are not representative of our ongoing business operations.
(h)Represents adjustments for defined benefit pension plan costs in our statement of income. More than two-thirds of our defined benefit pension plan obligations are under defined benefit pension plans that are frozen, and the remaining obligations primarily relate to plans operated in certain of our non-U.S. locations that, pursuant to jurisdictional requirements, cannot be frozen. As such, we do not view such expenses as core to our ongoing business operations.
(i)Represents a non-cash gain on the write-off of the remaining liability under a contractual supply arrangement. As part of Eco’s acquisition of substantially all of the assets of Solvay USA Inc’ sulfuric acid refining services business unit on December 1, 2014, we recognized a liability as part of business combination accounting related to our obligation to serve a customer under a pre-existing unfavorable supply agreement. In December 2018, the customer who was party to the agreement closed its facility, and as a result, we were relieved from our obligation to continue to supply the customer on the below market contract. Because the fair value of the unfavorable contract liability was recognized as part of the application of business combination accounting, and since the write-off of the remaining liability was non-cash in nature, we believe this gain is a special item that is not representative of our ongoing business operations.
(j)Other costs consist of certain expenses that are not core to our ongoing business operations, including environmental remediation-related costs associated with the legacy operations of our business prior to the Business Combination, capital and franchise taxes, non-cash asset retirement obligation accretion and the initial implementation of procedures to comply with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Included in this line-item are rounding discrepancies that may arise from rounding from dollars (in thousands) to dollars (in millions).
Adjusted Net Income
Summarized adjusted net income information is shown below in the following table:
(1)We define adjusted net income as net income attributable to PQ Group Holdings adjusted for non-operating income or expense and the impact of certain non-cash or other items that are included in net income that we do not consider indicative of our ongoing operating performance. Adjusted net income is presented as a key performance indicator as we believe it will enhance a prospective investor’s understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. Adjusted net income may not be comparable with net income or adjusted net income as defined by other companies.
(2)Refer to the Adjusted EBITDA notes above for more information with respect to each adjustment.
(3)Amount represents the impact to tax expense in net income before non-controlling interest and the related adjustments to net income associated with the GILTI provisions of the TCJA. We were required to record incremental tax provision impact with respect to GILTI even though we had historical NOL amounts to offset the GILTI taxable income inclusion. This NOL utilization precluded us from recognizing GILTI credits which would otherwise help offset the tax impacts of GILTI. No GILTI credits will be recognized with respect to GILTI until the cumulative NOL balance had been exhausted. Because the GILTI provision did not impact our cash taxes (given available U.S. NOLs), we do not view this item as a component of core operations.
(4)Represents the transaction tax adjustment for the impact of the TCJA and the rate change in the Netherlands related to the Dutch Tax Plan 2019 recorded in net income.
The adjustments to net income attributable to PQ Group Holdings Inc. are shown net of applicable statutory tax rates.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity consist of cash flow from operations, existing cash balances as well as funds available under our asset based lending revolving credit facility. We expect that ongoing requirements for debt service and capital expenditures will be funded from these sources of funds. Our primary liquidity requirements include funding working capital requirements (primarily inventory and accounts receivable, net of accounts payable and other accrued liabilities), debt service requirements and capital expenditures. Our capital expenditures include both maintenance of business, which includes spending on maintenance and health, safety and environmental initiatives as well as growth, which includes spending to drive organic sales growth and cost savings initiatives.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and cash flows from operations, combined with availability under our asset based lending revolving credit facility, will be sufficient to meet our presently anticipated future cash needs for at least the next 12 months. We may also pursue strategic acquisition opportunities, which may impact our future cash requirements. We may, from time to time, increase borrowings under our asset based lending revolving credit facility to meet our future cash needs. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $135.5 million and availability of $102.5 million under our asset based lending revolving credit facility, after giving effect to $18.2 million of outstanding letters of credit and no revolving credit facility borrowings, for a total available liquidity of $238.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants under our debt agreements.
Included in our cash and cash equivalents balance as of December 31, 2020 was $33.4 million of cash and cash equivalents held in foreign jurisdictions. We repatriate cash held outside of the United States from certain foreign subsidiaries in order to meet domestic liquidity needs. Depending on domestic and foreign cash balances, we have certain flexibility to repatriate funds in order to meet domestic liquidity needs. In certain cases, the repatriation of foreign cash under previous U.S. tax law had generally been subject to U.S. income taxes at the time of cash distribution. Due to the enactment of the TCJA in December 2017, our overseas earnings repatriation will generally no longer be subject to U.S. federal income taxes at the time of cash distribution. However, future earnings may still be taxed for foreign and state income tax purposes.
Over the course of the next twelve months and beyond, we anticipate making significant cash payments for known contractual and other obligations, including:
Principal and interest on long-term debt
As of December 31, 2020, our total indebtedness was $1,426.4 million, with up to $102.5 million of available borrowings under our asset based lending revolving credit facility. Our liquidity requirements are significant, primarily due to debt service requirements. As reported, our cash interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was approximately $90.3 million, $117.8 million and $110.8 million, respectively. Before any impact of hedges, a one percent change in assumed interest rates for our variable interest credit facilities would have an annual impact of approximately $11.3 million on interest expense. None of the principal balances on our debt are due in the next twelve months.
Interest payments due within the next twelve months are $54.2 million using the interest rate effective as of December 31, 2020 on our variable interest credit facilities. Interest on long-term debt excludes amortization of deferred financing fees and original issue discount. The actual interest payments may differ materially based on actual amounts of long-term debt outstanding and actual interest rates in future periods.
Subject to approval by our board of directors, we may raise additional capital or borrowings from time to time or seek to refinance our existing debt. There can be no assurances that future capital or borrowings will be available to us, and the cost and availability of new capital or borrowings could be materially impacted by market conditions. Further, the decision to refinance our existing debt is based on a number of factors, including general market conditions and our ability to refinance on attractive terms at any given point in time. Any attempts to raise additional capital or borrowings or refinance our existing debt could cause us to incur significant charges. Such charges could have a material impact on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
Purchase commitments
We have entered into short and long-term purchase commitments for various key raw materials and energy requirements. The purchase obligations include agreements with various suppliers to purchase goods that are enforceable and legally binding, and that specify all significant terms, including fixed and minimum quantities to be purchased, fixed, minimum or variable provisions, and the approximate timing of the transaction. As of December 31, 2020, we had $22.0 million in purchase commitments, excluding agreements that are cancellable without penalty, of which $13.7 million is expected to be incurred in 2021.
Cash Flow
(1)Includes depreciation, amortization, changes related to purchase accounting fair value adjustments, amortization of deferred financing costs and original issue discount, goodwill impairment charges, debt extinguishment costs, foreign currency exchange gains and losses, pension and postretirement healthcare benefit expense and funding, deferred income tax benefit, net losses on asset disposals, stock compensation expense, equity in net income and dividends received from affiliated companies, and net interest income on swaps designated as net investment hedges.
The following discussions related to our cash flows are presented on a continuing operations basis, which excludes the cash flows from our former Performance Materials business accounted for as a discontinued operation.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities was $205.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $227.7 million provided for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash generated by net income and non-working capital related activities was lower during the year ended December 31, 2020 by $24.4 million compared to the prior year. Cash provided by working capital during the year ended December 31, 2020 was favorable compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Working capital for the year ended December 31, 2020 provided cash of $9.2 million, compared to cash provided of $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The decrease in cash generated by net income and non-working capital related activities of $24.4 million as compared to the prior year period was primarily due to a decrease in gross profit driven by lower sales volumes and higher transaction related costs.
The $2.2 million increase in cash from working capital as compared to the prior year was primarily due to favorable changes in inventory and accounts payable, which were partially offset by unfavorable changes in accrued liabilities, accounts receivable and prepaid and other assets balances.
The favorable change in inventory balances is due to a reduction in inventory in 2020 compared to an inventory build in 2019. We increased inventory levels at the end of the 2019 period within our polyolefin catalyst product group to meet sales demand in the 2020 period. The favorable change in accounts payable is due to timing of payments. The unfavorable change in accrued liabilities was primarily due to the timing of interest payments. The reduced cash flow contribution from accounts receivable was driven by the timing of collections on our receivable balances during the current year period versus prior year periods. The prior year period began with a higher receivable balances due to increased sales volumes at the end of December 31, 2018, of which those receivables were collected early in the 2019 period.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $562.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used of $18.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash used in investing activities primarily consisted of $97.1 million and $111.1 million to fund capital expenditures during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold our Performance Materials business for net cash proceeds of $624.3 million, sold a product line which resulted in proceeds of $18.0 million, sold additional assets which generated proceeds of $9.4 million, received $5.0 million in interest proceeds related to our cross currency swaps and sold our investment in a joint venture of $1.8 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we settled our cross currency swaps and received cash proceeds of $38.1 million, sold a product line which resulted in proceeds of $27.7 million, sold additional assets which generated proceeds of $17.6 million and received $8.5 million in interest proceeds related to our cross currency swaps.
Net cash used in financing activities was $721.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used of $214.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in financing activities was primarily driven by $470.3 million and $215.0 million in net repayments of our debt and revolving credit facility made during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid a dividend of $1.80 per common share, which resulted in a cash outflow of $243.7 million.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Net cash provided by operating activities was $227.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $213.2 million provided for the year ended December 31, 2018. Cash generated by net income and non-working capital related activities was lower during the year ended December 31, 2019 by $4.5 million compared to the prior year. Cash used by working capital during the year ended December 31, 2019 was favorable compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Working capital for the year ended December 31, 2019 provided cash of $7.0 million, compared to cash used of $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The decrease in cash generated by net income and non-working capital related activities of $4.5 million as compared to the prior year period was primarily due to a decrease in gross profit driven by lower customer volumes and higher labor costs.
The $19.0 million increase in cash from working capital as compared to the prior year was primarily due to favorable changes in accounts receivable, prepaid and other current assets and accounts payable, which were partially offset by unfavorable changes in accrued liabilities and inventory balances.
The increase in cash flow related to accounts receivable was due the timing of collections on our receivable balances during the current year period. We had higher receivables at the end of the 2018 period, of which those receivables were collected early in the 2019 period. The favorable change in prepaid and other current assets was due to lower receivable balances with our joint ventures and other related parties as well as the receipt of insurance proceeds during the year ended December 31, 2019. The favorable change in accounts payable was due to decrease in capital spending. The unfavorable change in accrued liabilities was primarily due to the timing of wage and interest payments. The unfavorable change in inventory was due to higher inventory build to meet future sales commitments.
Net cash used in investing activities was $18.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to net cash used of $98.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. Cash used in investing activities primarily consisted of $111.1 million and $111.8 million to fund capital expenditures during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we settled our cross currency swaps and received proceeds of $38.1 million, sold a product line which resulted in proceeds of $27.7 million, sold additional assets which generated proceeds of $17.6 million and received $8.5 million in interest proceeds related to our cross currency swaps. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we sold assets which generated proceeds of $12.4 million and received $4.9 million in interest proceeds related to our cross currency swaps.
Net cash used in financing activities was $214.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to net cash used of $135.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. Net cash used in financing activities was primarily driven by $215.0 million and $107.5 million in repayments of our term debt and revolving credit facility made during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Debt
As of December 31, 2020 our total debt was $1,426.4 million excluding the original issue discount of $15.6 million and deferred financing fees of $10.4 million for our senior secured credit facilities and notes. Our net debt was $1,290.9 million, including cash of $135.5 million. Our total available liquidity as of December 31, 2020 was $238.0 million, which represents our cash on hand of $135.5 million plus our excess availability under our asset based lending revolving credit facility of $102.5 million, after giving effect to $18.2 million of outstanding letters of credit and no revolving credit facility borrowings. We may seek, subject to market conditions and other factors, opportunities to repurchase, refinance or otherwise reprice our debt.
Senior Secured Credit Facilities
On May 4, 2016, we entered into senior secured credit facilities (collectively, the “Senior Secured Credit Facilities”) that were comprised of a $1,200.0 million term loan facility consisting of a $900.0 million U.S. dollar-denominated tranche and a $300.0 million Euro-denominated (or €265.0 million) tranche (the “2016 Term Loan Facility”), and a $200.0 million asset-based revolving credit facility (the “ABL Facility”).
On February 8, 2018, we refinanced the 2016 Term Loan Facility with a new $1,267.0 million senior secured term loan facility (the “Term Loan Facility”) by entering into the Third Amendment Agreement to the 2016 Term Loan Facility, which amended and restated the 2016 Term Loan Facility. Pursuant to the Third Amendment Agreement, the Term Loan Facility accrued interest at a floating rate of LIBOR (with a zero percent minimum LIBOR floor) plus 2.50% per annum and was scheduled to mature in February 2025.
In February 2020, we re-priced the $459.7 million Term Loan Facility to reduce the applicable interest rate and extend the maturity of the facility to February 2027. The terms of the facility were substantially consistent following the re-pricing, except that borrowings under the term loan will bear interest at a rate equal to a floating rate of LIBOR plus 2.25% per annum.
The ABL Facility provides for up to $200.0 million in revolving credit borrowings consisting of up to $150.0 million in U.S. available borrowings, up to $10.0 million in Canadian available borrowings and up to $40.0 million of European available borrowings. Borrowings under the ABL Facility bear interest at a rate equal to the LIBOR rate or the base rate elected by us at the time of the borrowing plus a margin of between 1.50%-2.00% or 0.50%-1.00%, respectively, depending on availability under the ABL Facility. In addition, there is an annual commitment fee equal to 0.375%, with a step-down to 0.25% based on the average usage of the revolving credit borrowings available. As of December 31, 2020, there were no revolving credit borrowings under the ABL Facility. Revolving credit borrowings are payable at our option throughout the term of the ABL Facility with the balance due May 4, 2021. We were in compliance with all debt covenants as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. On March 20, 2020, we amended our existing ABL facility to increase the aggregate amount of the revolving loan commitments available by $50.0 million to $250.0 million, consisting of up to $195.0 million in U.S. commitments, up to $15.0 million in Canadian commitments and up to $40.0 million in European commitments. The maturity of the facility has been extended to March 20, 2025. Following the amendment, the borrowings under the amended ABL Facility bear interest at a rate equal to the LIBOR rate or the base rate plus a margin of between 1.25% and 1.75% or 0.25% to 0.75%, respectively.
The Company has the ability to request letters of credit under the ABL Facility. The Company had $18.2 million of letters of credit outstanding as of December 31, 2020, which reduce available borrowings under the ABL Facility by such amounts.
6.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2022 - Redeemed in 2020
Concurrent with the Business Combination, we issued $625.0 million of 6.750% Senior Secured Notes due November 2022 (the “6.75% Senior Secured Notes”) in transactions exempt from or not subject to registration under the Securities Act pursuant to Rule 144A and Regulation S under the Securities Act of 1933. Interest on the 6.75% Senior Secured Notes was payable on May 15 and November 15 of each year, commencing November 15, 2016. No principal payments were required with respect to the 6.75% Senior Secured Notes prior to their final maturity. The 6.75% Senior Secured Notes were to mature on November 15, 2022.
In July 2020, we entered into an agreement for a new senior secured term loan facility. The proceeds were used to redeem the 6.75% Senior Secured Notes. Refer to the New Senior Secured Term Loan Facility section of this note for further discussion.
New Senior Secured Term Loan Facility due February 2027
In July 2020, we entered into an agreement for a new senior secured term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $650.0 million with an original issue discount of 1.5% and interest at a floating rate of LIBOR (with a 1.0% minimum LIBOR floor) plus 3.0% per annum. The proceeds were used to redeem our existing $625.0 million of 6.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2022 and pay the associated early redemption premiums. The new senior secured term loan facility requires scheduled quarterly amortization payments, each equal to 0.25% of the original principal amount of the loans under the new senior secured term loan facility.
5.75% Senior Unsecured Notes due 2025
On December 11, 2017, we issued $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.75% Senior Unsecured Notes due 2025 (the “5.75% Senior Unsecured Notes”) in a private placement exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act. The 5.75% Senior Unsecured Notes mature on December 15, 2025. Interest on the 5.75% Senior Unsecured Notes is to be paid semi-annually on February 15 and August 15, commencing August 15, 2018, at an annual rate of 5.75% per year.
Capital Expenditures
Maintenance capital expenditures include spending on maintenance of business, health, safety and environmental initiatives. Growth capital expenditures include spending to drive organic sales growth and cost savings initiatives. These capital expenditures represent our “book” capital expenditures for which the company has recorded, but not necessarily paid for the capital expenditures.
Capital expenditures remained at a level sufficient for required maintenance and certain expansion growth initiatives during these periods. Growth capital expenditures are lower in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 due to delayed expansion capital to align with market conditions. Maintenance capital expenditures are lower in the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to December 31, 2018 due to lower plant maintenance costs and the timing of turnaround projects.
Pension Funding
We paid $9.1 million, $8.8 million and $6.8 million in cash contributions into our defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement plans during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The net periodic pension and postretirement expense was $0.9 million, $3.5 million, and $2.3 million for those same periods, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our pension plans and other post-retirement benefit plans were underfunded by $44.0 million and $55.3 million, respectively. In addition, our supplemental retirement plan had a liability balance of $12.4 million and $11.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which is funded by our general assets including assets held in a Rabbi trust, or restoration plan assets, of $3.7 million and $4.2 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had $18.2 million and $19.9 million of outstanding letters of credit on our revolver facility as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP and our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and related disclosures. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other relevant factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We review these matters and reflect changes in estimates as appropriate. We have identified below the accounting policies, estimates and critical judgment areas that we believe could have a material effect on our financial position, liquidity or results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under our agreements, we perform the following steps: (i) identify the contract with the customer; (ii) determine whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measure the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation.
We identify a contract when an agreement with a customer creates legally enforceable rights and obligations, which occurs when a contract has been approved by both parties, the parties are committed to perform their respective obligations, each party’s rights and payment terms are clearly identified, commercial substance exists and it is probable that we will collect the consideration to which we are entitled.
Evidence of a contract with a customer may take the form of a master service agreement (“MSA”), a MSA in combination with an underlying purchase order, a combination of a pricing quote with an underlying purchase order or an individual purchase order received from a customer. Certain of our customers enter into MSAs that establish the terms, including prices, under which orders to purchase goods may be placed. In cases where the MSA contains a distinct order for goods or contains an enforceable minimum quantity to be purchased by the customer, we consider the MSA to be evidence of a contract with a customer as the MSA creates enforceable rights and obligations. In cases where the MSA does not contain a distinct order for goods, evidence of a contract with a customer is the purchase order issued under the MSA. Our customers may also negotiate orders via pricing quotes, which typically detail product pricing, delivery terms and payment information. When a customer procures goods under this method, we consider the combination of the pricing quote and the purchase order to create enforceable rights and obligations. Absent either a MSA or pricing quote, we consider an individual purchase order to create enforceable rights and obligations.
We identify a performance obligation in a contract for each promised good that is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract and for which the customer can benefit from the good. The majority of our contracts have a single performance obligation, which is the promise to transfer individual goods to the customer. Certain of our contracts include multiple performance obligations under which the purchase price for each distinct performance obligation is defined in the contract. These distinct performance obligations may include stand-ready provisions, which are arrangements to provide a customer assurance that they will have access to output from our manufacturing facilities, or monthly reservations of capacity fees. We consider stand-ready provisions and reservation of capacity fees to be performance obligations satisfied over time. Revenues related to stand-ready provisions and reservation of capacity fees are recognized on a ratable basis throughout the contract term and billed to the customer on a monthly basis.
As described above, our MSAs with our customers may outline prices for individual products or contract provisions. MSAs in the our Performance Chemicals and Refining Services segments may contain provisions whereby raw materials costs are passed-through to the customer per the terms of their contract. Our exposure to fluctuations in raw materials prices is limited, as the majority of pass-through contract provisions reset based on fluctuations in the underlying raw material price. MSAs in our Refining Services segment also contain take-or-pay arrangements, whereby the customer would incur a penalty in the form of a shortfall volume fee. Currently there is no history in which customers fail to meet the contractual minimum. Revenue from product sales are recorded at the sales price, which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established and which result from discounts, returns or other allowances that are offered within contracts with our customers.
We recognize revenues when performance obligations under the terms of a contract with our customer are satisfied, which generally occurs at a point in time by transferring control of a product to the customer. We determine the point in time when a customer obtains control of a product and we satisfy the performance obligation by considering factors including when we have a right to payment for the product, the customer has legal title to the product, we have transferred possession of the product, the customer has assumed the risks and rewards of ownership of the product and the customer has accepted the product. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods. We do not have any significant payment terms as payment is received at, or shortly after, the point of sale.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Assets and liabilities of acquired businesses are measured at their estimated fair values at the dates of acquisition. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired, including identified intangibles, is recorded as goodwill. The determination and allocation of fair value to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is based on various assumptions and valuation methodologies requiring considerable management judgment, including estimates based on historical information, current market data and future expectations.
Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized, but are tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events or circumstances exist that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying amount.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level. In performing tests for goodwill impairment, we are able to use our discretion to first perform an optional qualitative assessment about the likelihood of the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeding its fair value. The qualitative assessment need not be applied to all reporting units. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount based on the qualitative assessment, we perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test to identify the potential goodwill impairment and measure the amount of the goodwill impairment loss, if any, to be recognized for that reporting unit. For the annual assessments in 2020 and 2019, we bypassed the option to perform the qualitative assessment and proceeded directly to performing the quantitative goodwill impairment test for each of our reporting units. The quantitative test identifies both the potential existence of impairment and the amount of impairment loss. In performing our annual impairment test on goodwill as of October 1, 2020, we determined that an impairment existed with respect to our Performance Chemicals segment. As a result, we recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $260.0 million.
In applying the quantitative test, the Company calculates and compares the reporting unit’s estimated fair value to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is not impaired. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its implied fair value, an impairment charge is recognized, requiring recognition of a goodwill impairment charge for the differential up to the carrying value of goodwill. An impairment loss cannot exceed the carrying value of goodwill assigned to a reporting unit and the loss establishes a new basis in the goodwill. Subsequent reversal of an impairment loss is not permitted.
For the purposes of the quantitative goodwill impairment test, we determine the fair value of our reporting units using a combination of a market approach and an income, or discounted cash flow, approach. Estimating the fair value of a reporting unit requires various assumptions including the use of projections of future cash flows and discount rates that reflect the risks associated with achieving those cash flows. The key assumptions used in estimating the fair value are operating margin growth rates, revenue growth rates, the weighted average cost of capital, the perpetual growth rate, and the estimated earnings market multiples of each reporting unit. The market value is estimated using publicly traded comparable company values by applying their most recent annual adjusted EBITDA multiples to the reporting unit’s adjusted EBITDA for the trailing twelve months. The income approach value is estimated using a discounted cash flow approach. The assumptions about future cash flows and growth rates are based on our assessment of a number of factors including the reporting unit’s recent performance against budget as well as management’s ability to execute planned future strategic initiatives. Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in those future cash flows.
For intangible assets other than goodwill, definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives. Intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized, but rather are tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the intangible asset below its carrying amount. Our indefinite-lived intangible assets include trade names and certain trademarks. Similar to the goodwill impairment test, we may first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. If we choose to bypass the qualitative assessment, or if the qualitative assessment indicates that the indefinite-lived intangible asset is more likely than not impaired, a quantitative impairment test must be performed. Unlike the goodwill impairment test, the quantitative test for indefinite-lived intangible assets is a one-step test comparing the fair value of the asset to its carrying amount. If the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than the carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the difference.
The unit of accounting used to test our indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment is at the reporting unit level. The fair values of our indefinite-lived trade names and trademarks are determined for impairment testing purposes based on an income approach using a discounted cash flow valuation model under a relief from royalty methodology. Significant assumptions under the relief from royalty method include the royalty rate a market participant may assume, projected sales and the discount rate applied to the estimated cash flows.
For definite-lived intangible assets, we amortize technical know-how over periods that range from fourteen to twenty years, customer relationships over periods that range from seven to fifteen years, trademarks over a fifteen year period, contracts over periods that range from two to sixteen years, and permits over five years. We perform an impairment review of definite-lived intangible assets when facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable from its undiscounted future cash flows. The impairment test for definite-lived intangible assets is consistent with the test applied to property, plant and equipment as described in our policy.
Assessment of the potential impairment of goodwill and intangible assets is an integral part of our normal ongoing review of operations. Testing for potential impairment of these assets is significantly dependent on numerous assumptions and reflects management's best estimates at a particular point in time. Estimates based on these assumptions may differ significantly from actual results. Changes in factors and assumptions used in assessing potential impairments can have a significant impact on the existence and magnitude of impairments, as well as the time in which such impairments are recognized.
In addition, we continually review our diverse portfolio of assets to ensure they are achieving their greatest potential and are aligned with our growth strategy. Strategic decisions involving a particular group of assets may trigger an assessment of the recoverability of the related assets. Such an assessment could result in impairment losses.
For further information see Note 15 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets.
Income Taxes
We operate within multiple taxing jurisdictions and are subject to tax filing requirements and potential audits within these jurisdictions. Our operations and the global complexity of tax regulations require assessments of uncertainties and judgments in estimating taxes we will ultimately pay. The final taxes paid are dependent upon many factors, including negotiations with taxing authorities in various jurisdictions, outcomes of tax litigation and resolution of disputes arising from federal, state and international tax audits in the normal course of business. The resolution of these uncertainties may result in adjustments to our tax assets and tax liabilities. We use the asset and liability method in accounting for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, using statutory tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date. We evaluate our deferred tax assets each period to ensure that estimated future taxable income will be sufficient in character (e.g., capital gain versus ordinary income treatment), amount and timing, to result in their realizability. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets, unless it is more likely than not that those assets will be realized. Considerable judgments are required in establishing deferred tax valuation allowances. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences and carryforward deferred tax assets become deductible or utilized. We consider the scheduled reversal of taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income and tax-planning strategies in making this assessment. As events and circumstances change, valuation allowances are adjusted within results from operations when applicable.
Generally, APB 23 of ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”), provides guidance with respect to establishing deferred income taxes on earnings from foreign subsidiaries, to the extent that these earnings are considered to be available for repatriation. Further, ASC 740-30 requires that deferred taxes be established with respect to the earnings of a foreign subsidiary, unless existing tax law provides a means by which the investment in a subsidiary can be recovered tax-free. We have determined that we are able repatriate the non-permanently reinvested earnings of our foreign subsidiaries in a tax-free manner. As such, we are able to assert for purposes of ASC 740-30 that no deferred income taxes are needed with respect to earnings from foreign subsidiaries.
We recognize net tax benefits under the recognition and measurement criteria of ASC 740, which prescribes requirements and other guidance for financial statement recognition and measurement of positions taken or expected to be taken on tax returns. We recognize a financial statement benefit for positions taken for tax return purposes when it will be more likely than not (i.e. greater than 50%) that the positions will be sustained upon tax examination, based solely on the technical merits of the tax positions. Otherwise, no tax benefit is recognized. The tax benefits recognized are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We recognize potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of income tax expense. Tax examinations are often complex as tax authorities may disagree with the treatment of items reported by us and may require several years to resolve. These accrued liabilities represent a provision for taxes that are reasonably expected to be incurred on the basis of available information but which are not certain.
On December 22, 2017, the TCJA was enacted into law. The TCJA provided for several significant tax law changes and modifications, including the reduction of the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21%, the requirement for companies to pay a one-time transition tax on earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries that were previously tax deferred, as well as the creation of new taxes on certain foreign-sourced earnings. At December 31, 2018 we had completed our accounting for the impacts of the enactment of the Act.
The 2020 U.S. federal impact to tax expense with respect to GILTI is $7.8 million. Based on FASB guidance, we are permitted to make an accounting policy election to either (1) treat the taxes incurred as a result of the GILTI provision as a current-period expense when incurred or (2) factor such amounts into our measurement of deferred taxes. We have elected to treat any expense incurred as a current-period expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
We grant stock-based compensation awards in connection with our stock incentive plans. Under the terms of the incentive plans, we are authorized to issue equity awards to our employees, directors and affiliates. The grants have taken the form of restricted stock awards, restricted stock units, performance stock units and stock options. Restricted stock awards provide the recipient with shares of our stock subject to certain vesting requirements. Restricted stock units and performance stock units provide the recipient with the right to receive shares of our stock at a future date if certain vesting conditions are met. Stock option awards provide the recipient the ability to purchase shares of our stock at a given strike price upon the satisfaction of certain vesting requirements.
The vesting requirements associated with the awards include a mix of both service and/or performance conditions. Depending on the award and recipient, the service condition may reflect a cliff vesting provision (e.g., 100% vested upon four years of service) or a graded vesting provision (e.g., 33.3% vested each year over a period of three years). Restricted stock awards and stock options issued with performance conditions vest based on the occurrence of a defined liquidity event upon which certain investment funds affiliated with CCMP receive proceeds exceeding certain thresholds. Although achievement of the performance condition is subject to continued service with us, the terms of awards issued with performance conditions stipulate that the performance vesting condition can be attained for a period of six months following separation from service under certain circumstances, depending on the means of separation from the Company and subject to other factors such as individual separation agreements. The same performance vesting condition for our restricted stock awards also governs the achievement of the performance vesting condition for our stock options. The value of the restricted stock awards granted was based on the average of the high and low trading prices of our common stock on the NYSE on the preceding trading day, in accordance with our policy for valuing such awards.
In addition to restricted stock awards, we have granted restricted stock units and performance stock units as part of our equity incentive compensation program. Each restricted stock unit provides the recipient with the right to receive a share of common stock subject to graded vesting terms based on service, which generally requires one year of service for members of our board of directors and three years of service for employees. Performance stock units vest upon the achievement of Company-specific financial performance targets and the provision of service through the vesting date.
We recognize compensation expense related to our equity awards with service conditions on a straight-line basis over the stated vesting period for each award. Expense related to our equity awards with performance conditions is recognized in the period in which it becomes probable that the performance target will be achieved. No compensation expense has been recognized to-date on any of our restricted stock awards and stock options subject to vesting based on performance conditions, since a liquidity event triggering vesting of the awards has not occurred, nor is it considered probable.
The grant date fair value of restricted stock awards, restricted stock units and performance stock units is based on the value of our common stock as traded on the New York Stock Exchange. The grant date fair value of stock option awards is estimated using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. Determining the fair value of stock option awards at the grant date requires judgment, including estimates of the average risk-free interest rate, dividend yield, volatility and expected term. Since we have limited experience with respect to historical exercise and forfeiture rates or patterns, we have estimated certain assumptions using acceptable simplified methods and through benchmarking to our peer group of companies.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards and their effect on us.