Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains a discussion of our business, including a general overview of our segments, our results of operations, our liquidity and capital resources, and our quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk.
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. The forward-looking statements are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside of our control. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Remarks Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in the front of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Management Summary
We are the exclusive United States trade co-publisher of Usborne children’s books and the owner of Kane Miller. We operate two separate segments; UBAM and Publishing, to sell our Usborne and Kane Miller children’s books. These two segments each have their own customer base. The Publishing segment markets its products on a wholesale basis to various retail accounts. The UBAM segment markets its products through a network of independent sales consultants using a combination of home shows, social media platform events (called “online parties”) and book fairs. All other supporting administrative activities are recognized as other expenses outside of our two segments. Other expenses are primarily compensation of our office, warehouse and sales support staff as well as the cost of operating and maintaining our corporate office and distribution facility.
UBAM Division
Our UBAM division uses a multi-level direct selling platform to market books through independent sales representatives (“consultants”) located throughout the United States. The customer base of UBAM consists of individual purchasers, as well as schools and public libraries. Revenues are primarily generated through book showings in individual homes, on social media collaboration platforms, through book fairs with school and public libraries and other events. This past fiscal year continued with a significant shift toward internet sales via social media platform events, such as Facebook parties.
An important factor in the continued growth of the UBAM division is the addition of new sales consultants and the retention of existing consultants. Current active consultants (defined as those with sales during the past six months) often recruit new sales consultants. UBAM makes it easy to recruit by providing sign-up kits for which new consultants can earn rewards including discounted books and cash based on exceeding certain sales criteria. In addition, our UBAM division provides our consultants with an extensive operational handbook, valuable training and an individual website they can customize and use to operate their business.
Consultants
Our UBAM division’s multi-level marketing platform presently has eight levels of sales representatives:
●
Consultants
●
Team Leaders
●
Advanced Leaders
●
Senior Leaders
●
Executive Leaders
●
Senior Executive Leaders
●
Directors
●
Senior Directors
Upon signing up, sales representatives begin as “Consultants”. Consultants receive “weekly commissions” from each sale they make; the commission rate they receive on each sale is determined by the marketing program under which the sale is made. In addition, Consultants receive a monthly sales bonus once their sales reach an established monthly goal and other awards (called “Home Office Challenges”) for meeting other individual sales and recruiting goals for the month. Consultants who recruit a specified number of other consultants into their downline “central group” become “Team Leaders”. Upon reaching this Team Leader level, consultants become eligible to receive “monthly override payments” which are calculated on sales made from their downline central group of recruits. Team Leaders that recruit and promote other Team Leaders, and meet other established criteria, are eligible to become “Advanced Leaders”.
Once Advanced Leaders promote a second level consultant, add additional recruits and meet other established criteria, they become “Senior Leaders”, “Executive Leaders”, “Senior Executive Leaders”, “Directors” or “Senior Directors”. One-time bonus payments are made to consultants at each promotion level. Executive Leaders and higher receive an additional monthly override payment based upon the sales of their downline groups. Directors and higher receive an additional bonus payment if they promote an Advanced Leader to a Senior Leader from their central group. The maximum override payment a leader can receive is calculated on three levels below their downline central group.
During fiscal year 2021, internet sales continued to be the largest sales channel within our UBAM division. The use of social media and party plan platforms, such as those available on Facebook, have become popular sales tools. These platforms allow consultants to “present” and customers to “attend” online purchasing events from any geographical location.
Customer’s internet orders are primarily received via the consultant’s customized website, which is hosted by the Company. Consultants contact hosts or hostesses (collectively “hostess”) who then provide a list of contacts to invite to an online party. During the online party, the consultant answers attendee’s questions and provides product recommendations. These attendees then select desired products and place orders via the consultant’s customized website. Internet orders are processed through a standard online “shopping cart checkout” and the consultant receives sales credit and commission on the transaction. All internet orders are shipped directly to the end customer. The hostess earns discounted books based on the total sales from the attendees at the online party.
Home parties occur when consultants contact hostesses to hold book shows in their homes. The consultant assists the hostess in setting up the details for the show, makes a presentation at the show and takes orders for the books. The hostess earns discounted books based on the total sales at the party, including internet orders for those customers who can only attend via online access. Home party orders are typically shipped to the hostess who then distributes the books to the end customer. Customer specials are also available when customers, or their party, order above a specified amount. Additionally, home shows often provide an excellent opportunity for recruiting new consultants.
UBAM net revenues also includes sales to schools and libraries through educational consultants. The school and library program includes book fairs which are held with an organization as the sponsor. The consultant provides promotional materials to introduce our books to parents. Parents turn in their orders at a designated time. The book fair program generates discounted books for the sponsoring organization. UBAM also has various fundraiser programs. Reach for the Stars is a pledge-based reading incentive program that provides cash and books to the sponsoring organization and books for the participating children. An additional fundraising program, Cards for a Cause, offers our consultants the opportunity to help members of the community by sharing proceeds from the sale of specific items. Organizations sell variety boxes of greeting-type cards and donate a portion of the proceeds to help support their related causes.
Publishing Division
Our Publishing division operates in a market that is highly competitive, with a large number of retail companies engaged in the selling of books. The Publishing division’s customer base includes national book chains, regional and local bookstores, toy and gift stores, school supply stores and museums. To reach these markets, the Publishing division utilizes a combination of commissioned sales representatives located throughout the country and a commissioned in-house sales group located at our headquarters.
The table below shows the percentage of net revenues from our Publishing division based on market type.
Publishing Division Net Revenues by Market Type
Publishing uses a variety of methods to attract potential new customers and maintain current customers. Our employees attend many of the national trade shows held by the book selling industry each year, allowing us to contact potential buyers who may be unfamiliar with our books. We actively target the national book chains through joint promotional efforts and institutional advertising in trade publications. Our products are then featured in promotions, such as catalogs offered by the vendor. We may also seek to acquire, for a fee, an end cap position (our products are placed on the end of a shelf) in a bookstore, which we and the publishing industry consider an advantageous location in the bookstore.
Publishing’s in-house sales group targets the smaller independent book and gift store customers. This market has seen continued growth over the past several years as our sales to large bookstore chains have fluctuated based primarily on the number of promotions that we are able to run in the national chain stores. Our semi-annual, full-color, 200-page catalogs, are mailed to over 4,000 customers and potential customers. We also offer two display racks to assist stores in displaying our products.
Our Publishing division activities and sales were significantly impacted during the last fiscal year due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Many of the national trade shows were cancelled and a significant number of our retail customers temporarily closed to comply with their local health department recommendations. The Company has taken steps to limit the exposure to bad credit as well as offer flexible payment terms for those customers that requested additional time to pay their outstanding invoices.
Result of Operations
The following table shows our statements of earnings data:
See the detailed discussion of net revenues, gross margin and operating expenses by reportable segment below.
The following is a discussion of significant changes in the non-segment related operating expenses, other income and expenses and income taxes during the respective periods.
Non-Segment Operating Results
Operating expenses not associated with a reporting segment were $19.4 million for fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 compared to $13.1 million for the same period a year ago. Operating expenses increased $6.3 million due to a $3.8 million increase in payroll primarily related to an increase in warehouse labor and incentive plan expenses, an increase in freight handling costs of $1.9 million from an escalation in the number of shipments, a $0.2 million increase in depreciation expense, a $0.2 million increase in other services related to the increase in sales volumes, a $0.1 million increase in rent for the addition of warehouse space needed for the influx of inventory and other various increases totaling $0.1 million.
Interest expense decreased $0.3 million to $0.6 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, compared to $0.9 million reported for fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 due to the early extinguishment of two long-term debt agreements during the second quarter of fiscal year 2021.
Other income increased $0.2 million to $1.8 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, compared to $1.6 million for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 due primarily to increased royalties received from a national fast food restaurant chain that prints shortened versions of selected titles to include with their kids meals.
Income taxes increased $2.5 million to $4.6 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, from $2.1 million for the same period a year ago. This increase was primarily related to an increase in taxable income for the current fiscal year compared to prior fiscal year. The effective tax rate decreased by 0.5% to 26.7% for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, as compared to 27.2% for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 due to sales mix fluctuations between states. Our tax rates are higher than the federal statutory rate of 21% due to the inclusion of state income and franchise taxes.
UBAM Operating Results
The following table summarizes the operating results of the UBAM segment for the twelve months ended February 28 (29):
UBAM net revenues increased $92.7 million, or 89.7%, to $196.0 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, when compared with net revenues of $103.3 million reported for fiscal year ended February 29, 2020. The average number of active consultants in fiscal year 2021 was 48,700, an increase of 16,200, or 49.8%, from 32,500 average active consultants selling in fiscal year 2020. The Company reports the average number of active consultants as a key indicator for this division. UBAM's increase in active consultants resulted from several factors, including: an increase in families looking for non-traditional income streams to supplement or replace income lost from the COVID-19 pandemic, a change in new consultant kits which offered lower introductory prices, the restructure of our UBAM consultant success program, which was introduced during the first quarter of fiscal 2021 and technology improvements that have enhanced the customer experience and streamlined the proprietary systems that our consultants use to run their business. Our increase in active consultants and our ability to receive orders online and deliver directly to our customers’ homes resulted in our increased revenues during the current fiscal year.
UBAM gross margin increased $68.8 million, or 96.1%, to $140.4 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, from $71.6 million reported for fiscal year ended February 29, 2020. Gross margin as a percentage of net revenues increased 2.3% to 71.6% for fiscal year 2021 when compared to 69.3% for fiscal year 2020. The increase in gross margin as a percentage of net revenues was due to the change in mix of order types received. In the current fiscal year, our web sales, which have the lowest discounts and pay the highest commissions, increased significantly while book fairs, school and library sales and other in-person sale types declined year over year, due to the quarantining effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in web sales and decrease in in-person sales also resulted in overall higher sales commissions as a percentage of net revenues during the fiscal year. The overall net profit impact of the order type mix change after selling expenses, commissions and direct operating expenses was minimal.
Total UBAM operating expenses increased $53.5 million, or 98.9%, to $107.6 million during the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, when compared with $54.1 million reported for fiscal year ended February 29, 2020. Operating and selling expenses increased $15.6 million, to $31.2 million for fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 from $15.6 million reported for fiscal year 2020, primarily due to an increase in postage and freight costs of $15.0 million and an increase in expenses for trip accruals and other consultant rewards of $0.6 million, both associated with increased UBAM sales. Sales commissions increased $35.1 million, to $69.7 million, for fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 from $34.6 million reported for fiscal year 2020, due primarily to the increase in sales volumes and the increase in internet-based sales, which offer fewer discounts and higher sales commissions to consultants. General and administrative expenses increased $2.8 million to $6.7 million during the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, when compared with $3.9 million reported for fiscal year ended February 29, 2020. This increase was primarily due to $2.1 million of increased credit card transaction fees associated with increased sales volumes and a $0.7 million increase in promotions and marketing expenses associated with increased consultant counts.
Operating income of our UBAM division increased $15.4 million, or 88.5%, to $32.8 million for fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, as compared to $17.4 million reported for fiscal year ended February 29, 2020. Operating income of the UBAM division as a percentage of net revenues for the year ended February 28, 2021 was 16.7%, compared to 16.9% for the year ended February 29, 2020, a change of 0.2%, or $0.3 million. Operating income as a percentage of net revenues changed from the prior year primarily due to increased postage and freight expenses as a percentage of net revenues totaling approximately $0.8 million, partially offset by the positive impact of the change to a “virtual” annual convention in our fiscal 2020 second quarter totaling approximately $0.5 million.
Publishing Operating Results
The following table summarizes the operating results of the Publishing segment for the twelve months ended February 28 (29):
Our Publishing division’s net revenues decreased $1.1 million, or 11.3%, to $8.6 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, when compared with net revenues of $9.7 million reported for fiscal year ended February 29, 2020. The decrease in sales resulted from temporary store closures in areas impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Many Publishing customers temporarily closed during the first part of our fiscal year 2021, following the guidance from their local authorities to prevent the spread of the pandemic, and have begun reopening at varying times over the last six months of the fiscal year. In addition, many customers expanded their capacity to sell online, which had a positive impact on Publishing sales in the last six months.
Gross margin decreased $0.4 million to $4.2 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, from $4.6 million reported for fiscal year ended February 29, 2020. The decrease in gross margin primarily resulted from the decrease in net revenues. Gross margin as a percentage of net revenues increased 1.2% to 48.6% for the fiscal year 2021, compared to 47.4% reported the same period a year ago. The increase in gross margin percentage results primarily from a change in our customer mix. Customers receive varying discounts due to sales volumes and contract terms.
Operating income for the segment decreased $0.1 million, or 3.7%, to $2.6 million for fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, from $2.7 million reported during the same period last year. The decrease in operating income resulted primarily from the $0.4 million decrease in gross margin, offset by $0.1 million of reduced freight from fewer sales orders, $0.1 million reduced sales commissions from fewer sales orders and $0.1 million of reduced expenses due to trade show cancellations resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
EDC has a history of profitability and positive cash flows. We typically fund our operations from the cash we generate. We also use available cash primarily to purchase additional inventory, to pay down our outstanding bank loan balances, for capital expenditures, to pay dividends and to acquire treasury stock. During fiscal year 2021, we dramatically increased our inventory purchases based on fiscal year 2021 sales. At fiscal year-end 2021, our revolving bank credit facility loan balance was $5.2 million with $9.6 million in available capacity.
During fiscal year 2021, we generated positive cash flows from our operations of $7.8 million. These cash flows resulted from:
● net earnings of $12,624,000
Adjusted for:
● depreciation expense of $1,633,200
● share-based compensation expense of $938,600
● provision for inventory valuation allowance of $198,600
● provision for doubtful accounts of $139,800
Offset by:
● deferred income taxes of $903,400
Positively impacted by:
● increase in accounts payable of $8,952,000
● increase in accrued salaries, commissions, and other liabilities of $4,676,000
● increase in deferred revenue of $1,528,800
● increase in income taxes payable of $351,900
Negatively impacted by:
● increase in inventories, net of $21,542,300
● increase in accounts receivable of $519,400
● increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $260,100
Cash used in investing activities was $4.1 million for capital expenditures. Our capital expenditures were primarily associated with equipment purchased to increase our daily shipping capacity and the software upgrades that our UBAM consultants use to monitor their business and place customer orders.
Our capital expenditures included:
● Equipment purchased to increase our daily shipping capacity of $3,475,600
● UBAM consultant and customer facing software upgrades of $502,100
● Building and other improvements of $167,600
Cash used in financing activities was $4.9 million, which was comprised of net cash used to pay down term debt of $7.8 million, payments of $2.3 million for dividends and were offset by $5.2 million in net borrowings under the line of credit.
We continue to expect the cash generated from our operations and cash available through our line of credit with our Bank will provide us the liquidity we need to support ongoing operations. Cash generated from operations will be used to increase inventory by expanding our product lines, to liquidate existing debt, and any excess cash is expected to be distributed to our shareholders.
On February 15, 2021, the Company executed the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement with MidFirst Bank which replaced the prior loan agreement and includes multiple loans. Term Loan #1 Tranche A, originally totaling $13.4 million, was part of the prior loan agreement. Term Loan #1 Tranche A has a fixed interest rate of 4.23% with principal and interest payable monthly and a stated maturity date of December 1, 2025. Term Loan #1 is secured by the primary office, warehouse and land. The outstanding borrowings on Term Loan #1 were $11.0 million and $11.5 million as of February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020, respectively.
In addition, the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement provides a $6.0 million Advancing Term Loan to be used to finance planned equipment purchases. The Advancing Term Loan requires interest-only payments through July 15, 2021, at which time it will convert to a 60-month amortizing term loan maturing July 15, 2026. The Advancing Term Loan accrues interest at the Bank-adjusted LIBOR Index plus a tiered pricing rate based on the Company’s Adjusted Funded Debt to EBITDA Ratio, with a minimum rate of 2.75% and matures on July 15, 2026. The Company had no borrowings under the Advancing Term Loan at February 28, 2021.
The Amended and Restated Loan Agreement also provides a $15.0 million revolving loan (“Line of credit”) through August 15, 2022 with interest payable monthly at the Bank-adjusted LIBOR Index plus a tiered pricing rate based on the Company’s Adjusted Funded Debt to EBITDA Ratio, with a minimum rate of 2.75%. The Company had $5.2 million of borrowings outstanding on the line of credit as of February 28, 2021. Available credit under the revolving credit agreement was $9.6 million as of February 28, 2021.
During the second quarter of fiscal year 2021, we paid off Term Loan #1 Tranche B totaling $4.2 million from the previous loan agreement, which had a maturity date of December 1, 2025. In addition, we also paid off Term Loan #2 from the previous loan agreement totaling $2.9 million, which previously had a maturity date of June 28, 2021. The purpose of paying off these loans early was to utilize our existing cash flows from operations to increase future profits by reducing interest expense, as well as, free up future cash flows to be used to either pay dividends or purchase additional shares.
The Amended and Restated Loan Agreement also contains a provision for our use of the Bank’s letters of credit. The Bank agrees to issue or obtain issuance of commercial or stand-by letters of credit provided that the sum of the line of credit plus the letters of credit issued would not exceed the borrowing base in effect at the time. For the year ended February 28, 2021, we had no letters of credit outstanding. The agreement contains provisions that require us to maintain specified financial ratios, place limitations on additional debt with other banks, limit the amounts of dividends declared and limits the amount of shares that can be repurchased using funding from the line of credit.
The following table reflects aggregate future maturities of long-term debt during the next five fiscal years as follows:
During the first quarter of fiscal 2021 we increased our quarterly dividend payments from $0.05 to $0.06. During the third quarter of fiscal 2021 we further increased our quarterly dividend from $0.06 to $0.10 per quarter. The Company has a long history of paying quarterly dividends and expects to continue its current practice of paying quarterly dividends to its shareholders.
In April 2008, our Board of Directors amended our 1998 stock repurchase plan, establishing that we may purchase up to an additional 1,000,000 shares as market conditions warrant. In February 2019, our Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase plan to replace the amended 2008 plan. Under the new 2019 plan, the Company is authorized to purchase up to 800,000 shares of common stock, which represented approximately 10% of the outstanding shares as of February 28, 2021, of which 514,594 remains available to purchase as of February 28, 2021. Management believes using excess liquidity to purchase outstanding shares enhances the value to the remaining shareholders and that these repurchases will have no adverse effect on our short-term and long-term liquidity.
Contractual Obligations
We are a smaller reporting company and are not required to provide this information.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of February 28, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Seasonality
The Company experiences increased sales in the Fall season. We experience an increase in inventory during the Summer in anticipation for the Fall increase in sales. In addition, new titles are released twice a year, in the Spring and Fall, which increases our inventory the months preceding these scheduled releases. The Company uses available cash or working capital borrowings to fund these increases in inventory.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to our valuation of inventory, allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable, allowance for sales returns, long-lived assets and deferred income taxes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may materially differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Historically, however, actual results have not differed materially from those determined using required estimates. Our significant accounting policies are described in the notes accompanying the financial statements included elsewhere in this report. However, we consider the following accounting policies to be more significantly dependent on the use of estimates and assumptions.
Share-Based Compensation
We account for share-based compensation whereby share-based payment transactions with employees, such as stock options and restricted stock, are measured at estimated fair value at the date of grant. For awards subject to service conditions, compensation expense is recognized over the vesting period on a straight-line basis. Awards subject to performance conditions are attributed separately for each vesting tranche of the award and are recognized ratably from the service inception date to the vesting date for each tranche. Forfeitures are recognized when they occur.
The restricted share awards granted under the 2019 Long-Term Incentive Plan (“2019 LTI Plan”) contain both service and performance conditions. The Company recognizes share compensation expense only for the portion of the restricted share awards that are considered probable of vesting. Shares are considered granted, and the service inception date begins, when a mutual understanding of the key terms and conditions between the Company and the employees have been established. The fair value of these awards are determined based on the closing price of the shares on the grant date. The probability of restricted share awards granted with future performance conditions is evaluated at each reporting period and compensation expense is adjusted based on the probability assessment.
During fiscal years 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized $0.9 million and $0.7 million, respectively, of compensation expense associated with the shares granted.
Revenue Recognition
Sales associated with product orders are recognized and recorded when products are shipped. Products are shipped FOB- Shipping Point. UBAM’s sales are generally paid at the time the product is ordered. Sales which have been paid for but not shipped are classified as deferred revenue on the balance sheet. Sales associated with consignment inventory are recognized when reported and payment associated with the sale has been remitted. Transportation revenue represents the amount billed to the customer for shipping the product and is recorded when the product is shipped.
Estimated allowances for sales returns are recorded as sales are recognized. Management uses a moving average calculation to estimate the allowance for sales returns. We are not responsible for product damaged in transit. Damaged returns are primarily received from the retail customers of our Publishing division. Those damages occur in the stores, not in shipping to the stores, and we typically do not offer credit for damaged returns. It is industry practice to accept non-damaged returns from retail customers. Management has estimated and included a reserve for sales returns of $0.2 million for the fiscal years ended February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain an allowance for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments and a reserve for vendor share markdowns (collectively “allowance for doubtful accounts”). An estimate of uncollectible amounts is made by management based upon historical bad debts, current customer receivable balances, age of customer receivable balances, customers’ financial conditions and current economic trends. The COVID-19 pandemic caused several of our retail customers to temporarily close their stores during the past fiscal year. The impact of the temporary store closures on our customers is uncertain and many customers may be financially harmed and unable to continue operations. Management has evaluated customers with significant receivable balances to determine if additional bad debt reserves are needed. In addition, we have offered extended payment terms to customers that have requested assistance. Management has estimated an allowance for doubtful accounts of $0.3 million and $0.2 million as of February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020, respectively. Included within this allowance is $0.1 million of reserve for vendor discounts to sell remaining inventory as of February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020.
Inventory
Our inventory contains over 2,000 titles, each with different rates of sale depending upon the nature and popularity of the title. Almost all of our product line is saleable as the books are not topical in nature and remain current in content today as well as in the future. Most of our products are printed in China, Europe, Singapore, India, Malaysia and Dubai resulting in a four to six-month lead-time to have a title printed and delivered to us.
Certain inventory is maintained in a noncurrent classification. Management continually estimates and calculates the amount of noncurrent inventory. Noncurrent inventory arises due to occasional purchases of titles in quantities in excess of what will be sold within the normal operating cycle, due to the minimum order requirements of our suppliers. Noncurrent inventory was estimated by management using the current year turnover ratio by title. All inventory in excess of 2½ years of anticipated sales is classified as noncurrent inventory. Noncurrent inventory balances prior to valuation allowances were $0.9 million and $1.2 million at February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020, respectively.
Consultants that meet certain eligibility requirements may request and receive inventory on consignment. We believe allowing our consultants to have consignment inventory greatly increases their ability to be successful in making effective presentations at home shows, book fairs and other events; and having consignment inventory leads to additional sales opportunities. Approximately 4.0% of our active consultants maintained consignment inventory at the end of fiscal year 2021. Consignment inventory is stated at cost, less an estimated reserve for consignment inventory that is not expected to be sold or returned to the Company. The total cost of inventory on consignment with consultants was $1.1 million and $1.5 million at February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020, respectively.
Inventories are presented net of a valuation allowance, which includes reserves for inventory obsolescence and reserves for consigned inventory that is not expected to be sold or returned to the Company. Management estimates the inventory obsolescence allowance for both current and noncurrent inventory, which is based on management’s identification of slow-moving inventory. Management has estimated a valuation allowance for both current and noncurrent inventory, including the reserve for consigned inventory, of $0.7 million and $0.5 million as of February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020, respectively. The increase in our valuation allowance is primarily an increase in the reserve for consigned inventory. Management has increased this reserve due to declined consignment sales as in-person events, such as booths and fairs, have been cancelled due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
Our principal supplier, based in England, generally requires a minimum re-order of 6,500 or more of a title in order to get a solo print run. Smaller orders would require a shared print run with the supplier’s other customers, which can result in lengthy delays to receive the ordered title. Anticipating customer preferences and purchasing habits requires historical analysis of similar titles in the same series. We then place the initial order or re-order based upon this analysis. These factors and historical analysis have led our management to determine that 2½ years represents a reasonable estimate of the normal operating cycle for our products.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See the New Accounting Pronouncements section of Note 1 to our financial statements, included in Part IV, Item 15 of this report, for further details of recent accounting pronouncements.