ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements (“financial statements”) and related notes thereto, included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report.
Overview
Energy Focus, Inc. engages primarily in the design, development, manufacturing, marketing and sale of energy-efficient LED lighting systems and controls and recently announced development of UVCD products. We develop, market and sell high quality LED lighting products and UVCD products and controls in the commercial market and MMM. Our mission is to enable our customers to run their facilities and offices with greater energy efficiency, productivity, and human health through advanced LED retrofit and UVCD solutions. Our goal is to be the LED and HCL technology and market leader for the most demanding applications where performance, quality, value (high quality at an affordable price), environmental impact and health are considered paramount. We specialize in LED lighting retrofit by replacing fluorescent, high-intensity discharge lighting and other types of lamps and fixtures in institutional buildings for primarily indoor lighting applications with our innovative, high-quality commercial and military TLED, as well as other LED and lighting control and UVCD products. On October 14, 2020, we announced the launch of our UVCD product portfolio.
The LED lighting industry has changed dramatically over the past several years due to increasing commoditization, competition and price erosion. We have been experiencing these industry forces in both our military business since 2016 and in our commercial segment, where we once commanded significant price premiums for our flicker-free TLEDs with primarily 10-year warranties. Since April 2019, we have focused on redesigning our products for lower costs and consolidating our supply chain for stronger purchasing power where appropriate in order to price our products more competitively. Despite these efforts, the pricing of our legacy products remains at a premium to the competitive range and we expect aggressive pricing actions and commoditization to continue to be a headwind until our more differentiated new products ramp in volume. These trends are not unique to Energy Focus as evidenced by the increasing number of industry peers facing challenges, exiting LED lighting, selling assets and even going out of business.
In addition to continuously pursuing scheduled cost reductions, our strategy to combat these trends it to move up the value chain, with more innovative and differentiated products and solutions that offer greater, distinct value to our customers. Two specific examples of these products we have developed include the RedCap®, our emergency backup battery integrated TLED, and EnFocus™, our new dimmable/color-tunable lighting and control platform that we launched in 2020. We believe our revamped go-to-market strategy that focuses more on direct-sales marketing, selectively expanding our channel partner network that covers territories across the country, and listens to the voice of the customer, has led to better and more impactful product development efforts that we believe will eventually translate into larger addressable markets and greater sales growth for us.
Leveraging and integrating a broad range of rapidly advancing technologies including LED lighting, UV-C disinfection, electronics, software, sensors, cloud and AI, the Energy Focus UVCD solutions aim to provide impactful and affordable disinfection products for businesses and homes to effectively reduce infection risks. In addition to being ozone-free, the products are designed to guard against the risks of direct human exposure to UV-C rays. abUVTM and nUVoTM include enclosed, self-contained UV-C disinfection units that continuously inactivate viruses while reducing overall pathogen levels in the air. mUVeTM incorporates advanced sensor, machine vision and autonomous technologies to avoid human exposure during disinfection operations. We believe Energy Focus UVCD solutions are capable of providing affordable continuous disinfection with optimal effectiveness and safety. We believe that the UVCD products will open up a new, emerging and sizable market for us and expand our sales and growth potential.
Since April 2019, we have experienced significant change at the Company. Prior to James Tu returning as Chief Executive Officer and Chairman at the beginning of April 2019, the Company had experienced significant sales declines, operating losses and increases in its inventory. Immediately upon Mr. Tu returning to the Company, significant additional restructuring efforts were undertaken. The Company has since then replaced the entire senior management team, significantly reduced non-critical expenses, minimized the amount of inventory the Company was purchasing, dramatically changed the composition of our board of directors, as well as adding very selectively to the executive team by hiring Tod Nestor as President and Chief Financial Officer at the beginning of July 2019, and James R. Warren as Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Corporate Secretary in September 2020, in addition to recruiting new departmental leaders across the Company. The cost savings efforts undertaken included the Company implementing phased actions to reduce costs to minimize cash usage. Our initial actions included the elimination of certain positions, restructuring of the sales organization and incentive plan, flattening of the senior management team, additional operational streamlining, management compensation reductions, and outsourcing of certain functions including
certain elements of supply chain and marketing. In connection with these actions, we recorded severance and related benefits charges of $0.2 million during the first half of 2019. These additional restructuring charges primarily related to severance and related benefits charges as a result of eliminating three positions during the first quarter of 2019 and nine positions during the second quarter of 2019, as well as costs associated with closing our offices in San Jose, California and Taipei, Taiwan in the second quarter of 2019. With quarterly sales for the Company leveling off at its low point in the third quarter of 2019 at $2.9 million, we began to see the impact of our relaunch efforts and restructuring of our sales organization in the fourth quarter of 2019 achieving sales of $3.5 million, or a sequential quarter-over-quarter growth rate of 21.1%. In addition, losses were mitigated through the better cost management and a sharp focus on better managing pricing and inventory decisions for the last half of 2019.
During 2020, we continued to see the benefits from these relaunch efforts undertaken by the new management team, in addition to a number of strategic sourcing projects completed during 2020. It is our belief that the continued momentum of the efforts undertaken in 2019 and into 2020, along with the development and launch of new and innovative products as well as an expanded sales team and distribution network, will over time result in improved sales and bottom-line performance for the Company.
We launched our EnFocus™ platform during the second quarter of 2020 and continued to receive positive feedback from existing, new, and potential new customers. The EnFocus™ platform offers two immediately available product lines: EnFocus™ DM, which provides a dimmable lighting solution, and EnFocus™ DCT, which provides both a dimmable and color tunable lighting solution. EnFocus™ enables buildings to have dimmable, color tunable and circadian-ready lighting using existing wiring, without requiring laying additional data cables or any wireless communication systems, through a relatively simple upgrade with EnFocus™ switches and tubular LEDs, a far more affordable and environmentally sustainable solution compared with replacing entire lighting fixtures and incorporating additional wired or wireless communication.
In addition, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and an anticipated increase in sanitation and hygiene demand for buildings, facilities and homes, we started developing advanced UVCD products for both consumer as well as the commercial and industrial markets beginning in the first quarter of 2020. We announced the following three UVCD products in October 2020: abUV™ circadian lighting and UVCD air disinfection integrated troffers controlled by the EnFocus™ platform technology; nUVo™ portable disinfection device for offices and homes; and mUVe™ autonomous robot designed for surface disinfection.
In our MMM business, significant efforts undertaken to reduce costs in our product offerings have positioned us to be more competitive in this segment. Such efforts allowed us to continue to win bids and proposals that helped grow our MMM sales during 2020, offsetting some of the weakness being experienced in our commercial business. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020, we became an approved supplier for the General Services Administration (“GSA”) and our products are now listed in the GSA website for all federal and military agencies to view and order our products. While we continue to aggressively seek to increase sales of our commercial products, the MMM business offers us continued sales, in addition to validating our product quality and strengthening our brand trust in the marketplace.
Meanwhile, we continue to seek additional external funding alternatives and sources to support our growth strategies, plans and initiatives. We plan to achieve profitability through developing and launching new, innovative products such as EnFocusTM and our UVCD products, as well as executing on our multi-channel sales strategy that targets key verticals, such as government, healthcare, education and commercial and industrial, complemented by our marketing outreach campaigns and expanding channel partnerships. We also plan to continue to develop advanced lighting and lighting control applications built upon the EnFocusTM platform. In addition, we intend to continue to apply rigorous financial discipline in our organizational structure, business processes and policies, strategic sourcing activities and supply chain practices to help accelerate our path towards profitability.
Despite continuing progress throughout 2020 in reducing our operating losses significantly by 18.7% from December 31, 2019, the Company’s results reflect the challenges due to long and unpredictable sales cycles, unexpected delays in customer retrofit budgets and project starts, and unexpected supply chain issues, all exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic since early 2020. There has also been continuing aggressive price competition in the lighting industry. We continued to incur losses and we have a substantial accumulated deficit, which continues to raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern at December 31, 2020.
The COVID-19 pandemic in particular has, and may continue to have, a significant economic and business impact on our company. Following a slowdown in the second quarter of 2020, we have seen a continuing weakness in commercial sales as customers in the healthcare, education, and commercial and industrial sectors delayed order placements in reaction to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers, suppliers and logistics providers, and to evaluate governmental actions being taken to curtail and respond to the spread of the virus. The significance and duration of the ongoing impact on us is still uncertain. Material adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on market drivers, our customers, suppliers or logistics providers could significantly impact our operating results. We also plan to continue to actively follow, assess and analyze the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and stand ready to adjust our organizational structure, strategies, plans and processes to respond.
Because the situation continues to evolve, we cannot reasonably estimate the ultimate impact to our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial position that the COVID-19 pandemic may have. Continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic and government actions in response thereto could cause further disruptions to our operations and the operations of our customers, suppliers and logistics partners and could significantly adversely affect our near-term and long-term revenues, earnings, liquidity and cash flows. We aim to stay agile as an organization to respond to potential or continuing weakness in the macro environment and in the meantime expand sales channels and enter new markets such as UVCD that might be able to provide additional growth opportunities.
Results of operations
The following table sets forth the percentage of net sales represented by certain items reflected on our Consolidated Statements of Operations for the following periods:
Net sales
A further breakdown of our net sales by product line is as follows (in thousands):
Our net sales of $16.8 million in 2020 increased 32.5% compared to 2019 mainly driven by an increase of 136.6% in MMM sales. MMM sales were lower in 2019 primarily due to two of our products that were pending evaluation by the Defense Logistics Agency, during which time the US Navy was not allowed to purchase these two products and also due to federal
government funding restrictions. In March 2020, we won a contract worth about $3.5 million and throughout 2020, our sales from our in-house sales and inside sales accounts grew significantly. Net sales of our commercial products decreased 31.4% in 2020 as compared to 2019, reflecting fluctuations in the timing, pace, and size of commercial projects, including impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
International sales
We do not generate significant sales from customers outside the United States. International net sales accounted for approximately 1% of net sales in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Changes in currency exchange rates did not have an impact on net sales in 2020 or 2019, as our sales, including international sales, are denominated in U.S. dollars.
Gross profit
Gross profit was $5.2 million in 2020, compared to $2.0 million in 2019. The increase in gross profit was primarily driven by an increase in MMM sales as noted above, as well as improved efficiency in our plant operations. Our 2020 gross profit as a percent of net sales of 30.8% increased from our 2019 gross profit as a percent of net sales of 15.5%, primarily driven by product mix and margin impact from MMM sales. Gross margin for 2020 included favorable price and usage variances for material and labor of $0.9 million or 5.5% of net sales and favorable inventory reserves recorded of $0.6 million, or 3.7% of net sales, offsetting unexpected additional manufacturing cost due to supply chain challenges relating primarily to our MMM products.
Operating expenses
Product development
Product development expenses include salaries, including stock-based compensation and related benefits, contractor and consulting fees, legal fees, supplies and materials, as well as overhead items, such as depreciation and facilities costs. Product development costs are expensed as they are incurred. Cost recovery represents the combination of revenues and credits from government contracts.
Total gross and net product development spending, including credits from government contracts, is shown in the following table (in thousands):
Gross product development expenses were $1.4 million in 2020, an increase of 10.2%, compared to $1.3 million in 2019. The increase primarily resulted from increased product development and testing costs of $0.2 million associated with the development and launch of EnFocusTM and the development of our UVCD products.
Selling, general, and administrative
Selling, general, and administrative expenses were $7.9 million, or 46.9%, of net sales in 2020, compared to $7.4 million, or 58.6%, of net sales in 2019. Of the year-over-year $0.5 million increase, approximately $0.5 million is attributable to increased headcount and salaries, including stock-based compensation and related benefits, $0.2 million to an increase in legal and professional fees, and a $0.1 million increase in recruiting and relocation fees. These increases were offset by savings of $0.2 million in sales commissions, $0.1 million in travel and related expenses as a result of COVID-19 stay-at-home orders and $0.1 million in reduced depreciation expense.
Restructuring
During 2019 and 2020, we recorded restructuring charges of approximately $0.2 million and credits of approximately $0.1 million, respectively, related to the cost and offsetting sub-lease income for the remaining lease obligation for our former New York, New York and Arlington, Virginia offices. The lease on our Arlington, Virginia office ended September 30, 2019.
During 2020, we recorded no restructuring-related severance and related benefits charges. During the first half of 2019, we recorded severance and related benefits charges of $0.2 million with no material restructuring charges recorded during the second half of 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, we estimate that we will receive a total of approximately $0.1 million in sublease payments to offset our remaining lease obligations of $0.2 million, which extend until June 2021. We expect to incur insignificant additional costs over the remaining life of our lease obligations. Please refer to Note 3, “Restructuring,” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report for further information.
Other expenses
Interest expense
We incurred $481 thousand in interest expense in 2020, primarily related to interest on borrowings and non-cash amortization of fees related to the Austin Facility, the promissory note in the principal amount of $1.3 million (the “Iliad Note”) the Company sold and issued to Iliad Research and Trading, L.P. (“Iliad”), pursuant to a note purchase agreement (the “Iliad Note Purchase Agreement”) with Iliad, and the interest on borrowings and non-cash amortization of fees related to the Credit Facilities.
We incurred $317 thousand in interest expense in 2019, primarily related to interest on borrowings and non-cash amortization of fees related to the Austin Facility and under the Iliad Note.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
A loss of $276 thousand on the extinguishment of debt was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of a $100 thousand termination fee and the write-off of the remaining related debt acquisition costs of $59 thousand from the Austin Facility and the write-off of the remaining debt acquisition costs of $117 thousand relating to the Iliad Note.
Loss from change in fair value of warrants
A loss of $1.1 million was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 for the market value change in our warrant liabilities. The loss recognized was a result of the revaluation of the warrant liability using the market price of the Company’s common stock at December 22, 2020, versus the market price of the Company’s common stock at the time of initial issuance of the warrants (January 13, 2020). On December 22, 2020, all warrant holders agreed to a modification of the terms of their warrants that qualified the warrants for equity accounting. At that time, the liability relating to the remaining 467,306 warrants was fair-valued with the offsetting adjustment recorded in income. The $1.4 million warrant liability was then reclassified into equity and the warrants are no longer subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date.
Other expenses, net
We recognized other expenses, net, of $73 thousand in 2020, compared to other expenses, net, of $91 thousand in 2019. Other expenses, net, in 2020 primarily consisted of bank and collateral management fees. Other expenses, net in 2019 primarily consisted of $80 thousand of collateral management fees related to the Austin Facility and a net loss on the sale and disposal of fixed assets of $24 thousand, partially offset by various refunds of $12 thousand.
Income taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our effective tax rate was 0.1% and (0.1)%, respectively.
In 2020, our effective tax rate was lower than the statutory rate due to an increase in the valuation allowance as a result of the $7.1 million additional federal net operating loss we recognized for the year. In 2019, our effective tax rate was lower than the statutory rate due to an increase in the valuation allowance as a result of the $8.3 million additional federal net operating loss we recognized for the year.
Deferred income tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred income tax assets will not be realized. In considering the need for a valuation allowance, we assess all evidence, both positive and negative, available to determine whether all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Such evidence includes, but is not limited to, recent earnings history, projections of future income or loss, reversal patterns of existing taxable and deductible temporary differences, and tax planning strategies. We have recorded a full valuation allowance
against our deferred tax assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We had no net deferred liabilities at December 31, 2020 or 2019. We will continue to evaluate the need for a valuation allowance on a quarterly basis.
At December 31, 2020, we had net operating loss carry-forwards of approximately $115.9 million for federal income tax purposes ($72.3 million for state and local income tax purposes). However, due to changes in our capital structure, approximately $61.5 million of the $115.9 million is available after the application of IRC Section 382 limitations. As a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Tax Act”), net operating loss carry-forwards generated in tax years beginning after December 31, 2017 can only offset 80% of taxable income. These net operating loss carry-forwards can no longer be carried back, but they can be carried forward indefinitely. The $7.1 million and $8.3 million in federal net operating losses generated in 2020 and 2019 will be subject to the new limitations under the Tax Act. If not utilized, the carry-forwards generated prior to December 31, 2017 of $37.3 million will begin to expire in 2021 for federal purposes and have begun to expire for state and local purposes. Please refer to Note 12, “Income Taxes,” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report for further information.
Net loss
Our net loss from operations improved to $6.0 million in 2020 compared to $7.4 million in 2019. The improvement in our loss is primarily due to increased sales of $4.1 million, or 32.5% over 2019 and our continued cost control initiatives, resulting in an increase in gross margin of 162.7% over 2019. These improvements were offset slightly by an increase in operating expenses of $0.3 million over 2019.
Liquidity and capital resources
General
We generated a net loss of $6.0 million in 2020, compared to net loss of $7.4 million in 2019. We have incurred substantial losses in the past, and as of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $130.9 million.
In order for us to operate our business profitably, we need to grow our sales, maintain cost control discipline while balancing development of our new products required for long-term competitiveness and revenue growth, continue our efforts to reduce product cost, and drive further operating efficiencies. There is a risk that our strategy to return to profitability may not be successful. We will likely require additional financing to achieve our strategic plan and, if our operations do not achieve, or we experience an unanticipated delay in achieving, our intended level and pace of profitability, we will continue to need additional funding, none of which may be available on favorable terms or at all and could require us to discontinue or curtail our operations.
Considering both quantitative and qualitative information, we continue to believe that the combination of our plan to continue to ensure appropriate levels of the availability of external financing, current financial position, liquid resources, obligations due or anticipated within the next year, executive and sales reorganization, and implementation of our product development and sales channel strategy, if adequately executed, will provide us with an ability to finance our operations through 2021 and will mitigate the substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Credit Facilities
On August 11, 2020, we entered into the Credit Facilities. The new Credit Facilities consist of the Inventory Facility, a two-year inventory financing facility for up to $3.0 million, and the Receivables Facility, a two-year receivables financing facility for up to $2.5 million. These facilities replaced our previous credit facility, the Austin Facility. As of December 31, 2020, our cash was approximately $1.8 million and our total outstanding balance was approximately $2.3 million under the Credit Facilities. As of December 31, 2020, our additional availability under the Credit Facilities was $1.7 million.
Convertible Notes
On March 29, 2019, we issued $1.7 million aggregate principal amount of subordinated convertible promissory notes (the “Convertible Notes”) to certain investors in a private placement exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The Convertible Notes had a maturity date of December 31, 2021 and bore interest at a rate of 5% per annum until June 30, 2019 and at a rate of 10% thereafter. Pursuant to their terms, on January 16, 2020, following approval by our stockholders of certain amendments to the Certificate of Incorporation, the principal amount of all of the Convertible Notes, and the accumulated interest thereon ($0.1 million), which totaled $1.8 million, were converted at a conversion price of $0.67 per share into an aggregate of 2,709,018 shares of the Company’s Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.0001 per
share (the “Series A Preferred Stock”), which is convertible on a one-for-five basis into shares of our common stock. During 2020, 111,548 shares of the Series A Preferred Stock were converted into 22,310 shares of common stock.
Iliad Note
On November 25, 2019, we entered into the Iliad Note Purchase Agreement with Iliad pursuant to which the Company sold and issued to Iliad the Iliad Note in the principal amount of $1.3 million. The Iliad Note was issued with an original issue discount of $142 thousand and Iliad paid a purchase price of $1.1 million for the issuance of the Iliad Note, after deduction of $15 thousand of Iliad transaction expenses.
On December 1, 2020, we repaid the remaining outstanding balance of $30 thousand on the Iliad Note prior to its maturity date of November 24, 2021. We wrote-off $117 thousand in remaining debt and original issue discount costs at that time. The debt acquisition and original issue discount costs written-off are reflected as a loss on extinguishment of debt in our Consolidated Statements of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Iliad Note accrued interest at 8% per annum, compounded daily, on the outstanding balance. We were able to prepay the amounts outstanding under the Iliad Note at a premium, which was 15% during the first year and 10% during the second year. Beginning in May 2020, Iliad could have required us to redeem up to $150 thousand of the Iliad Note in any calendar month. We had the right on three occasions to defer all redemptions that Iliad could otherwise require us to make during any calendar month. No such deferrals were exercised.
Pursuant to the Iliad Note Purchase Agreement and the Iliad Note, we had, among other things, agreed that, until the Iliad Note was repaid, 10% of gross proceeds the Company received from the sale of our common stock or other equity must be paid to Iliad and applied to reduce the outstanding balance of the Iliad Note.
January 2020 Equity Offering
In January 2020, we completed a registered direct offering for the sale of 688,360 shares of our common stock to certain institutional investors, at a purchase price of $3.37 per share. We also sold, to the same institutional investors, warrants to purchase up to 688,360 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $3.37 per share in a concurrent private placement for a purchase price of $0.625 per warrant. We paid the placement agent commissions of $193 thousand plus $50 thousand in expenses in connection with the registered direct offering and the concurrent private placement and we also paid legal, accounting and other fees of $231 thousand related to the offering. Proceeds to us, before expenses, from the sale of common stock and warrants (the “January 2020 Equity Offering”) were approximately $2.8 million. In accordance with the terms of the Iliad Note, 10% of the gross proceeds from the January 2020 Equity Offering ($275 thousand) were used to make payments on the Iliad Note, a large portion of which was applied to reduce the outstanding principal amount.
Need for Additional Financing
Even with access to borrowings under the Credit Facilities, we may not generate sufficient cash flows from our operations or be able to borrow sufficient funds to sustain our operations. As such, we will likely need additional external financing during 2021 and will continue to review and pursue external funding sources including, but not limited to, the following:
•obtaining financing from traditional or non-traditional investment capital organizations or individuals;
•obtaining funding from the sale of our common stock or other equity or debt instruments; and
•obtaining debt financing with lending terms that more closely match our business model and capital needs.
There can be no assurance that we will obtain funding on acceptable terms, in a timely fashion, or at all. Obtaining additional financing contains risks, including:
•additional equity financing may not be available to us on satisfactory terms and any equity we are able to issue could lead to dilution for current stockholders and have rights, preferences and privileges senior to our common stock;
•loans or other debt instruments may have terms and/or conditions, such as interest rates, restrictive covenants and control or revocation provisions, which are not acceptable to management or our board of directors; and
•the current environment in the capital markets, as well as global health risks, combined with our capital constraints may prevent us from being able to obtain adequate debt financing.
If we fail to obtain additional financing to sustain our business before we are able to produce levels of revenue to meet our financial needs, we will need to delay, scale back or eliminate our business plan and further reduce our operating costs and headcount, each of which would have a material adverse effect on our business, future prospects, and financial condition. A lack of additional financing could also result in our inability to continue as a going concern and force us to sell certain assets or discontinue or curtail our operations and, as a result, investors in the Company could lose their entire investment.
Cash and debt
At December 31, 2020, our cash balance was $1.8 million, compared to $0.4 million at December 31, 2019.
The following is a summary of cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows (in thousands):
Cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $2.5 million in 2020 resulted primarily from the net loss incurred of $6.0 million, adjusted for non-cash items, including: depreciation and amortization of $0.2 million and stock-based compensation, net of $0.1 million, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $1.1 million and favorable provisions from inventory of $0.6 million. We generated $1.1 million in cash for an increase in accounts payable due to the timing of inventory receipts and payments, $1.1 million from a net decrease in inventories primarily due to the timing of inventory receipts, $0.4 million through the timing of collection of accounts receivable and $0.3 million through an increase of other accrued liabilities, primarily related to accrued payroll and benefits and commissions. We used $0.7 million for short-term deposits to our contract manufacturers for inventory for the new EnFocus™ platform.
Net cash used in operating activities of $6.6 million in 2019 resulted primarily from the net loss incurred of $7.4 million, adjusted for non-cash items, including: depreciation and amortization of $0.3 million and stock-based compensation, net of $0.6 million. Cash used by an increase in accounts receivable of $0.1 million and a decrease in accounts payable mainly for inventory due to the timing of inventory receipts of $2.2 million and a decrease in accrued expenses primarily for accrued payroll and benefits, severance and commissions of $0.5 million further attributed to the cash impact of the net loss incurred. The cash used by these working capital changes was partially offset by cash generated by a net decrease in inventories of $1.9 million as we sold existing inventory and reduced inventory purchasing and prepaid expenses of $(0.1) million, as the inventory for which we paid deposits to our contract manufacturers in prior quarters was received in the first quarter of 2019.
Cash used in investing activities
Net cash used by investing activities was $0.2 million in 2020 and $0.1 million in 2019, respectively, and resulted primarily from the addition of property and equipment tooling to support production operations.
Cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $4.2 million primarily resulted from $2.7 million in proceeds received from the January 2020 Equity Offering, partially offset by $0.5 million in offering costs. Investors in the January 2020 Equity Offering received warrants to purchase shares of our common stock, of which warrants to purchase an aggregate of 467,306 shares remain outstanding at December 31, 2020 with a weighted average exercise price of $3.51 per share. During the year ended December 31, 2020, 269,240 warrants were exercised resulting in $0.9 million of proceeds. The exercise of the warrants remaining outstanding at December 31, 2020, could provide us with cash proceeds of up to $1.6 million in the aggregate.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $0.8 million in proceeds from the PPP loan, $1.4 million from borrowings under the Inventory Facility and $1.1 million from borrowings under the Receivables Facility, and paid $0.7 million, net, on the Austin Facility. Also during the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid $0.2 million in deferred financing fees on the Credit Facilities. On August 11, 2020, we paid the outstanding balance of $1.4 million to close out the Austin Facility, which included a $100 thousand termination fee.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repaid $1.3 million aggregate principal amount under the Iliad Note, which included a mandatory repayment pursuant to the terms of the Iliad Note in connection with the issuance of common stock in the January 2020 Equity Offering, of which $0.2 million was allocated against principal. At December 31, 2020, we had additional availability for us to borrow of $1.0 million under the Inventory Facility and $0.6 million under the Receivables Facility.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $1.1 million primarily resulted from net proceeds from the Convertible Notes of $1.7 million and the Iliad Note of $1.1 million offset by payments to the Austin Facility of $1.4 million.
Credit facilities
On August 11, 2020, we entered into the Credit Facilities, consisting of two debt financing arrangements. The new Credit Facilities consist of the Inventory Facility, a two-year inventory financing facility for up to $3.0 million, and the Receivables Facility, a two-year receivables financing facility for up to $2.5 million. These facilities replaced our previous credit facility, the Austin Facility, substantially increasing the Company’s borrowing capacity and reducing its blended interest expense rate.
Borrowings under the Inventory Facility were $1.3 million and borrowings under the Receivables Facility were $1.0 million at December 31, 2020. These facilities are recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020 as a current liability under the caption “Credit line borrowings, net or origination fees.” Outstanding balances include unamortized net issuance costs totaling $0.1 million for the Inventory Facility and $40 thousand for the Receivables Facility as of December 31, 2020.
The Credit Facilities replaced the Austin Facility which was entered into on December 11, 2018 and was secured by a lien on our assets. The Austin Facility was a three year, $5.0 million revolving line of credit. Borrowings under the Austin Facility were $0.7 million at December 31, 2019 with total availability of $1.6 million. On August 11, 2020, we paid $1.4 million to close the Austin Facility which included a $100 thousand termination fee. Additionally, we wrote off $59 thousand of the remaining related debt acquisition costs. The termination fee and the write-off of debt acquisition costs are reflected as a loss on extinguishment of debt in our Consolidated Statements of Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
For more information, see Note 9 “Debt” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”) requires that we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingencies, and the reported amounts of net sales and expenses in the financial statements. Material differences may result in the amount and timing of net sales and expenses if different judgments or different estimates were utilized.
Critical accounting policies, judgments, and estimates that we believe have the most significant impact on our financial statements are set forth below:
•revenue recognition,
•allowances for doubtful accounts, returns and discounts,
•impairment of long-lived assets,
•valuation of inventories,
•accounting for income taxes,
•share-based compensation, and
•leases.
Revenue recognition
On January 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), as amended by subsequently issued additional guidance (together, “ASC 606”) using the modified retrospective method. The adoption of ASC 606 did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial position or results of operations, as our revenue arrangements generally consist of a single performance obligation to transfer promised goods at a fixed price.
Net sales include revenues from sales of products and shipping and handling charges, net of estimates for product returns. Revenue is measured at the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for the transferred products. We recognize revenue at the point in time when we transfer the promised products to the customer and the customer obtains control over the products. Distributors’ obligations to us are not contingent upon the resale of our products. We recognize revenue for shipping and handling charges at the time the goods are shipped to the customer, and the costs of outbound freight are included in cost of sales. We provide for product returns based on historical return rates. While we incur costs for sales commissions to our sales employees and outside agents, we recognize commission costs concurrent with the related revenue, as the amortization period is less than one year. We do not incur any other incremental costs to obtain contracts with our customers. Our product warranties are assurance-type warranties, which promise the customer that the products are as specified in the contract. therefore, the product warranties are not a separate performance obligation and are accounted for as described below. Sales taxes assessed by governmental authorities are accounted for on a net basis and are excluded from net sales.
A disaggregation of product net sales is presented in Note 13, “Product and Geographic Information,” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report.
Accounts Receivable
Our trade accounts receivable consists of amounts billed to and currently due from customers. Our customers are concentrated in the United States. In the normal course of business, we extend unsecured credit to our customers related to the sale of our products. Credit is extended to customers based on an evaluation of the customer’s financial condition and the amounts due are stated at their estimated net realizable value. During the first eleven months of 2019, we evaluated and monitored the creditworthiness of each customer on a case-by-case basis. However, during December 2019, we transitioned to an account receivable insurance program with a very high credit worthy insurance company where we have the large majority of the accounts receivable insured with a portion of self-retention. This third party also provides credit-worthiness ratings and metrics that significantly assists us in evaluating the credit worthiness of both existing and new customers. We maintain allowances for sales returns and doubtful accounts receivable to provide for the estimated number of account receivables that will not be collected. The allowance is based on an assessment of customer creditworthiness and historical payment experience, the age of outstanding receivables, and performance guarantees to the extent applicable. Past due amounts are written off when our internal collection efforts have been unsuccessful, and payments subsequently received on such receivables are credited to the allowance for doubtful accounts. We do not generally require collateral from our customers.
Our standard payment terms with customers are net 30 days from the date of shipment, and we do not generally offer extended payment terms to our customers, but exceptions are made in some cases to major customers or with particular orders. Accordingly, we do not adjust trade accounts receivable for the effects of financing, as we expect the period between the transfer of product to the customer and the receipt of payment from the customer to be in line with our standard payment terms.
Allowances for doubtful accounts, returns, and discounts
We establish allowances for doubtful accounts and returns for probable losses based on the customers’ loss history with us, the
financial condition of the customer, the condition of the general economy and the industry as a whole, and the contractual terms established with the customer. The specific components are as follows:
• allowance for doubtful accounts for accounts receivable, and
•allowance for sales returns and discounts.
In 2020 and 2019, the total allowance was $8 thousand and $28 thousand, respectively, which was all related to sales returns. We review these allowance accounts periodically and adjust them accordingly for current conditions.
Long-lived assets
Property and equipment are stated at cost and include expenditures for additions and major improvements. Expenditures for repairs and maintenance are charged to operations as incurred. We use the straight-line method of depreciation over the estimated useful lives of the related assets (generally two to fifteen years) for financial reporting purposes. Accelerated methods of depreciation are used for federal income tax purposes. When assets are sold or otherwise disposed of, the cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any gain or loss is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. Refer to Note 6, “Property and Equipment,” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report for additional information.
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Events or circumstances that would result in an impairment review primarily include operations reporting losses, a significant change in the use of an asset, or the planned disposal or sale of the asset. The asset would be considered impaired when the future net undiscounted cash flows generated by the asset are less than its carrying value. An impairment loss would be recognized based on the amount by which the carrying value of the asset exceeds its fair value, as determined by quoted market prices (if available) or the present value of expected future cash flows. Refer to Note 6, “Property and Equipment,” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report for additional information.
Valuation of inventories
We state inventories at the lower of standard cost (which approximates actual cost determined using the first-in-first-out method) or net realizable value. We establish provisions for excess and obsolete inventories after evaluation of historical sales, current economic trends, forecasted sales, product lifecycles, and current inventory levels. During 2019, due to efforts to sell excess and obsolete inventory and better management of inventory orders, we realized a net reduction of our excess inventory reserves of $0.6 million. During 2020, we continued to apply discipline in manufacturing and supply chain management, focusing on a reduction of lead time and inventory on hand which resulted in a net reduction of our gross inventory levels of $1.2 million and excess inventory reserves of $0.6 million compared to 2019. Adjustments to our estimates, such as forecasted sales and expected product lifecycles, could harm our operating results and financial position. Refer to Note 5, “Inventories,” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report for additional information.
Accounting for income taxes
As part of the process of preparing the Consolidated Financial Statements, we are required to estimate our income tax liability in each of the jurisdictions in which we do business. This process involves estimating our actual current tax expense together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items, such as deferred revenues, for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We then assess the likelihood of the deferred tax assets being recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be recovered, or is unknown, we establish a valuation allowance.
Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we have recorded a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets in the United States due to uncertainties related to our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets, primarily consisting of certain net operating losses carried forward. The valuation allowance is based upon our estimates of taxable income by jurisdiction and the period over which our deferred tax assets will be recoverable. In considering the need for a valuation allowance, we assess all evidence, both positive and negative, available to determine whether all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Such evidence includes, but is not limited to, recent earnings history, projections of future income or loss, reversal patterns of existing taxable and deductible temporary differences, and tax planning strategies. We continue to evaluate the need for a valuation allowance on a quarterly basis.
At December 31, 2020, we had net operating loss carry-forwards of approximately $115.9 million for federal income tax purposes ($72.3 million for state and local income tax purposes). However, due to changes in our capital structure, approximately $61.5 million of the $115.9 million is available to offset future taxable income after the application of IRC Section 382 limitations. As a result of the Tax Act, net operating loss carry-forwards generated in tax years beginning after December 31, 2017 can only offset 80% of taxable income. These net operating loss carry-forwards can no longer be carried back, but they can be carried forward indefinitely. The $7.1 million and $8.3 million in federal net operating losses generated in 2020 and 2019 will be subject to the new limitations under the Tax Act. If not utilized, the carry-forwards generated prior to December 31, 2017 of $37.3 million will begin to expire in 2021 for federal purposes and have begun to expire for state and local purposes. Please refer to Note 12, “Income Taxes,” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report for further information.
Share-based payments
The cost of employee and director stock options and restricted stock units, as well as other share-based compensation arrangements, is reflected in the Consolidated Financial Statements based on the estimated grant date fair value method under the authoritative guidance. Management applies the Black-Scholes option pricing model to options issued to employees and directors to determine the fair value of stock options and apply judgment in estimating key assumptions that are important elements of the model in expense recognition. These elements include the expected life of the option, the expected stock-price volatility, and expected forfeiture rates. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based awards under Black-Scholes represent our best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable and appropriate, changes in assumptions could materially impact our reported financial results. Restricted stock units and stock options issued to non-employees are valued based upon the intrinsic value of the award. See Note 11, “Stockholders’ Equity,” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report for additional information.
Leases
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), which supersedes the current lease accounting requirements. Additionally, in July 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-11, Leases (Topic 842): Targeted Improvements, which simplifies adoption of Topic 842 by allowing an additional transition method that will not require restatement of prior periods and providing a new practical expedient for lessors to avoid separating lease and non-lease components within a contract if certain criteria are met (provisions of which must be elected upon adoption of Topic 842). The new standard requires a lessee to record on the balance sheet the assets and liabilities for the rights and obligations created by leases with lease terms of more than 12 months. It also requires lessees to disclose certain key information about lease transactions. Upon implementation, an entity’s lease payment obligations will be recognized at their estimated present value along with a corresponding right-of-use asset. Lease expense recognition will be generally consistent with current practice.
The Company adopted this guidance as of January 1, 2019 using the required modified retrospective method with the non-comparative transition option. The Company applied the transitional package of practical expedients allowed by the standard to not reassess the identification, classification and initial direct costs of leases commencing before this ASU’s effective date. The Company also applied the lease term and impairment hindsight transitional practical expedients. The Company has chosen to apply the following accounting policy practical expedients: to not separate lease and non-lease components to new leases as well as existing leases through transition; and the election to not apply recognition requirements of the guidance to short-term leases.
On adoption, we recognized additional operating lease liabilities of approximately $2.9 million as of January 1, 2019, with corresponding right-of-use assets based on the present value of the remaining minimum rental payments for our existing operating leases. The operating lease right-of-use assets recorded upon adoption were offset by the carrying value of liabilities previously recorded under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 420, Exit or Disposal Cost Obligations (“Topic 420”) and impairment charges totaling $0.3 million and $0.2 million, respectively. Refer to Note 4, “Leases,” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report for additional disclosures relating to the Company’s leasing arrangements.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which significantly changes the accounting for credit losses on instruments within its scope. The new guidance introduces an approach based on expected losses to estimate credit losses on certain financial instruments, including trade receivables, and requires an entity to recognize an allowance based on its estimate of expected credit losses
rather than incurred losses. This standard will be effective for interim and annual periods starting after December 15, 2022 and will generally require adoption on a modified retrospective basis. We are in the process of evaluating the impact of the standard.