ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
The objective of this section is to provide an overview of the results of operations and financial condition of the Company by focusing on changes in certain key measures from year to year. It should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes contained in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” and other financial data presented elsewhere in this report, particularly the information regarding the Company’s business operations described in Item 1. A detailed discussion comparing 2019 and 2018 results is incorporated herein by reference to Item 7 of the Company’s 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 22, 2020.
Executive Summary
Our Company offers a broad range of business and personal banking services including wealth management services. Lending services include commercial and industrial, commercial real estate, real estate construction and development, residential real estate, and other loans. A wide variety of deposit products and a complete suite of treasury management and international trade services complement our lending capabilities. Tax-credit brokerage activities consist of the acquisition of Federal and State tax credits and the sale of these tax credits. The Company’s results of operations are also affected by prevailing economic conditions, competition, government policies and other actions of regulatory agencies.
The Company closed its acquisition of Seacoast and its wholly-owned subsidiary, Seacoast Commerce Bank, on November 12, 2020. Seacoast operated five full-service retail and commercial banking offices in California and Nevada as well as SBA loan production offices and deposit production offices in Arizona, California, Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Nevada, Ohio, Oregon, Texas, Utah, and Washington. The Company closed its acquisition of Trinity and its wholly-owned subsidiary, LANB, on March 8, 2019. Trinity operated six full-service retail and commercial banking offices in Los Alamos, Santa Fe, and Albuquerque, New Mexico. The results of operations of Seacoast and Trinity are included in our consolidated results in periods after the respective acquisition dates and are excluded from preceding periods. See “Item 8. Note 2 - Acquisitions” for more information.
The following table summarizes the significant components of the Seacoast and Trinity transactions at the date of acquisition:
Financial Performance Highlights
Below are highlights of our financial performance for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
1Non-GAAP measures. A reconciliation has been included in this MD&A section under the caption “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
The Company noted the following trends during 2020:
•The Company reported net income of $74.4 million, or $2.76 per diluted share for 2020, compared to $92.7 million, or $3.55 per diluted share for 2019. An increase in operating revenue (net interest income and
noninterest income) of $36.6 million in 2020 was offset by a $59.0 million increase in the provision for credit losses. The increase in the provision for credit losses was primarily due to the forward-looking CECL methodology and the worsening outlook for forecasted economic factors.
•Net interest income for 2020 totaled $270.0 million, an increase of $31.3 million, or 13%, compared to $238.7 million for 2019. PPP interest and fee income totaled $19.6 million in 2020. The Seacoast acquisition added $8.0 million and the Company benefited from a full year of Trinity operations in 2020 compared to a partial year in 2019.
•Net interest margin decreased 24 basis points to 3.56% during 2020, compared to 3.80% in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decline in interest rates during 2020 that reduced the earning asset yield to 4.02% from 4.85%, coupled with the shift in 2020 in earning assets to lower yielding PPP loans and short-term investments. The one-month and three-month LIBOR rates were 0.14% and 0.24%, respectively, at December 31, 2020, compared to 1.76% and 1.97%, respectively, at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $2.5 billion in loans indexed to LIBOR.
•Noninterest income increased $5.3 million, or 11%, to $54.5 million in 2020 compared to $49.2 million in 2019. This improvement was primarily due to a $2.3 million increase in mortgage revenue on higher volumes and a $2.5 million increase in income from community development investments.
•Noninterest expenses totaled $167.2 million for 2020, an increase of $1.7 million, or 1%, compared to 2019. The operations of Seacoast added $6.0 million of noninterest expense in 2020, in addition to $4.2 million of merger-related expenses. The Company also incurred a full year of Trinity operating expenses in 2020, compared to a partial year in 2019. These increases were offset by a reduction in the Trinity merger expenses of $18.0 million in 2019. The Company’s efficiency ratio was 51.5% in 2020, compared to 57.5% for the prior year. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due to the merger-related expenses. The Company’s core efficiency ratio1 was 51.0% in 2020, compared to 52.4% for the prior year.
•The Company’s effective tax rate was 19.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 20.1% in 2019. The lower rate in 2020 primarily resulted from increased benefits from tax exempt income.
1Non-GAAP measures. A reconciliation has been included in this MD&A section under the caption “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
2020 Significant Transactions
During 2020, we announced the following significant transactions:
•On November 12, 2020, the Company announced the completion of its acquisition of Seacoast which was merged with and into the Company, and Seacoast Commerce Bank, Seacoast’s wholly-owned subsidiary, merged with and into the Bank. Aggregate consideration at closing was 5.0 million shares of Company common stock to Seacoast shareholders. The overall transaction had a value of $169 million.
•Assisted new and existing customers with navigating and accessing PPP loans through the approval of approximately 3,900 loans totaling $859 million.
•In May 2020, the Company issued $63.3 million of 5.75% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due in 2030. The notes are callable beginning in 2025 and are included in tier 2 capital.
•The Company repurchased 456,251 of its common shares at a weighted-average share price of $33.64. At December 31, 2020, there were 95,907 shares remaining to be purchased under its existing share repurchase plan.
•Dividends paid in 2020 of $0.72 per share increased $0.10 per share, or 16%, compared to $0.62 per share in 2019.
2019 Significant Transactions
During 2019, we announced the following significant transactions:
•On March 8, 2019, the Company announced the completion of its acquisition of Trinity which was merged with and into the Company, and LANB, Trinity’s wholly-owned subsidiary, merged with and into the Bank. Aggregate consideration at closing was 4.0 million shares of Company common stock and $37.3 million cash paid to Trinity shareholders. The overall transaction had a value of $209.2 million.
•The Company repurchased 396,737 of its common shares at a weighted-average share price of $39.13, pursuant to its publicly announced share repurchase program.
•Dividends paid in 2019 of $0.62 per share increased $0.15 per share, or 32%, compared to $0.47 per share in 2018.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Interest Income
Average Balance Sheet
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, certain information related to our average interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as, the corresponding interest rates earned and paid, all on a tax equivalent basis.
1Average balances include non-accrual loans. Interest income includes net loan fees of $18.4 million, $4.5 million, and $4.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 respectively. The increase in loan fees in 2020 is due to PPP fees of $13.8 million.
2Non-taxable income is presented on a fully tax-equivalent basis using a 24.7% tax rate. The tax-equivalent adjustments were $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Rate/Volume
The following table sets forth, on a tax-equivalent basis for the periods indicated, a summary of the changes in interest income and interest expense resulting from changes in yield/rates and volume.
Net interest income (on a tax equivalent basis) was $273.2 million for 2020, compared to $240.3 million for 2019, an increase of $32.9 million, or 14%. Total interest income increased $1.2 million and total interest expense decreased $31.6 million. The increase in net interest income in 2020 was primarily due to higher loan volumes, which benefited from PPP and the Seacoast acquisition, and a decline in the interest rate on interest-bearing liabilities. A decline in the yield on earning assets offset the benefit provided by higher loan volumes and a lower cost of funds.
The tax-equivalent net interest margin was 3.56% for 2020, compared to 3.80% for 2019. The primary driver of the decline in net interest margin from 2019 to 2020 was a decline in short-term rates. The federal funds target rate declined 150 basis points in 2020 and one-month LIBOR declined 162 basis points. The decline in short-term rates reduced the yield on the Company’s variable-rate loan portfolio, which represents approximately 60% of total loans. In addition, a shift in the composition of the loan portfolio to lower yielding PPP loans reduced the net interest margin. The yield on PPP loans was 3.47% on an average balance of $563.6 million in 2020. Excluding PPP, the yield on the loan portfolio was 4.56%. In response to the decline in interest rates, the Company proactively reduced the cost of certain managed money market and interest-bearing transaction accounts.
Average interest-earning assets increased $1.3 billion, or 21%, to $7.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to growth in average total loans of $1.1 billion, or 21%, primarily due to PPP loans. Average securities and short-term investments increased $291.9 million, or 22%. Securities represented 18% of earnings assets in 2020 and 19% in 2019. Short-term securities increased from 2% to 3% of earning assets, primarily due to higher liquidity from deposit growth. Due to volume growth in the balance sheet, interest income on earning assets increased $58.2 million. Interest income on interest-earnings assets decreased $57.0 million primarily due the decline in interest rates in 2020 compared to 2019.
Average interest-bearing liabilities increased $589.2 million, or 12% for the year ended December 31, 2020, . The increase in average interest-bearing liabilities resulted from $555.5 million of growth in interest-bearing deposits primarily due to customer liquidity provided by PPP loans. While average interest-bearing liabilities increased, interest expense declined $31.6 million due to a 75 basis point decline in the cost of deposits. The Company issued $63.3 million of subordinated debentures in May 2020 at 5.75% and reduced its use of FHLB advances. The total cost of interest-bearing liabilities declined 74 basis points, from 1.38% in 2019 to 0.64% in 2020. Volume growth in deposits and other borrowings used to fund asset growth increased interest expense in 2020 by $5.7 million. Interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities decreased $37.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to lower rates.
Noninterest Income
The following table presents a comparative summary of the major components of noninterest income for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2020:
Noninterest income increased $5.3 million, or 11%, in 2020 compared to 2019. This improvement was primarily due to higher income from tax credit income and other miscellaneous income, primarily mortgage revenue, community development investment fees, swap fees, and BOLI income. Due to the slowdown in economic activity in 2020 caused by the pandemic, volumes on card and deposit services were down. Conversely, mortgage revenue was strong as customers took advantage of low, long-term mortgage rates. Similarly, tax credit income increased in 2020 as activity levels remained strong.
Noninterest Expense
The following table presents a comparative summary of the components of noninterest expense:
Noninterest expense increased $1.7 million, or 1%, in 2020 compared to 2019. While total noninterest expense did not materially change from 2019, there were offsetting changes within the expense categories. The Company recorded $6.0 million of operating expenses from the acquisition of Seacoast, including $3.0 million in employee compensation and benefits and $2.2 million in other expenses from SBA lending and customer marketing and support services. Fiscal 2020 was also the first full year of Trinity operations. Employee compensation increased $11.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019, due to the previously mentioned increases from Seacoast and Trinity, annual merit and cost of living increases of approximately 3% of base salaries, and higher mortgage commissions commensurate with the increase in revenue. Merger related expenses of $4.2 million on the Seacoast acquisition were $13.8 million lower than the $18.0 million recorded in 2019 on the Trinity acquisition. In 2020, the majority of the Company's employees shifted to a virtual work environment. The Company did not experience a significant change in its operating expense from this development.
The Company expects to continue to invest in revenue producing associates and other infrastructure that supports additional growth.
Income Taxes
The Company’s blended federal and state tax rate is approximately 24.9%. Permanent differences between pre-tax income and taxable income along with tax planning initiatives reduced the effective income tax rate in 2020 to 19.1% compared to 20.1% in 2019. In addition, pursuant to the CARES Act, the Company was able to carryback a net operating loss to a prior period with a higher tax rate. This generated a tax benefit in 2020 of approximately $0.5 million.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Summary Balance Sheet
Assets
Loans by Type
The Company has a diversified loan portfolio, with no particular concentration of credit in any one economic sector; however, a substantial portion of the portfolio, including the C&I category, is secured by $4.0 billion of real estate. The ability of the Company’s borrowers to honor their contractual obligations is partially dependent upon the local economy and its effect on the real estate market.
The following table sets forth the composition of the Company’s loan portfolio by type of loans at the dates indicated:
C&I loans are made based on the borrower’s ability to generate cash flows for repayment from income sources, general credit strength, experience, and character, even though such loans may also be secured by real estate or other assets. The credit risk related to commercial loans is largely influenced by general economic conditions and the resulting impact on a borrower’s operations.
The Company continues to focus on originating high-quality C&I relationships as they typically have variable interest rates and allow for cross selling opportunities involving other banking products. C&I loan growth also
supports our efforts to maintain the Company’s asset sensitive interest rate risk position. Additionally, our specialized products, especially sponsor finance, life insurance premium financing, and tax credit financing/lending, consist of primarily C&I loans, and have contributed significantly to the Company’s C&I loan growth. These loans are sourced through relationships developed with wealth and estate planning firms and private equity funds and are not bound geographically by our markets. As a result, these specialized loan products offer opportunities to expand and diversify our overall geographic concentration by entering into new markets. For the period ending December 31, 2020, C&I loans increased $727.8 million, or 31%, from 2019 primarily due to PPP loans.
Real estate loans place an emphasis on the estimated cash flows from the operation of the property and/or the underlying collateral value.
•Our commercial real estate loans, including investor-owned and owner-occupied categories, primarily represent multifamily and other commercial property loans on which the primary source of repayment is income from the property. These loans are principally underwritten based on the cash flow coverage of the property, the Company’s loan to value guidelines, and generally require either the limited or full guaranty of principal sponsors of the credit. Commercial real estate loans also represent owner-occupied C&I loans for which the primary source of repayment is dependent on sources other than the underlying collateral. For the period ending December 31, 2020, commercial real estate loans increased $1.1 billion, or 55%, from 2019 primarily due to the acquisition of Seacoast.
•Construction and land development loans relating primarily to residential and commercial properties, represent financing secured by real estate under development for eventual sale or undeveloped ground. At December 31, 2020, $164.4 million of these loans include the use of interest reserves and follow standard underwriting guidelines. Construction projects are monitored by the loan officer and a centralized independent loan disbursement function is employed.
•Residential real estate loans include residential mortgages, which are loans that, due to size or other attributes, do not qualify for conventional home mortgages available-for-sale in the secondary market, second mortgages and home equity lines. Residential mortgage loans are usually limited to a maximum of 80% of collateral value at origination.
Other loans represent loans to individuals, loans to state and political subdivisions, loans to nondepository financial institutions, and loans to purchase or are fully secured by investment securities. Credit risk is managed by thoroughly reviewing the creditworthiness of the borrowers prior to origination and thereafter.
The following table presents a breakdown of loans by NAICS code at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The following table presents a breakdown of commercial & industrial loans by size at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents a breakdown of commercial real estate loans by size at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents a breakdown of construction loans by size at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents a breakdown of residential loans by size at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents a breakdown of other loans by size at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents a breakdown of total loans by geographic region at December 31, 2020:
The table above excludes $698.6 million of PPP loans and $1.9 billion of specialty lending at December 31, 2020 and $1.0 billion of specialty lending at December 31, 2019.
The following table illustrates selected specialty lending detail, at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified among the categories to conform to the current period presentation.
The sponsor finance portfolio is primarily comprised of loans in the manufacturing, and wholesale trade sectors. It includes mid-market company mergers and acquisitions, targeted private equity firms, principally SBICs, and senior debt financing to portfolio companies.
The life insurance premium financing category specializes in financing whole life insurance premiums utilized in high net worth estate planning, through relationships with boutique estate planners throughout the United States.
The tax credit portfolio includes tax credit-related lending on affordable housing projects funded through the use of
federal and state low income housing tax credits. In addition, we provide leveraged and other loans on projects funded through the U.S. Department of the Treasury Community Development Financial Institution (“CDFI”) New Markets Tax Credit Program. This portfolio also includes tax credit brokerage through 10-year streams of Missouri state tax credits from affordable housing development funds. The tax credits are sold to clients and other individuals for tax planning purposes.
SBA 7(a) loans are primarily owner-occupied, commercial real estate loans secured by a 1st lien. These loans predominantly have a 75% portion guaranteed by the SBA.
SBA PPP loans originated in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and are guaranteed by the SBA. The loans may be forgivable by the SBA if certain requirements are met.
Significant loan concentrations are considered to exist for a financial institution when there are amounts loaned to numerous borrowers engaged in similar activities that would cause them to be similarly impacted by economic or other conditions. At December 31, 2020, no significant concentrations exceeding 10% of total loans existed in the Company’s loan portfolio, except as described above.
The following table presents the maturity distribution of loans at December 31, 2020 categorized by fixed or variable interest rates, net of unearned loan fees:
Fixed rate loans comprise 43% of the total loan portfolio at December 31, 2020, and 58% of the Company’s loans are variable-rate loans, most of which are based on the prime rate or LIBOR. Most loan originations have one-to three-year maturities. Management monitors this mix as part of its interest rate risk management. See “Interest Rate Risk” of this MD&A section.
Of the $1.6 billion of commercial real estate loans maturing in one year or less, $469 million, or 29%, represent loans secured by non-owner occupied commercial properties.
Provision and Allowance for Loan Losses
The adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020 increased the ACL on loans by $28.4 million, or 65%, and the allowance for unfunded commitments by $2.4 million. These increases were offset in retained earnings and did not impact the consolidated statement of operations. The following table summarizes changes in the ACL on loans arising from CECL adoption; additions to the allowance from acquired PCD loans, additions charged to expense, as well as loan charge-offs and recoveries by loan category.
The following table presents the components of the provision for credit losses:
The following table is a summary of the allocation of the allowance for loan losses for the five-year period ended December 31, 2020:
The provision for credit losses, which includes a provision for losses on unfunded commitments, is a charge to earnings to maintain the ACL at a level consistent with management’s assessment of expected losses in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. The Company also records reversals of interest on nonaccrual loans and interest recoveries directly through the provision of credit losses. CECL requires economic forecasts to be factored into determining estimated losses. As a result, CECL will typically require a higher level of provision at the start of an economic downturn. The increase in the provision for credit losses in 2020 was primarily due to a change in economic forecasts from the end of 2019, which significantly deteriorated in March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting slow-down of business activity. Two of the primary economic loss drivers used in estimating the ACL include the percentage change in GDP and unemployment. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s forecast of the percentage change in GDP included a range of (2.5)% to 11.9% and the percentage change in unemployment included a range of 5.6% to 9.8%. The Company utilizes a one-year reasonable and supportable forecast and a one-year reversion period
As part of the acquisition of Seacoast, we recognized an allowance of $3.5 million on the PCD portfolio. In addition, we recognized $8.6 million on the non-PCD portion of the portfolio.
To the extent the Company does not recognize charge-offs and economic forecasts improve in future periods, the Company could recognize a reversal of provision for credit losses. Conversely, if economic conditions and the Company’s forecast worsens, the Company could recognize elevated levels of provision for credit losses. The provision is also reflective of charge-offs in the period.
The allowance for loan losses was 1.89% of total loans at December 31, 2020, compared to 0.81%, and 1.00%, at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in 2020 compared to 2019 was due to the adoption of CECL and higher provision expense due to the pandemic, partially offset by the acquisition of Seacoast and PPP loans which include $1.3 billion in government-guaranteed loans with no allowance.
See “Critical Accounting Policies” of this MD&A section for more information on the allowance for loan losses methodology.
Nonperforming assets
Prior to the adoption of CECL, PCI loans were accounted for in performing pools of loans and were not individually identified as nonaccrual or classified. Under the CECL accounting model, the Company did not elect to maintain PCI pools for certain loans which are now accounted for individually and are now included in nonperforming and classified loans. PCI loans are referred to as PCD under CECL.
See “Item 8. Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for more policy information on impaired loans and other real estate.
The following table presents the categories of nonperforming assets, excluding government guaranteed portions, as of the dates indicated:
Nonperforming loans
Nonperforming loans based on loan type were as follows:
The following table summarizes the changes in nonperforming loans:
Nonperforming loans at December 31, 2020 increased $12.1 million, or 46%, when compared to December 31, 2019. The increase in nonperforming loans during 2020 was primarily from a $9.1 million hotel loan. The Company has a specific reserve of $2.8 million for the potential collateral shortfall.
The Company has implemented several loan programs to assist its customers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. These programs include consumer and business deferral programs and expanded small business lines of credit.
The following table presents loans modified as part of our COVID-19 deferral programs that remained in a deferral status:
Loans in a deferral status at December 31, 2020 listed above include $30.3 million of loans receiving more than one deferral. The deferral modifications are primarily set to expire in the first quarter of 2021.
Potential problem loans
Potential problem loans are unimpaired loans with a risk rating of 8-Substandard still accruing interest. See “Item 8. Note 5 - Loans” for the definitions of risk ratings. Potential problem loans, which are not included in nonperforming loans, were $80 million, or 1.05%, of loans outstanding at December 31, 2020, compared to $56 million, or 1.20%, of loans outstanding at December 31, 2019. Potential problem loans at December 31, 2020 include the addition of $30.7 million of PCI loans previously accounted for in performing loan pools. For these loans, payment of principal and interest is current and the loans are performing; however, some doubts exist as to the borrower’s ability to continue to comply with repayment terms. Potential problem loans include loans to companies characterized by significant losses or where downward trends in financial performance have been identified, or are in an industry experiencing significant difficulty.
Other real estate
Other real estate at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was $5.3 million and $6.3 million, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, other real estate was comprised of four properties located in the St. Louis region and four properties in New Mexico consisting of a mix of commercial, land, and residential.
The following table summarizes the changes in other real estate:
Writedowns in fair value were recorded in loan, legal, and other real estate expense.
Investments
At December 31, 2020, our portfolio of investment securities was $1.4 billion, or 14%, of total assets. The portfolio is comprised of both available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities.
Other investments primarily consist of the FHLB capital stock, common stock investments related to our trust preferred securities, community development funds, and other investments in private equity funds, primarily SBICs.
The table below sets forth the carrying value of investment securities held by the Company at the dates indicated:
The Company had no debt securities classified as trading at December 31, 2020, 2019, or 2018.
The following table summarizes expected maturity and tax-equivalent yield information on the investment portfolio at December 31, 2020:
Yields on tax-exempt securities are computed on a taxable equivalent basis using a tax rate of 24.7%. Expected maturities will differ from contractual maturities, as borrowers may have the right to call or repay obligations with or without prepayment penalties.
Deposits
The following table shows the breakdown of the Company’s deposits by type for the periods indicated:
Core deposits, defined as total deposits excluding certificates of deposits, were $7.4 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.5 billion, or 50%, from December 31, 2019. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to the Seacoast acquisition and PPP loan fundings. Certificates of deposit, the highest cost portion of the deposit portfolio, declined $0.3 million in 2020.
The following table sets forth the maturities of certificates of deposit of $100,000 or more as of December 31, 2020:
Shareholders’ equity
Shareholders’ equity totaled $1.1 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $211.8 million, or 24%, from December 31, 2019.
Significant activity during the year ended December 31, 2020 included the following:
•increase from the issuance of approximately 5.0 million shares of common stock for the Seacoast acquisition reflecting approximately $167 million of consideration;
•increase from net income of $74.4 million;
•net increase in fair value of available-for-sale securities and cash flow hedges of $19.4 million;
•decrease from dividends paid on common stock of $19.8 million; and
•decrease from share repurchase of $15.3 million, pursuant to the Company’s publicly-announced stock repurchase program.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
The objective of liquidity management is to ensure we have the ability to generate sufficient cash or cash equivalents in a timely and cost-effective manner to meet our commitments as they become due. Typical demands on liquidity are changes in deposit levels, maturing time deposits which are not renewed, and fundings under credit
commitments to customers. Funds are available from a number of sources, such as the core deposit base and loans and securities repayments and maturities.
Additionally, liquidity is provided from lines of credit with the FHLB, the Federal Reserve, and correspondent banks; the ability to acquire large and brokered deposits, sales of the securities portfolio, and the ability to sell loan participations to other banks. These alternatives are an important part of our liquidity plan and provide flexibility and efficient execution of the asset-liability management strategy.
The Company’s Asset-Liability Management Committee oversees our liquidity position, the parameters of which are approved by the Bank’s Board of Directors. Our liquidity position is monitored daily. Our liquidity management framework includes measurement of several key elements, such as the loan to deposit ratio, a liquidity ratio, and a dependency ratio. The Company’s liquidity framework also incorporates contingency planning to assess the nature and volatility of funding sources and to determine alternatives to these sources. While core deposits and loan and investment repayments are principal sources of liquidity, funding diversification is another key element of liquidity management and is achieved by strategically varying depositor types, terms, funding markets, and instruments.
Liquidity from asset categories is provided through cash and interest-bearing deposits with other banks, which totaled $537.7 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $167.3 million at December 31, 2019. The low interest rate environment, coupled with an uncertain outlook and government stimulus, such as the PPP, have increased liquidity for the banking industry, including the Company. Investment securities are another important tool to the Company’s liquidity objectives. Securities totaled $1.4 billion at December 31, 2020, and included $526 million pledged as collateral for deposits of public institutions, treasury, loan notes, and other requirements. The remaining $874 million could be pledged or sold to enhance liquidity, if necessary.
Liability liquidity funding sources are available to increase financial flexibility. In addition to amounts currently borrowed, at December 31, 2020, the Company could borrow an additional $739 million from the FHLB of Des Moines under blanket loan pledges and has an additional $921 million available from the Federal Reserve Bank under a pledged loan agreement. The Company also has unsecured federal funds lines with six correspondent banks totaling $90 million.
In the normal course of business, the Company enters into certain forms of off-balance sheet transactions, including unfunded loan commitments and letters of credit. These transactions are managed through the Company’s various risk management processes. Management considers both on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet transactions in its evaluation of the Company’s liquidity. The Company has $2 billion in unused commitments as of December 31, 2020. While this commitment level would exhaust the majority the Company’s current liquidity resources, the nature of these commitments is such that the likelihood of funding them in the aggregate at any one time is low.
At the holding company level, our primary funding sources are dividends and payments from the Bank and proceeds from the issuance of equity (i.e. stock option exercises, stock offerings) and debt instruments. The main use of this liquidity is to provide the funds necessary to pay dividends to shareholders, service debt, invest in subsidiaries as necessary, and satisfy other operating requirements. The holding company maintains a revolving line of credit for an aggregate amount up to $25 million, all of which is available at December 31, 2020. The line of credit has a one-year term and matures in February 2021 and is in the process for renewal. The proceeds can be used for general corporate purposes.
The Company has an effective automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3 allowing for the issuance of various forms of equity and debt securities. The Company’s ability to offer securities pursuant to the registration statement depends on market conditions and the Company’s continuing eligibility to use the Form S-3 under rules of the SEC.
Strong capital ratios, credit quality and core earnings are essential to retaining cost-effective access to the wholesale funding markets. Deterioration in any of these factors could have a negative impact on the Company’s ability to
access these funding sources and, as a result, these factors are monitored on an ongoing basis as part of the liquidity management process. The Bank is subject to regulations and, among other things, may be limited in its ability to pay dividends or transfer funds to the parent company. Accordingly, consolidated cash flows as presented in the consolidated statements of cash flows may not represent cash immediately available for the payment of cash dividends to the Company’s shareholders or for other cash needs.
Capital Resources
The Company and the Bank are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possible additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on the financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Company and its bank affiliate must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance-sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The banking affiliate’s capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings and other factors.
Quantitative measures established by regulation to ensure capital adequacy require the Company and the Bank to maintain minimum amounts and ratios (set forth in the following table) of total and tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets, and of tier 1 capital to average assets. To be categorized as “well-capitalized”, banks must maintain minimum total risk-based (10%), tier 1 risk-based (8%), common equity tier 1 risk-based (6.5%), and tier 1 leverage ratios (5%). As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, the Company and the Bank met all capital adequacy requirements to which they are subject.
The Bank met the definition of “well-capitalized” at each of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. Refer to “Item 8. Note 15 - Regulatory Matters” for a summary of our risk-based capital and leverage ratios.
The following table summarizes the Company’s various capital ratios at the dates indicated:
The following table summarizes the Bank’s various capital ratios at the dates indicated:
The Company believes the tangible common equity and regulatory capital ratios are important measures of capital strength even though they are considered to be non-GAAP measures. The tables further within MD&A reconcile these ratios to U.S. GAAP.
Risk Management
Market risk arises from exposure to changes in interest rates and other relevant market rate or price risk. The Company faces market risk in the form of interest rate risk through transactions other than trading activities. Market risk from these activities, in the form of interest rate risk, is measured and managed through a number of methods. The Company uses financial modeling techniques to measure interest rate risk. These techniques measure the sensitivity of future earnings due to changing interest rate environments. Guidelines established by the Bank’s Asset/Liability Management Committee and approved by the Bank’s Board of Directors are used to monitor exposure of earnings at risk. General interest rate movements are used to develop sensitivity as management believes it has no primary exposure to a specific point on the yield curve. These limits are based on the Company’s exposure to immediate and sustained parallel rate movements, either upward or downward. The Company does not have any direct market risk from commodity exposures.
Interest Rate Risk
Our interest rate risk management practices are aimed at optimizing net interest income, while guarding against deterioration that could be caused by certain interest rate scenarios. Interest rate sensitivity varies with different types of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. We attempt to maintain interest-earning assets, comprised primarily of both loans and investments, and interest-bearing liabilities, comprised primarily of deposits, maturing or repricing in similar time horizons in order to manage any impact from market interest rate changes according to our risk tolerance. The Company uses an earnings simulation model to measure earnings sensitivity to changing rates.
The Company determines the sensitivity of its short-term future earnings to a hypothetical plus or minus 100 to 300 basis point parallel rate shock through the use of simulation modeling. The simulation of earnings includes the modeling of the balance sheet as an ongoing entity. Future business assumptions involving administered rate products, prepayments for future rate-sensitive balances, and the reinvestment of maturing assets and liabilities are included. These items are then modeled to project net interest income based on a hypothetical change in interest rates. The resulting net interest income for the next 12-month period is compared to the net interest income amount calculated using flat rates. This difference represents the Company’s earnings sensitivity to a positive or negative 100 basis points parallel rate shock.
The following table summarizes the projected impact of interest rate shocks on net interest income at December 31, 2020:
In addition to the rate shocks shown in the table above, the Company models net interest income under various dynamic interest rate scenarios. In general, changes in interest rates are positively correlated with changes in net interest income.
The Company occasionally uses interest rate derivative instruments as an asset/liability management tool to hedge mismatches in interest rate exposure indicated by the net interest income simulation described above. They are used to modify the Company’s exposures to interest rate fluctuations and provide more stable spreads between loan yields and the rate on their funding sources. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $62.0 million in derivative
contracts used to manage interest rate risk. Derivative financial instruments are also discussed in “Item 8. Note 7 - Derivative Financial Instruments.”
The United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority (“FCA”) announced in 2017 that market participants should not rely on LIBOR after 2021. LIBOR is the most liquid and common interest rate index in the world and is commonly referenced in financial instruments. While the Ice Benchmark Administration Ltd., who administers LIBOR, has said that it intends to continue to produce LIBOR after 2021, there can be no guarantee that it will continue without the FCA compelling or persuading LIBOR panel banks to submit quotes. The Federal Reserve’s Alternative Reference Rates Committee (“ARRC”) has proposed that the Secured Overnight Funding Rate (“SOFR”) replace LIBOR. However, at this time, the Company has not identified a replacement index for LIBOR.
We have exposure to LIBOR in various financial contracts. Instruments that may be impacted include loans, securities, debt instruments and derivatives, among other financial contracts indexed to LIBOR and that mature after December 31, 2021. We have an internal working group composed of members from legal, credit, finance, operations, risk and audit to monitor developments, develop policies and procedures, assess the impact to the Company, consider relevant options and to determine an appropriate replacement index for affected contracts that expire after the expected discontinuation of LIBOR on December 31, 2021. We are actively working to amend and address impacted contracts to allow for a replacement index. However, amending certain contracts indexed to LIBOR may require consent from the counterparties which could be difficult and costly to obtain in certain limited circumstances. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s financial contracts indexed to LIBOR included $2.5 billion in loans, $239.2 million in deposits and borrowings, and $992.2 million (notional) in derivatives.
In addition, LIBOR is used in the Company’s analysis of the fair value of tax credits and may be referenced in other financial contracts not included in the discussion above.
The Company has $4.1 billion in variable rate loans as of December 31, 2020. Of these loans, $1.7 billion, or 37.0%, have a floor. $2.5 billion in variable rate loans are indexed to LIBOR, $1.3 billion are indexed to the prime rate, and $302 million are indexed to other rates.
Contractual Obligations, Off-Balance Sheet Risk, and Contingent Liabilities
Through the normal course of operations, the Company has entered into certain contractual obligations and other commitments. Such obligations relate to funding of operations through deposits or debt issuances, as well as leases for premises and equipment. As a financial services provider, the Company routinely enters into commitments to extend credit. While contractual obligations represent future cash requirements of the Company, a significant portion of commitments to extend credit may expire without being drawn upon. Such commitments are subject to the same credit policies and approval process accorded to loans made by the Company.
The recorded contractual obligations and other commitments, excluding any contractual interest,1 at December 31, 2020, were as follows:
The contractual commitments of off-balance sheet financial instruments at December 31, 2020, were as follows:
As of December 31, 2020, we had liabilities associated with uncertain tax positions of $3.1 million. The table above does not include these liabilities due to the high degree of uncertainty regarding the future cash flows associated with these amounts.
The Company also enters into derivative contracts under which the Company either receives cash from or pays cash to counterparties depending on changes in interest rates. Derivative contracts are carried at fair value on the consolidated balance sheet with the fair value representing the net present value of expected future cash receipts or payments based on market interest rates as of the balance sheet date. The fair value of these contracts changes daily as market interest rates change.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The following accounting policies are considered most critical to the understanding of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. These critical accounting policies require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain. Because these estimates and judgments are based on current circumstances, they may change over time or prove to be inaccurate based on actual experience. In the event that different assumptions or conditions were to prevail, and depending upon the severity of such changes, the possibility of a materially different financial condition and/or results of operations could reasonably be expected. The impact and any associated risks related to our critical accounting policies on our business operations are discussed throughout “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see “Item 8. Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”
The Company has prepared all of the consolidated financial information in this report in accordance with GAAP. The Company makes estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Such estimates include the valuation of loans, goodwill, intangible assets, and other long-lived assets, along with assumptions used in the calculation of income taxes, among others. These estimates and assumptions are based on management’s best estimates and judgment. Management evaluates its estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis using loss experience and other factors, including the current economic environment, which management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. We adjust such estimates and assumptions when facts and circumstances dictate. Decreased real estate values, volatile credit markets, and persistent high unemployment have combined to increase the uncertainty inherent in such estimates and assumptions. As future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. Changes in estimates resulting from continuing changes in the economic environment will be reflected in the financial statement in future periods. There can be no assurances that actual results will not differ from those estimates.
Acquisitions
Acquisitions and Business Combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. The assets and liabilities of the acquired entities have been recorded at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets.
The purchase price allocation process requires an estimation of the fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. When a business combination agreement provides for an adjustment to the cost of the combination contingent on future events, the Company includes an estimate of the acquisition-date fair value as part of the cost of the combination. To determine the fair values, the Company relies on third party valuations, such as appraisals, or internal valuations based on discounted cash flow analyses or other valuation techniques. The results of operations of the acquired business are included in the Company’s consolidated financial statements from the respective date of acquisition. Merger-related costs are costs the Company incurs to effect a business combination. Merger-related expenses include costs directly related to merger or acquisition activity and include legal and professional fees, system consolidation and conversion costs, and compensation costs such as severance and retention incentives for employees impacted by acquisition activity. The Company accounts for merger-related costs as expenses in the periods in which the costs are incurred and the services are received.
Allowance for Credit Losses
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted Accounting Standard Update 2016-13 “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments.” This standard, referred to as CECL, requires an estimate of lifetime expected credit losses on certain financial assets measured at amortized cost.
The Company maintains separate allowances for funded loans, unfunded loans, and held-to-maturity securities, collectively the ACL. The ACL is a valuation account to adjust the cost basis to the amount expected to be collected, based on management’s estimate of experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. For purposes of determining the allowance for funded and unfunded loans, the portfolios are segregated into pools that share similar risk characteristics that are then further segregated by credit grades. Loans that do not share similar risk characteristics are evaluated on an individual basis and are not included in the collective evaluation. The Company estimates the amount of the allowance based on historical loan loss experience, adjusted for current and forecasted economic conditions, including unemployment, changes in GDP, and commercial and residential real estate prices. The Company’s forecast of economic conditions uses internal and external information and considers a weighted average of a baseline, upside, and downside scenarios. Because economic conditions can change and are difficult to predict, the anticipated amount of estimated loan defaults and losses, and therefore the adequacy of the allowance, could change significantly and have a direct impact on the Company’s credit costs.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
The Company completes a goodwill impairment test in the fourth quarter each year or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the Company may not be able to recover the goodwill or intangible assets respective carrying amounts. The impairment test involves the use of various estimates and assumptions. Management believes the estimates and assumptions utilized are reasonable. However, the Company may incur impairment charges related to goodwill or intangible assets in the future due to changes in business prospects or other matters that could impact estimates and assumptions.
Intangible assets other than goodwill, such as core deposit intangibles, that are determined to have finite lives are amortized over their estimated remaining useful lives. These assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
Our consolidated financial statements and related data presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollar amounts (except with respect to securities classified as available-for-sale which are carried at market value) without considering the changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Substantially all of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature; as a result, interest rates have a greater impact on our performance than do the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or to the same magnitude as the price of goods and services.
Effects of New Accounting Pronouncements
See “Item 8. Note 22 - New Authoritative Accounting Guidance” for information on recent accounting pronouncements and their impact, if any, on our consolidated financial statements.
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The Company’s accounting and reporting policies conform to U.S. GAAP and the prevailing practices in the banking industry. However, the Company provides other financial measures, such as core efficiency ratio, tangible common equity ratio, return on average tangible common equity, and tangible book value per common share, in this filing that are considered “non-GAAP financial measures.” Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s financial performance, financial position, or cash flows that exclude (or include) amounts that are included in (or excluded from) the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
The Company considers its core efficiency ratio, tangible common equity ratio, return on average tangible common equity, and tangible book value per common share, collectively “core performance measures” presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as relevant measures of financial performance, even though they are non-GAAP measures, as they provide supplemental information by which to evaluate the impact of certain non-comparable items, and the Company’s operating performance on an ongoing basis. Core performance measures exclude certain other income and expense items such as merger-related expenses, facilities charges, and the gain or loss on sale of investment securities, the Company believes to be not indicative of or useful to measure the Company’s operating performance on an ongoing basis. The attached tables contain a reconciliation of these core performance measures to the GAAP measures. The Company believes that the tangible common equity ratio provides useful information to investors about the Company’s capital strength even though it is considered to be a non-GAAP financial measure and is not part of the regulatory capital requirements to which the Company is subject.
The Company believes the tangible common equity ratio provides useful information to investors about the Company’s capital strength, even though it is considered to be a non-GAAP financial measure, and is not part of the regulatory capital requirements to which the Company is subject.
The Company believes these non-GAAP measures and ratios, when taken together with the corresponding GAAP measures and ratios, provide meaningful supplemental information regarding the Company’s performance and capital strength. The Company’s management uses, and believes investors benefit from referring to, these non-GAAP measures and ratios in assessing the Company’s operating results and related trends and when forecasting future periods. However, these non-GAAP measures and ratios should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or preferable to, ratios prepared in accordance with GAAP. The Company has provided a reconciliation of, where applicable, the most comparable GAAP financial measures and ratios to the non-GAAP financial measures and ratios, or a reconciliation of the non-GAAP calculation of the financial measure for the periods indicated.
Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Core Efficiency Ratio
Tangible Common Equity and Tangible Common Equity Ratio
Return on Average Tangible Common Equity
Tangible Book Value Per Common Share