Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 21E of the Exchange Act, as amended. Forward-looking statements include, among other things, statements as to industry trends, our future expectations, operations, financial condition and prospects, business strategies and other matters that do not relate strictly to historical facts. These statements are often identified by the use of words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “estimate,” or “continue,” and similar expressions or variations. These statements are based on the beliefs and assumptions of our management based on information currently available to management. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results and the timing of certain events to differ materially from future results expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” set forth in Part I, Item 1A and in the "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" preceding Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements. Prior period information has been modified to conform to current year presentation. All information is presented in thousands, except per share amounts, customer count and where specifically noted.
Overview
We were founded in 2001 as a provider of content delivery network services to deliver digital content over the Internet. We began development of our infrastructure in 2001 and began generating meaningful revenue in 2002. Today, we are a leading provider of digital content delivery, online video delivery, cloud security, edge computing, and cloud storage services. Our edge services platform includes a globally distributed, high-performance private network, intelligent software, and support services. Our mission is to securely manage and globally deliver digital content, building customer satisfaction through exceptional reliability and performance.
Our delivery services represented approximately 78% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. We also generate revenue through the sale of professional services and other infrastructure services, such as transit and rack space services.
We operate in markets that are highly competitive. We have experienced and expect to continue to experience increased competition in price, features, functionality, integration and other factors leading to customer churn and customers operating their own network. Competition and technology advancements have resulted in declining average selling prices in the industry. We believe continued increases in content delivery traffic growth rates, driven by the continued shift to over the top consumption for online video and increased consumption of rich media content and larger file sizes, increased migration of applications and data to the cloud, and continued growth rates of mobile device usage are all important trends that will continue to outpace declining average selling prices in the industry.
In addition to these revenue-related trends, our profitability is impacted by trends in our costs of services and operating expenses. We continuously review our capacity needs and work to optimize our data center footprint. During 2020, we increased our network capacity by approximately 30 terabits per second. We continuously renegotiate our infrastructure contracts in order to scale our operations based on traffic levels and lower bandwidth costs per unit. Our operating expenses are largely driven by payroll and related employee costs. Our headcount increased from 610 at December 31, 2019, to 618 as of December 31, 2020.
The change in everyday behavior caused by the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted people’s viewing habits and created new patterns in daily usage worldwide. This has included a greater consumption of content online, such as movies and television shows, news, and video games. We continued to see strong volumes of customer traffic and we believe the pandemic has accelerated the adoption of direct to consumer product offerings. Nevertheless, there is uncertainty about future traffic patterns as the pandemic evolves, workers return to their places of employment, and seasonal weather impacts end customers viewing habits.
Our business is dependent on providing our customers with fast, efficient, and reliable distribution of content delivery and digital asset management services over the Internet every minute of every day. Because of this, we operate a globally distributed network with services that are available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and 365 days a year. Our network is fully redundant and includes extensive diversity through data center and telecommunication suppliers within and across regions. In response to the outbreak of COVID-19, we took several precautionary steps early to safeguard our business and our people, including implementing travel bans and restrictions, temporarily closing offices, and canceling participation in various industry events. We have been in constant communication with our business-critical partners and are frequently reassured that, like us, they have activated their pandemic response plans to ensure service continuity. We also have had conversations with various ISPs to understand their pain points and how we can manage our traffic to better alleviate congestion.
We have seen a slowing in our collections of outstanding accounts receivable from some of our customers, and we are experiencing logistics challenges in some parts of the world that may cause delays in updating or expanding our network and acquiring new customers. While it is difficult to predict what the world will look like when this pandemic has run its course, we currently do not expect the COVID-19 pandemic to have a material adverse impact on our balance sheet, financial condition, and results of operations, nor do we expect any impairment of goodwill, long-lived assets or right of use assets. There has been no material impact to our financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, and disclosure controls and procedures.
The following table summarizes our revenue, costs and expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 (in thousands of dollars and as a percentage of total revenue).
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To evaluate our business, we consider and use non-generally accepted accounting principles (Non-GAAP) net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as supplemental measures of operating performance. These measures include the same adjustments that management takes into account when it reviews and assesses operating performance on a period-to-period basis. We consider Non-GAAP net income (loss) to be an important indicator of overall business performance. We define Non-GAAP net income (loss) to be U.S. GAAP net income (loss), adjusted to exclude the settlement and patent license income, share-based compensation, litigation expenses, and non-cash interest expense. We believe that EBITDA provides a useful metric to investors to compare us with other companies within our industry and across industries. We define EBITDA as U.S. GAAP net income (loss), adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization, interest expense, interest and other (income) expense and income tax expense. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted to exclude the settlement and patent license income, share-based compensation and litigation expenses. We use Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure to review and assess operating performance. Our management uses these Non-GAAP financial measures because, collectively, they provide valuable information on the performance of our on-going operations, excluding non-cash charges, taxes and non-core activities (including interest payments related to financing activities). These measures also enable our management to compare the results of our on-going operations from period to period, and allow management to review the performance of our on-going operations against our peer companies and against other companies in our industry and adjacent industries. We believe these measures also provide similar insights to investors, and enable investors to review our results of operations “through the eyes of management.”
Furthermore, our management uses these Non-GAAP financial measures to assist them in making decisions regarding our strategic priorities and areas for future investment and focus.
In our February 11, 2021 earnings press release, as furnished on Form 8-K, we included Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. The terms Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not defined under U.S. GAAP, and are not measures of operating income, operating performance or liquidity presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as analytical tools, and when assessing our operating performance, Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for net income (loss) or other consolidated income statement data prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations include, but are not limited to:
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•these measures do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Non-GAAP net income (loss) and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect the cash requirements necessary for litigation costs, including provision for litigation and litigation expenses;
•these measures do not reflect the interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debt that we may incur;
•these measures do not reflect income taxes or the cash requirements for any tax payments;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will be replaced sometime in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
•while share-based compensation is a component of operating expense, the impact on our financial statements compared to other companies can vary significantly due to such factors as the assumed life of the options and the assumed volatility of our common stock; and
•other companies may calculate Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our U.S. GAAP results and using Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA only as supplemental support for management’s analysis of business performance. Non-GAAP net income (loss), EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are calculated as follows for the periods presented.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In accordance with the requirements of Item 10(e) of Regulation S-K, we are presenting the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures and reconciling the unaudited Non-GAAP financial metrics to the comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
Reconciliation of U.S. GAAP Net Income (Loss) to Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss)
(Unaudited)
Reconciliation of U.S. GAAP Net Income (Loss) to EBITDA to Adjusted EBITDA
(Unaudited)
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. The accounting policies described below are significantly affected by critical accounting estimates. Such accounting policies require significant judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements, and actual results could differ materially from the amounts reported based on these policies.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
Our customers generally execute contracts with terms of one year or longer, which are referred to as recurring revenue contracts or long-term contracts. These contracts generally allow the customer access to our network and are either entirely usage based or commit the customer to a minimum monthly level of usage with additional charges applicable for actual usage above the monthly minimum commitment. We define usage as customer data sent or received using our content delivery service, or content that is hosted or cached by us at the request or direction of our customers. For contracts that contain minimum monthly commitments, we recognize revenue equal to the greater of the minimum monthly committed amount or actual usage, if actual usage exceeds the monthly committed amount, using the right to invoice practical expedient allowable under Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606).
For contracts that contain minimum commitments over the contractual term, we estimate an amount of variable consideration by using either the expected value method or the most likely amount method. We include estimates of variable consideration in revenue only when we have a high degree of confidence that revenue will not be reversed in a subsequent reporting period. We believe that the expected value method is the most appropriate estimate of the amount of variable consideration. These customers have entered into contracts with contract terms generally from one to four years. As of December 31, 2020, we have approximately $3,215 of remaining unsatisfied performance obligations. We recognized revenue of approximately $7,896 and $9,600, respectively, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, related to these types of contracts with our customers. We expect to recognize approximately 91% of the remaining unsatisfied performance obligations in 2021 and approximately 9% in 2022.
We may charge the customer an activation fee when services are first activated. We do not charge activation fees for contract renewals. Activation fees are not distinct within the context of the overall contractual commitment with the customer to perform our content delivery service and are therefore recognized initially as deferred revenue and recognized as revenue ratably over the estimated life of the customer arrangement.
We also derive revenue from services and events sold as discrete, non-recurring events or based solely on usage. For these services, we recognize revenue when control of promised goods or services is transferred to customers at an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
At the inception of a customer contract for service, we make an assessment as to that customer’s ability to pay for the services provided. If we subsequently determine that collection from the customer is not probable, we record an allowance for doubtful accounts and bad debt expense or deferred revenue for that customer’s unpaid invoices and cease recognizing revenue for continued services provided until it is probable that revenue will not be reversed in a subsequent reporting period. Our standard payment terms vary by the type and location of our customer.
Arrangements with Multiple Performance Obligations
Certain of our revenue arrangements include multiple promises to our customers. Revenue arrangements with multiple promises are accounted for as separate performance obligations if each promise is distinct. Such arrangements may include a combination of some or all of the following: content delivery services, video content management services, performance services for website and web application acceleration and security, professional services, cloud storage, edge computing services, and sale of equipment.
Judgment may be required in determining whether products or services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or as one combined performance obligation. Revenue is recognized over the period in which the performance obligations are satisfied, which is generally over the contract term. We have determined that generally most of our products and services do not constitute an individual service offering to our customers, as our promise to the customer is to provide a complete edge services platform, and therefore have concluded that it represents a single performance obligation. We have determined that professional services and hardware sales represent separate performance obligations from that of our edge services platform.
Consideration is allocated to the performance obligations using the relative standalone selling price method. Generally, arrangements with performance obligations are provided over the same contract period, and therefore, revenue is recognized over the same period.
We determine standalone selling price by evaluating the overall pricing objectives and market conditions. Consideration includes our discounting practices, the size and volume of our transactions, the area where services are sold, price lists, historical sales and contract prices.
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue represents amounts billed to customers for which revenue has not been recognized. Deferred revenue primarily consists of the unearned portion of monthly billed service fees and prepayments made by customers for services to be rendered in future periods.
Convertible Senior Notes
In July 2020, we issued $125,000 aggregate principal amount of 3.50% convertible senior notes. We separate our convertible senior notes (the Notes) into liability and equity components. The carrying amount of the liability component is calculated by measuring the fair value of a similar debt instrument that does not have an associated convertible feature. The carrying amount of the equity component representing the conversion option is determined by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the principal amount of the Notes. The excess of the principal amount of the Notes over the carrying amount of the liability component (debt discount) is amortized to interest expense at an effective interest rate over the contractual term of the Notes. The equity component is recorded in additional paid-in capital and is not remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification. We allocate the issuance costs to the liability and equity components of the Notes based on the proportion of the proceeds allocated to the debt and equity components. Issuance costs attributable to the liability component are amortized to interest expense using the effective interest method over the contractual terms of the Notes. Issuance costs attributable to the equity component are netted with the equity component in stockholders’ equity.
Accounts Receivable and Related Reserves
Trade accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amounts and do not bear interest. We record reserves as a reduction of our accounts receivable balance for service credits and for doubtful accounts. Estimates are used in determining both of these reserves. The allowance for doubtful accounts charges are included as a component of general and administrative expenses.
Our allowance for doubtful accounts is based upon a calculation that uses our aging of accounts receivable and applies a reserve percentage to the specific age of the receivable to estimate the allowance for doubtful accounts. The reserve percentages are determined based on our historical write-off experience. These estimates could change significantly if our customers’ financial condition changes or if the economy in general deteriorates. In the event such conditions become known, we specifically identify balances for necessary reserves.
Our reserve for future service credits relates to service credits that are expected to be issued to customers during the ordinary course of business. These credits typically relate to customer disputes and billing adjustments and are estimated at the time the revenue is recognized and recorded as a reduction of revenues. Estimates for service credits are based on an analysis of credits issued in previous periods.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
We have recorded goodwill as a result of past business acquisitions. Goodwill is recorded when the purchase price paid for an acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of the net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. In each of our acquisitions, the objective of the acquisition was to expand our product offerings and customer base and to achieve synergies related to cross selling opportunities, all of which contributed to the recognition of goodwill.
We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. We concluded that we have one reporting unit and assigned the entire balance of goodwill to this reporting unit. The estimated fair value of the reporting unit is determined using our market capitalization as of our annual impairment assessment date or more frequently if circumstances indicate the goodwill might be impaired. Items that could reasonably be expected to negatively affect key assumptions used in estimating fair value include but are not limited to:
•sustained decline in our stock price due to a decline in our financial performance due to the loss of key customers, loss of key personnel, emergence of new technologies or new competitors and/or unfavorable outcomes of intellectual property disputes;
•decline in overall market or economic conditions leading to a decline in our stock price; and
•decline in observed control premiums paid in business combinations involving comparable companies.
The estimated fair value of the reporting unit is determined using a market approach. Our market capitalization is adjusted for a control premium based on the estimated average and median control premiums of transactions involving companies comparable to us. As of the annual impairment testing date of October 31, 2020, we determined that goodwill was not impaired.
Impairment and Useful Lives of Long-Lived Assets
We review our long-lived assets, such as fixed assets and amortizable intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Events that would trigger an impairment review include a change in the use of the asset or forecasted negative cash flows related to the asset. When such events occur, we compare the carrying amount of the asset to the undiscounted expected future cash flows related to the asset. If this comparison indicates that impairment is present, the amount of the impairment is calculated as the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset. If a readily determinable market price does not exist, fair value is estimated using discounted expected cash flows attributable to the asset. The estimates required to apply this accounting policy include forecasted usage of the long-lived assets, the useful lives of these assets, and expected future cash flows. Changes in these estimates could materially impact results from operations.
Results of Continuing Operations
Discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is presented below.
Discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 can be found in “Part II. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on January 30, 2020.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
We derive revenue primarily from the sale of our digital content delivery, video delivery, cloud security, edge cloud and origin storage services. We also generate revenue through the sale of professional services and other infrastructure services, such as transit and rack space services.
The following table reflects our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019:
Our revenue increased during the year ended December 31, 2020, versus 2019 primarily due to a significant increase in volumes driven by increased demand for our content delivery services. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we experienced a decrease in average selling price versus the comparable 2019 period as a result of continuous pricing compression, which is common in our industry.
Our active customers worldwide decreased to 527 as of December 31, 2020, compared to 599 as of December 31, 2019. We are continuing our selective approach to accepting profitable business by following a clear process for identifying customers that value quality, performance, availability, and service.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, sales to our top 20 customers accounted for approximately 75% and 72%, respectively of our total revenue. The customers that comprised our top 20 customers change from time to time, and our large customers may not continue to be as significant going forward as they have been in the past.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had two customers, Amazon and Sony who represented approximately 36% and 11%, respectively of our total revenue. During the year ended December 31, 2019, Amazon represented approximately 30% of our total revenue.
Revenue by geography is based on the location of the customer from which the revenue is earned. The following table sets forth revenue by geographic area (in thousands and as a percentage of total revenue):
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of fees paid to network providers for bandwidth and backbone, costs incurred for non-settlement free peering and connection to Internet service providers, and fees paid to data center operators for housing of our network equipment in third party network data centers, also known as co-location costs. Cost of revenue also includes leased warehouse space and utilities, depreciation of network equipment used to deliver our content delivery services, payroll and related costs, and share-based compensation for our network operations and professional services personnel. Other costs include professional fees and outside services, travel and travel-related expenses and royalty expenses.
Cost of revenue was composed of the following (in thousands and as a percentage of total revenue):
Our cost of revenue increased in both aggregate dollars and as a percentage of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus the comparable 2019 period. The changes in cost of revenue were primarily a result of the following:
•Bandwidth expenses increased in aggregate dollars due to higher transit fees and increased peering costs, resulting from increased traffic on our network and our continued expansion in existing, as well as new geographies.
•Our co-location costs increased in aggregate dollars primarily due to our expansion in existing, as well as new geographies.
•Depreciation expense increased due to increased capital expenditures over the last two years.
•Payroll and related employee costs increased as a result of additional network operations and professional services personnel.
•Other costs increased primarily due to an increase in international re-seller costs, which was partially off-set by decreased travel and entertainment and contract royalties.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense was composed of the following (in thousands and as a percentage of total revenue):
Our general and administrative expense increased in aggregate dollars and decreased as a percentage of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus the comparable 2019 period.
The increase in aggregate dollars for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus the comparable 2019 period was primarily driven by increased payroll and related employee costs due to increased general and administrative personnel. These increases were partially off-set by decreased share-based compensation, decreased professional fees and services (consulting). Other costs also decreased, which was primarily lower bad debt expense and lower travel and entertainment expenses.
We expect our general and administrative expenses for 2021 to remain consistent as a percentage of revenue.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense was composed of the following (in thousands and as a percentage of total revenue):
Our sales and marketing expense decreased in aggregate dollars and decreased as a percentage of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus the comparable 2019 period.
The decrease in aggregate dollars for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to lower other costs (travel and entertainment, recruiting fees and facilities). These decreases were offset by increased share-based compensation primarily due to variable compensation that was paid in restricted stock units and increased payroll and related employee costs.
We expect our sales and marketing expenses for 2021 to increase as a percentage of revenue as compared to 2020 due to increased marketing related initiatives and personnel costs to drive revenue growth.
Research and Development
Research and development expense was composed of the following (in thousands and as a percentage of total revenue):
Our research and development expense decreased in both aggregate dollars and as a percentage of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus the comparable 2019 period.
The decrease in aggregate dollars was primarily driven by decreased payroll and related employee costs (lower salaries) and decreased other costs (decreased travel and entertainment, facilities and other employee costs, off-set by increased professional fees). These decreases were partially offset by increased share-based compensation.
We expect our research and development expenses for 2021 to remain consistent with 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization (Operating Expenses)
Depreciation and amortization expense was $1,591, or 0.7% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus $872, or 0.4% of revenue for the comparable 2019 period. Depreciation expense consists of depreciation on equipment and furnishings used by general administrative, sales and marketing, and research and development personnel. Amortization expense consists of amortization of acquired intangible assets.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $3,939 for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus $76 for the comparable 2019 period. Interest expense includes expense associated with the issuance of our senior convertible notes in July 2020 and fees associated with the Loan and Security Agreement (as amended, the Credit Agreement) with Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) originally entered into in November 2015. See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to our debt.
Interest Income
Interest income was $69 for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus $427 for the comparable 2019 period. Interest income includes interest earned on invested cash balances and marketable securities.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense was $368 for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus other income of $80 for the comparable 2019 period. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, other income/expense consisted primarily of foreign currency transaction gains and losses and the gain/loss on sale of fixed assets.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $645 versus $750 for the comparable 2019 period. Income tax expense on net income (loss) before taxes was different than the statutory income tax rate primarily due to our providing for a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets in certain jurisdictions, and recording of state and foreign tax expense for the year. The effective income tax rate is based primarily upon income or loss for the year, the composition of the income or loss in different countries, and adjustments, if any, for the potential tax consequences, benefits or resolutions for tax audits.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act, among other things, permits NOL carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021. In addition, the CARES Act allows NOLs incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes. We are currently evaluating the impact of the CARES Act, but at present do not expect that the NOL carryback provision of the CARES Act would result in a cash benefit to us.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities classified as current totaled $123,723. Included in this amount is approximately $8,014 of cash and cash equivalents held outside the United States. Changes in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities are dependent upon changes in, among other things, working capital items such as deferred revenues, accounts payable, accounts receivable, accrued provision for litigation and various accrued expenses, as well as purchases of property and equipment and changes in our capital and financial structure due to debt repurchases and issuances, stock option exercises, sales of equity investments and similar events.
Cash from operations could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and other risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A titled "Risk Factors". However, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, and available borrowing capacity will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months. If the assumptions underlying our business plan regarding future revenue and expenses change or if unexpected opportunities or needs arise, we may seek to raise additional cash by selling equity or debt securities.
The major components of changes in cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $21,328 for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus net cash provided by operating activities of $1,746 for 2019, an increase of $19,582. Changes in operating assets and liabilities of $(1,750) during the year ended December 31, 2020, versus $(18,074) in 2019 were primarily due to:
•accounts receivable decreased $2,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of timing of collections as compared to a $10,228 increase in the comparable 2019 period;
•prepaid expenses and other current assets increased $5,717 during the year ended December 31, 2020, due to an increase in prepaid bandwidth and backbone costs, VAT receivable, and other prepaid expenses off-set by the amortization of prepaid bandwidth and backbone expenses, compared to a $1,101 increase in the comparable 2019 period;
•accounts payable and other current liabilities decreased $1,069 during the year ended December 31, 2020, versus an increase of $1,292 for the comparable 2019 period due to timing of vendor payments and variable compensation; and
•net payments for provision for litigation decreased by $3,040 as a result our final payments from a settled litigation matter during the three months ended June 30, 2019.
Cash provided by operating activities may not be sufficient to cover new purchases of property and equipment during 2021 and beyond. The timing and amount of future working capital changes and our ability to manage our days sales outstanding will also affect the future amount of cash used in or provided by operating activities.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $102,665 for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus $9,568 for 2019. Net cash used in investing activities was primarily related to the purchase of marketable securities, and capital expenditures primarily for servers and network equipment associated with the build-out and expansion of our global computing platform, partially offset by cash received from the sale and maturities of marketable securities.
We expect to have ongoing capital expenditure requirements as we continue to invest in and expand our content delivery network. During 2020, we made capital expenditures of $25,085, which represented approximately 11% of our total revenue. We currently expect capital expenditures in 2021 to approximate ten percent of revenue, as we continue to increase the capacity of our global network and re-fresh our systems.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $109,518 for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus net cash provided by financing activities of $799 for 2019. Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily relates to cash received from the issuance of our Notes of $121,600, and the exercise of stock options and our employee stock purchase plan of $10,068, offset by $16,413 premium paid related to our capped call transactions, $859 payment of debt issuance costs, and the payments of employee tax withholdings related to the net settlement of vested restricted stock units of $4,878.
Convertible Senior Notes and Capped Call Transactions
In July 2020, we issued $125,000 aggregate principal amount of 3.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 (the Notes), with an initial conversion rate of 117.2367 shares of our common stock (equal to an initial conversion rate of $8.53 per share), subject to adjustment in some events. The Notes will be senior, unsecured obligations of ours and will be equal in right of payment with our senior, unsecured indebtedness; senior in right of payment to our indebtedness that is expressly subordinated to the Notes; effectively subordinated to our senior, secured indebtedness, including future borrowings, if any, under our $20,000 credit facility with SVB, to the extent of the value of the collateral securing that indebtedness; and structurally subordinated to all indebtedness and other liabilities, including trade payables, and (to the extent we are not a holder thereof) preferred equity, if any, of our subsidiaries. The Notes are governed by an indenture (the Indenture) between us, as the issuer, and U.S. Bank, National Association, as trustee. The Indenture does not contain any financial covenants.
The Notes mature on August 1, 2025, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased in accordance with their term prior to the maturity date. Interest is payable semiannually in arrears on February 1 and August 1 of each year, beginning on February 1, 2021. We may not redeem the Notes prior to August 4, 2023.
On or after August 4, 2023, and on or before the 40th scheduled trading day immediately before the maturity date, we may redeem for cash all or any portion of the Notes if the last reported sale price of our common stock has been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive), including the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption, during any 30 consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption. The redemption price will equal 100% of the principal amount of the Notes being redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. No sinking fund is provided for the Notes.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the conditions allowing holders of the Notes to convert were not met and therefore the Notes are not yet convertible.
In connection with the offering of the Notes, we also entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions (collectively, the Capped Calls). The Capped Calls have an initial strike price of approximately $8.53 per share, subject to certain adjustments, which corresponds to the initial conversion price of the Notes. The Capped Calls have an initial cap price of $13.38 per share, subject to certain adjustments. The capped call transactions cover, subject to anti-dilution adjustments, approximately 14.7 million shares of our common stock and are expected to offset the potential economic dilution to our common stock up to the initial cap price.
Line of Credit
In July 2020, we entered into a Sixth Amendment (Sixth Amendment) and in December 2020 we entered into the Seventh Amendment (Seventh Amendment) to the Loan and Security Agreement (the Credit Agreement) with Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) originally entered into in November 2015. Under the Sixth and Seventh Amendments, the maximum principal commitment amount remained at $20,000. The Sixth Amendment modified language within the Credit Agreement, which permitted us to issue our Notes. The Seventh Amendment modified the reporting requirements on a quarterly basis, given our current liquidity position. As long as our Adjusted Quick Ratio remains above 1.5 to 1, we no longer are required to submit quarterly borrowing base reports as previously required. Our borrowing capacity is the lesser of the commitment amount or 80% of eligible accounts receivable. All outstanding borrowings owed under the Credit Agreement become due and payable no later than the extended final maturity date of November 2, 2022.
As of December 31, 2020, borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at the current prime rate minus 0.25%. In the event of default, obligations shall bear interest at a rate per annum which is 3% above the then applicable rate. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, we had no outstanding borrowings, and we had availability under the Credit Agreement of $20,000.
Financial Covenants and Borrowing Limitations
The Credit Agreement requires, and any future credit facilities will likely require, us to comply with specified financial requirements that may limit the amount we can borrow. A breach of any of these covenants could result in a default. Our ability to satisfy those covenants depends principally upon our ability to meet or exceed certain financial performance results. Any debt agreements we enter into in the future may further limit our ability to enter into certain types of transactions.
We are required to maintain an Adjusted Quick Ratio of at least 1.0 to 1.0. We are also subject to certain customary limitations on our ability to, among other things, incur debt, grant liens, make acquisitions and other investments, make certain restricted payments such as dividends, dispose of assets or undergo a change in control. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with our covenant under the Credit Agreement.
For a more detailed discussion regarding our Credit Agreement and Sixth Amendment, please refer to Note 8 "Debt - Line of Credit" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We may be prevented from taking advantage of business opportunities that arise because of the limitations imposed on us by restrictive covenants within the Credit Agreement. These restrictions may also limit our ability to plan for or react to market conditions, meet capital needs or otherwise restrict our activities or business plans and adversely affect our ability to finance our operations, enter into acquisitions, execute our business strategy, effectively compete with companies that are not similarly restricted or engage in other business activities that would be in our interest. In the future, we may also incur debt obligations that might subject us to additional and different restrictive covenants that could affect our financial and operational flexibility. We cannot assure you that we will be granted waivers or amendments to the indenture governing the Credit Agreement, or such other debt obligations if for any reason we are unable to comply with our obligations thereunder or that we will be able to refinance our debt on acceptable terms, or at all, should we seek to do so. Any such limitations on borrowing under the Credit Agreement, including payments related to litigation, could have a material adverse impact on our liquidity and our ability to continue as a going concern could be impaired.
Share repurchases
On March 14, 2017, our board of directors authorized a $25,000 share repurchase program. Any shares repurchased under this program will be canceled and returned to authorized but unissued status. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, we did not repurchase any shares under the repurchase programs. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we purchased and canceled 1,000 shares for $3,800, including commissions and fees. As of December 31, 2020, there remained $21,200 under this share repurchase program.
Contractual Obligations, Contingent Liabilities, and Commercial Commitments
In the normal course of business, we make certain long-term commitments for ROU assets, (primarily office facilities) and purchase commitments for bandwidth, and computer rack space. These commitments expire on various dates ranging from 2021 to 2030. We expect that the growth of our business will require us to continue to add to and increase our right-of-use (ROU) assets and long-term commitments in 2021 and beyond. As a result of our growth strategies, we believe that our liquidity and capital resources requirements will grow.
The following table presents our contractual obligations and commercial commitments, as of December 31, 2020 over the next five years and thereafter (in thousands):
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we are not involved in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Standards.”