ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes set forth in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, our consolidated financial data set forth in Item 6. Selected Financial Data and the risk factors identified in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report. For further discussion regarding our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to Item 7 Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
General Overview
Eagle Bulk Shipping Inc. (“Eagle” or the “Company”) is a U.S. based fully integrated shipowner-operator providing global transportation solutions to a diverse group of customers including miners, producers, traders, and end users. Headquartered in Stamford, Connecticut, with offices in Singapore and Copenhagen, Eagle focuses exclusively on the versatile mid-size drybulk vessel segment and owns one of the largest fleets of Supramax/ Ultramax vessels in the world. The Company performs all management services in-house such as strategic, commercial, operational, technical, and administrative services and employs an active management approach to fleet trading with the objective of optimizing revenue performance and maximizing earnings on a risk-managed basis. Typical cargoes we transport include both major bulk cargoes, such as iron ore, coal and grain coal, grain, and iron ore, and minor bulk cargoes such as fertilizer, steel products, petcoke, cement, and forest products. As of December 31, 2020, we owned and operated a modern fleet of 45 Supramax/Ultramax dry bulk vessels. We chartered-in three Ultramax vessels for a remaining lease term of less than one year. In addition, the Company charters-in third-party vessels on a short to medium term basis.
Our owned fleet totals 45 vessels, with an aggregate carrying capacity of 2,686,570 dwt and had an average age of 8.8 years as of December 31, 2020.
Financing
On June 9, 2020, Ultraco Shipping LLC ("Ultraco"), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, and certain initial and additional guarantors entered into the Third Amendment (the "Third Amendment") to the New Ultraco Debt Facility to provide for incremental commitments and pursuant to which on June 12, 2020, Ultraco borrowed $22.6 million for general corporate purposes which was secured by two Ultramaxes already owned by the Company, the M/V Hong Kong Eagle and M/V Santos Eagle. The Company paid $0.4 million as financing costs to the lenders. The Company incurred an additional $0.2 million in other financing costs in relation to the transaction.
On December 22, 2020, the Company issued an aggregate of 1,381,215 shares in two concurrent public offerings ("Equity Offerings"). The total net proceeds from the offerings, net of issuance costs was $23.5 million. The Company used the net proceeds to finance the acquisition of two modern Ultramax vessels and general corporate purposes.
The following are certain significant events with respect to our vessels that occurred during 2020:
•For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company sold five vessels (Goldeneye, Skua, Shrike, Osprey I and Hawk) for total net proceeds of $23.2 million after brokerage commissions and associated selling expenses. The Company recorded a net loss of $0.5 million from the sale of the five vessels in its Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
•During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company entered into a series of memorandum of agreements to purchase three high specification scrubber-fitted Ultramax bulkcarriers for a total purchase price of $50.2 million excluding direct expenses of acquisition. The Company took delivery of the vessels during
the first quarter of 2021. The Company paid and recorded $3.3 million on two of the above mentioned vessels in advances for vessel purchases in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020.
Vessel upgrades - scrubbers and ballast water systems
During the third quarter of 2018, the Company entered into a series of agreements to purchase up to 37 scrubbers, which were fitted on the Company's vessels. The actual costs, including installation, were approximately $2.4 million per scrubber. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company completed and commissioned all 37 scrubbers and recorded $88.9 million in Vessels and vessel improvements in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020.
During the third quarter of 2018, the Company entered into a contract for the installation of BWTS on 39 of our owned vessels. The projected costs, including installation, are approximately $0.5 million per BWTS. The Company intends to complete the installations during scheduled drydockings. The Company completed installation of BWTS on 15 vessels and recorded $7.1 million in Vessels and vessel improvements in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, the Company recorded $2.3 million as advances paid towards installation of BWTS on the remaining vessels as a noncurrent asset in its Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company applied for and received extensions from the USCG of up to one year from their deadline for BWTS installation on 18 of our vessels. Additionally, the Company cancelled the BWTS installation orders on three of its oldest vessels.
Business Strategy and Outlook:
We believe our strong balance sheet allows us the flexibility to opportunistically make investments in the drybulk segment that will drive shareholder growth. In order to accomplish this, we intend to:
•Maintain a highly efficient and quality fleet in the drybulk segment;
•Maintain a revenue strategy that takes advantage of a rising rate environment and at the same time mitigate risk in a declining rate environment;
•Maintain a cost structure that allow us to be competitive in all economic cycles without sacrificing safety and maintenance;
•Continue to grow our relationships with our charterers and vendors; and
•Continue to invest in our on-shore operations and development of processes.
Our financial performance is based on the following key elements of our business strategy:
(1)Concentration in one vessel category: Supramax/Ultramax drybulk vessels, which we believe offer certain size, operational and geographical advantages relative to other classes of drybulk vessels, such as Handysize, Panamax and Capesize vessels,
(2)An active owner-operator model where we seek to operate our own fleet and develop contractual relationships with cargo interests. These relationships and the related cargo contracts have the dual benefit of providing greater operational efficiencies and act as a balance to the Company’s naturally long position to the market. Notwithstanding the focus on short term chartering, we consistently monitor the drybulk shipping market and, based on market conditions, will consider taking advantage of long-term time charters on our owned fleet at higher rates when appropriate.
(3)Maintain high quality vessels and improve standards of operation through improved standards and procedures, crew training and repair and maintenance procedures.
We have employed all of our vessels on time and voyage charters. The following table represents certain information about our revenue earning charters on our owned fleet as of December 31, 2020:
(1)The vessel is at a shipyard undergoing drydock as of December 31, 2020.
(2)The vessel is contracted to continue the existing time charter at an increased charter rate of $11,000 after January 8, 2021.
(3)The vessel was involved in a collision and was undergoing repairs at a shipyard as of December 31, 2020.
Business Outlook
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization (the “WHO”) declared COVID-19, to be a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic is having widespread, rapidly evolving, and unpredictable impacts on global society, economies, financial markets, and business practices. Governments have implemented measures such as social distancing, mask mandates, travel restrictions, COVID testing guidelines, quarantine regulations etc. All the above measures taken to slow the spread of COVID-19 have led to a significant slowdown in the worldwide economic activity and decline in demand for drybulk cargoes. This has contributed to lower charter rates and shipping revenues in the first half of 2020.
In 2020, drybulk trade decreased by 1.9% compared to an increase of 0.4% in 2019, as measured in metric tons of cargo. This was primarily the result of a 9.5% decline in coal trade around the world, reflecting the continuing shift away from thermal coal use in Europe, China-Australia trade tensions, and decreased electricity demand in many countries due to economic impacts of COVID-19. Demand for minor bulk commodities also decreased by 3.2% mainly due to the impact to steel and other construction-related commodities due to COVID-19, as well as a ban on exports of nickel ore from Indonesia that became effective in January 2020. On the positive side, grain trade increased by 7.8%. The BSI-58 index averaged $8,189 for 2020, compared to $9,948 for 2019.
During the second half of 2020, freight markets saw a strong rebound from the low point in the second quarter as demand for commodities recovered. The gross BSI averaged $9,931/day during the third quarter of 2020, up 81% quarter-on-quarter. The charter hire rates continued to improve during the fourth quarter of 2020 with average BSI averaging at $10,749/day. However, the economic activity levels as well as the demand for dry bulk cargoes is still dependent on the duration of COVID-19, timing, and logistics of vaccine distribution, which is currently uncertain.
The Company experienced delays in cargo operations due to port restrictions and additional protocols and cancellation of a few cargo contracts. However, the Company was able to secure alternative business for its vessels upon cancellation at the prevailing charter rates. Our crew on our ships were exposed to risk of exposure to COVID-19. The travel restrictions imposed at various ports have severely impeded our crew rotation plans during the year. We experienced some disruptions to our normal vessel operations and incurred additional offhire time due to deviations our vessels had to take to allow for crew changes. As a result of the spread of COVID-19, the Company incurred some additional expenses relating to procurement of personal protective equipment, COVID-19 testing, and crew travel, which is included in our vessel operating expenses in our Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, the Company experienced some delays in drydocking and BWTS installations, operations, and crew changes due to quarantine regulations and COVID-19 testing and resulting offhire days. For additional discussion regarding the impact of COVID-19, see “-Liquidity and Capital Resources- Summary of Liquidity and Capital Resources” and “Item 1A Risk Factors.”
We have instituted measures to reduce the risk of spread of COVID-19 for our crew members on our vessels as well as our onshore offices in Stamford, Connecticut, Singapore, and Copenhagen. However, if the COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the global economy on a prolonged basis, or vaccination program goes slower than expected, the rate environment in the drybulk market and our vessel values may deteriorate further and our operations and cash flows may be negatively impacted as well as our ability to meet the debt covenants under our existing debt facilities.
U.S.-China Trade Dispute
Over the course of 2018 and 2019, the United States imposed tariffs on various goods imported from a number of countries. Certain of these countries, including China, undertook retaliatory actions by implementing tariffs on select U.S. products. Most notably in terms of drybulk trade volumes is China’s tariff placed upon U.S. soybean exports. These tariffs impacted trade-flows with much of the US exports being substituted with soybeans from South America. This also had an impact on seasonality, given the different timing of harvests between the Northern and Southern hemispheres. With the signing of the “phase one” trade agreement between China and the U.S. in January 2020, China has agreed in principle to purchase meaningful quantities of agricultural products, including soybeans, from the U.S. In recent months, China has purchased large amounts of agricultural products that are transported on drybulk vessels which has helped support freight rates for the mid-sized and smaller vessel classes. It remains to be seen the stance the new U.S. administration will take towards China as well as any previously agreed upon trade deals. A deterioration in the trading relationship or a re-escalation of protectionist measures taken between these countries or others could lead to reduced volumes of drybulk trade as well as changes in trade flows.
Market Overview
The international shipping industry is highly competitive and fragmented with no single owner accounting for more than 3.5% of the on-the-water drybulk fleet. As of December 31, 2020, there are approximately 12,300 drybulk vessels over 10,000 dwt totaling 911 million dwt. We compete with other (primarily private) owners of drybulk vessels in the Handysize, Supramax/Ultramax, and Panamax asset classes.
Competition in the shipping industry varies according to the nature of the contractual relationship as well as the specific commodity being shipped. Our business will fluctuate as a result of changes in the supply and demand for drybulk commodities and also the main patterns of trade in these commodities. Competition in virtually all bulk trades is intense and based primarily on supply of ships and demand for our ocean transportation services. We compete for charters on the basis of price, vessel location, size, age, and condition of the vessel, as well as on our reputation as an owner and operator. Increasingly, major customers are demonstrating a preference for modern vessels based on concerns about the environmental and operational risks associated with older vessels. Consequently, owners of large modern fleets have gained a competitive advantage over owners of older fleets.
Our strategy is to focus primarily on the Supramax/Ultramax asset class, defined as drybulk vessels that range in size from approximately 50,000 to 65,000 dwt. These vessels have the cargo loading and unloading flexibility offered by their on-board cranes, while the cargo carrying capacity approaches that of Panamax, which ranges in size between 65,000 and 100,000 dwt but which require onshore facilities to load and offload their cargoes. We believe that the cargo handling flexibility and cargo carrying capacity of the Supramax/Ultramax class makes it the preferred type of ship attractive to potential charterers. As of December 31, 2020, all of our owned vessels range in size between 50,000 and 64,000 dwt.
The supply of drybulk vessels depends primarily on the size of the orderbook and the scrapping of older or less efficient vessels. During 2020, approximately 486 newbuilding vessels were delivered to industry participants, and 143 vessels were scrapped, resulting in 3.7% net growth in the drybulk fleet on a DWT-adjusted basis, as compared to 4.0% for 2019.
The typical trading life of a Supramax/Ultramax vessel is approximately 25 years. As of December 2020, 10% of the world's drybulk fleet (by vessel count) was 20 years or older.
Fleet Growth for 2021 is expected to continue at moderate to low levels of 2.6% for the drybulk fleet and 2.2% for Supramax/Ultramax vessels. The orderbook as of February 2021 stands at approximately 5.8% of the total drybulk fleet, with the orderbook for the Supramax/Ultramax segment at 5.3% of the on-the-water fleet, with both figures representing the smallest orderbook in approximately 30 years. The IMF is currently forecasting worldwide GDP growth at 5.5% for 2021, as the global economy recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic. This represents the strongest growth since 2010, when the economy was recovering from the 2009 recession. Drybulk trade, which tends to be correlated to global GDP, is expected to grow by approximately 3.7% in 2021, driven by a rebound in iron ore, and continued strong growth in bauxite, along with modest increases in coal, grain, and other minor bulk commodities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP” or “GAAP”). The preparation of the financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Critical accounting policies are those that reflect significant judgments of uncertainties and potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. We have described below what we believe are our most critical accounting policies, because they generally involve a comparatively higher degree of judgment in their application. For a description of all our accounting policies, see Note 2 Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included herein.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are generated from time charters and voyage charters. Time charter revenues are recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the respective time charter agreements as service is provided. Voyage revenues for cargo transportation are recognized ratably over the estimated relative transit time of each voyage. Voyage revenue is deemed to commence upon the commencement of loading of the charterer's cargo and is deemed to end upon the completion of discharge of the cargo, provided the charter rate is fixed and determinable, and collectability is reasonably assured. The costs incurred during the period prior to commencement of loading the cargo, primarily bunkers, are deferred as they represent setup costs and recorded as a current asset and are amortized on a straight-line basis as the related performance obligations are satisfied.
We adopted ASC 606 as of January 1, 2018 utilizing the modified retrospective method of transition. We recorded an adjustment of approximately $0.8 million to increase our opening accumulated deficit and increase our unearned revenue and Other current assets on our Consolidated Balance Sheet on January 1, 2018.
Revenue is based on contracted charter parties, including spot-market related time charters for which rates fluctuate based on changes in the spot market. However, there is always the possibility of dispute over terms and payment of hires and freights. In particular, disagreements may arise as to the responsibility for third party costs incurred by the customer and revenue due to us as a result. Additionally, there are certain performance parameters included in contracted charter parties, which if not met, can result in customer claims.
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASC 2016-13, "Financial Instruments - Credit Losses" ("ASC 326"). The Company maintains an allowance for credit losses for expected uncollectible account receivable, which is recorded as an offset to accounts receivable and changes in such are classified as voyage expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Upon adoption of ASC 326, the Company assessed collectability by reviewing accounts receivable on a collective basis where similar
characteristics exist and on an individual basis when we identify specific customers with known disputes or collectability issues. In determining the amount of the allowance for credit losses, the Company considered historical collectability based on past due status and made judgments about the creditworthiness of customers based on ongoing credit evaluations. The Company also considered customer-specific information, current market conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions to inform adjustments to historical loss data. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our assessment considered business and market disruptions caused by COVID-19 and estimates of expected emerging credit and collectability trends. The continued volatility in market conditions and evolving shifts in credit trends are difficult to predict causing variability and volatility that may have a material impact on our allowance for credit losses in future periods.
Leases
We adopted Accounting Standards Update 2016-02, "Leases", ("ASC 842") on January 1, 2019 which resulted in the recognition of operating lease right-of-use assets of $28.7 million and related lease liabilities for operating leases of $30.5 million in Total Assets and Total Liabilities, respectively, on our Consolidated Balance Sheet on January 1, 2019. Please see Note 2 Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements for additional information. Prior to January 1, 2019, the Company recognized lease expense in accordance with then-existing U.S. GAAP (“prior GAAP”). Because both ASC 842 and prior GAAP generally recognize operating lease expenses on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease arrangement and the Company only has operating lease arrangements, there were no material differences between the timing and amount of lease expenses recognized under the two accounting methodologies for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Vessel Lives and Impairment
The Company estimates the useful life of the Company's vessels to be 25 years from the date of initial delivery from the shipyard to the original owner. In addition, the Company estimates the scrap rate to be $300 per lwt, to compute each vessel's residual value, which is based on the 15-year average scrap value of steel.
The carrying values of the Company's vessels may not represent their fair market value at any point in time since the market prices of second-hand vessels tend to fluctuate with changes in charter rates and the cost of new buildings. Historically, both charter rates and vessel values tend to be cyclical. The volatility in dry bulk market is heavily impacted by growth rate and demand for commodities such as coal and iron ore in the world economy and Chinese economy in particular. The COVID-19 outbreak negatively impacted the charter hire rates as well as our vessel values. We evaluate the carrying amounts and periods over which long-lived assets are depreciated to determine if events have occurred which would require modification to their carrying values or useful lives. In evaluating useful lives and carrying values of long-lived assets, we review certain indicators of potential impairment, such as carrying value of the vessels lower than their fair market value, vessel sales, business plans and overall market conditions.
If indicators of impairment are present, we perform an analysis of the undiscounted projected net operating cash flows for each vessel and compare it to the vessel’s carrying value. This assessment is made at the individual vessel level since we can separately identify cash flow information for each vessel. In developing estimates of future cash flows, the Company must make assumptions about future charter rates, vessel operating expenses, and the estimated remaining useful lives of the vessels. These assumptions are based on historical trends as well as future expectations. The Company annually reviews all the assumptions that are used in the calculation of projected net operating cash flows. Specifically, we utilize the rates currently in effect for the duration of their current charters. Based on our annual review of assumptions, for periods of time where our vessels are not fixed on charters, we utilized an estimated daily time charter equivalent for our vessels’ unfixed days based on a historical average of the last fifteen years of one and three years’ time charter rates as published by a third party excluding the hire rates for the years 2007 and 2008 as we believe that they are outliers and are not representative of expected future rate environment in a typical shipping cycle. Historically, the Company utilized 25 year average of one and three year time charters for the unfixed days of the remaining useful life in its impairment analysis. This is considered a change in accounting estimate and it was done primarily to closely align with our peers and also based on our annual evaluation of assumptions used in the undiscounted projected net operating cash flows analysis, we believe that the
15 year average is more representative of future rate environment for our vessels. The change in accounting estimate did not have any impact on the impairment analysis and the consolidated financial statements.
The undiscounted projected net operating cash flows are determined by considering the future charter revenues from the existing charters for the fixed fleet days and for the unfixed days, projected FFA rates up to 2022 and an estimated daily time charter equivalent over the estimated remaining life of the vessel, assumed to be 25 years from the delivery of the vessel from the shipyard, reduced by commissions, expected outflows for vessels’ maintenance and vessel operating expenses (including planned drydocking and special survey expenditures) and any planned capital expenditures such as scrubbers and BWTS.
The Company evaluated if any impairment indicators existed as of December 31, 2020. Based on the evaluation, the Company determined that there were impairment indicators for 40 vessels in the Company's fleet for which the average vessel prices based on vessel valuations received from third party brokers were lower than their carrying values. The Company considered this to be an impairment indicator and performed an impairment test on the 40 vessels.
Of the inputs that the Company uses for its impairment analysis, future time charter rates are the most significant and most volatile. We utilize historical averages as discussed above in our impairment tests due to the highly cyclical nature of the drybulk shipping industry. Our vessels range from very new to seventeen years old, and we believe that utilizing rates over a long period of time incorporates numerous shipping cycles and reflects our strategy of operating our vessels over a long time period, and in line with the overall useful economic life of our vessels. As disclosed elsewhere herein, we also consider whether utilizing ten or five year averages would impact our impairment assessment. Our vessels remain fully utilized and have a relatively long average remaining useful life of approximately 17 years in which to provide sufficient cash flows on an undiscounted basis to recover their carrying values as of December 31, 2020. Management will continue to monitor developments in charter rates in our participatory markets with respect to the expectation of future rates over an extended period.
A comparison of the average estimated daily time charter equivalent rate used in our impairment analysis with the average break even rate at which the undiscounted cash flows for the 40 vessels for which impairment test was performed will be lower than their carrying value as of December 31, 2020 (“average break even rate”) for our vessels is presented below:
For the purpose of presenting our investors with additional information to determine how the Company’s future results of operations may be impacted in the event that daily time charter rates change from their current levels in future periods, we set forth in the table below analysis that shows the effect of the utilization of 1 year, 3 year, 5 year and 10 year average blended rates would have on the Company’s impairment analysis:
Management does not believe that a one year, a three year, and a five year historical average is reflective of the cyclical nature of the shipping business, which tends to have cycles much longer than one, three or five years.
Based on our impairment analysis, we determined that as of December 31, 2020, the future cash flows expected to be earned by the 40 vessels on an undiscounted basis would exceed their carrying value and therefore no impairment charges were recorded in the consolidated financial statements.
As of December 31, 2016, as part of our fleet renewal program, management considered it probable that we would divest some of our older vessels as well as certain less efficient vessels from its fleet to achieve operating cost savings. Based on our projected undiscounted cash flows prior to sale, factoring the probability of sale, such vessels were determined to be impaired, and written down to their current fair value as of December 31, 2016, which was determined by obtaining broker quotes from two unaffiliated ship brokers. As a result, we recorded an impairment charge of $122.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2016. The carrying value of these vessels prior to impairment was $234.9 million. In addition to the above, in 2015, we identified six vessels as probable sales, and recognized an impairment charge in 2015 of $50.9 million. As the value of such vessels further declined in the first quarter of 2016, we recorded an additional impairment charge of $6.2 million in that quarter. Out of the six vessels initially identified in 2015, all vessels have been sold as of December 31, 2020. Out of the sixteen vessels impaired in 2016, thirteen vessels have been sold as of December 31, 2020.
Although management believes that the assumptions used to evaluate potential impairment are reasonable and appropriate, such assumptions are highly subjective. Charter rates may remain at depressed levels for some time, which could adversely affect our revenue and profitability, and future assessments of vessel impairment. In the event that any future impairment were to occur, we would determine the fair value of the related asset and record a charge to operations calculated by comparing the asset's carrying value to its estimated fair value. We estimate fair value primarily through the use of third party valuations performed on an individual vessel basis. Such valuations are not necessarily the same as the amount any vessel may bring upon sale, which may be more or less, and should not be relied upon as such.
The table set forth below indicates the carrying value of each of our vessels as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, which we believe, based on broker quotes recently obtained, have a basic charter free market value below its carrying value. Please note that the carrying values of vessels sold during the year 2020 have been excluded from the table. Noted below the table is the aggregate difference between the carrying value and the basic market value, which represents the approximate amount by which we believe we would have to reduce our net income if we sold all of such vessels, excluding commissions, as of December 31, 2020, on industry standard terms, in cash transactions, and to a willing buyer where we are not under any compulsion to sell, and where the buyer is not under any compulsion to buy. Additionally, given the current dynamic in the drybulk market, were we to sell a vessel, we might not be able to realize proceeds consistent with the amounts disclosed below.
*Indicates drybulk carriers for which we believe, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the basic charter-free market value is lower than the vessel’s carrying value. We believe that the aggregate carrying value of these vessels exceed their December 31, 2020 and 2019 aggregate basic charter-free market value by approximately $223.7 million and $136.0 million, respectively.
Deferred Drydock Cost
There are two methods that are used by the shipping industry to account for drydockings: (a) the deferral method where drydock costs are deferred when incurred and amortized over the period to the next scheduled drydock; and (b) expensing drydocking costs in the period it is incurred. We use the deferral method of accounting for drydock expenses. Under the deferral method, drydock expenses are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis until the next drydock, which we estimate to be a period of two and a half to five years. We believe the deferral method better matches costs with revenue than expensing the costs as incurred. We use judgment when estimating the period between drydock performed, which can result in adjustments to the estimated amortization of drydock expense. If the vessel is disposed of before the next drydock, the remaining balance in deferred drydock is written-off to the gain or loss upon disposal of vessels in the period when contracted. We expect that our vessels will be required to be drydocked approximately every 60 months for vessels younger than 15 years and 30 months for vessels older than 15 years.
Costs deferred as part of the drydocking include direct costs that are incurred as part of the drydocking to meet regulatory requirements. During drydocking, we capitalize into the cost basis of the vessel any expenditures that add economic life to the vessel, increase the vessel’s earnings capacity or improve the vessel’s efficiency. Expenditures for normal maintenance and repairs, whether incurred as part of the drydocking or not, are expensed as incurred. Unamortized drydocking costs are written off as drydocking expense if the vessels are drydocked earlier than the applicable amortization period. Unamortized drydocking costs of vessels that are sold are written off and included in the calculation of the resulting gain or loss in the year of the vessels’ sale.
Vessel acquisition
Where we identify any intangible assets or liabilities associated with the acquisition of a vessel, we record all identified tangible and intangible assets or liabilities at fair value. Fair value is determined by reference to market data and the amount of expected future cash flows. We value any asset or liability arising from the market value of the time charters assumed when an acquired vessel is delivered to us.
Where we have assumed an existing charter obligation or enter into a time charter with the existing charterer in connection with the purchase of a vessel at charter rates that are less than market charter rates, we record a liability in fair value below contract value of time charters acquired based on the difference between the assumed charter rate and the market charter rate for an equivalent vessel. Conversely, where we assume an existing charter obligation or enter into a time charter with the existing charterer in connection with the purchase of a vessel at charter rates that are above market charter rates, we record an asset in fair value above contract value of time charters acquired, based on the difference between the market charter rate and the contracted charter rate for an equivalent vessel. This determination is made at the time the vessel is delivered to us, and such assets and liabilities are amortized to revenue over the remaining period of the charter. The determination of the fair value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities requires us to make significant assumptions and estimates of many variables including market charter rates, expected future charter rates, future vessel operation expenses, the level of utilization of our vessels and our weighted average cost of capital. The use of different assumptions could result in a material change in the fair value of these items, which could have a material impact on our financial position and results of operations. In the event that the market charter rates relating to the acquired vessels are lower than the contracted charter rates at the time of their respective deliveries to us, our net earnings for the remainder of the terms of the charters may be adversely affected although our cash flows will not be affected.
Results of operations for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 results and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. A discussion of 2019 results of operations compared to 2018 has been omitted from this Form 10-K, but may be found in “Part II, Item 7 Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 12, 2020.
Factors Affecting our Results of Operations
The following tables represent the operating data and certain financial statement data for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 on a consolidated basis.
We believe that the important measures for analyzing future trends in our results of operations consist of the following:
•Ownership days: We define ownership days as the aggregate number of days in a period during which each vessel in our fleet has been owned by us. Ownership days are an indicator of the size of our fleet over a period and affect both the amount of revenues and the amount of expenses that we record during a period.
•Chartered-in Days: We define chartered-in days as the aggregate number of days in a period during which the Company chartered-in vessels.
•Available days: We define available days as the number of our ownership days and chartered-in days less the aggregate number of days that our vessels are off-hire due to vessel familiarization upon acquisition, repairs, vessel upgrades or special surveys. The shipping industry uses available days to measure the number of days in a period during which vessels should be capable of generating revenues. We drydocked 11 vessels in 2020 and one vessel was undergoing drydock as of December 31, 2020 and 11 vessels in 2019.
•Operating days: We define operating days as the number of our available days in a period less the aggregate number of days that our vessels are off-hire due to any reason, including unforeseen circumstances. The shipping industry uses operating days to measure the aggregate number of days in a period during which vessels actually generate revenues.
•Fleet utilization: We calculate fleet utilization by dividing the number of our operating days during a period by the number of our available days during the period. The shipping industry uses fleet utilization to measure a company's efficiency in finding suitable employment for its vessels and minimizing the amount of days that its vessels are off-hire for reasons other than scheduled repairs or repairs under guarantee, vessel upgrades, special surveys or vessel positioning. Our fleet continues to perform at very high utilization rates.
Time Charter and Voyage Revenue
Shipping revenues are highly sensitive to patterns of supply and demand for vessels of the size and design configurations owned and operated by a company and the trades in which those vessels operate. In the drybulk sector of the shipping industry, rates for the transportation of drybulk cargoes such as ores, grains, steel, fertilizers, and similar commodities, are determined by market forces such as the supply and demand for such commodities, the distance that cargoes must be transported, and the number of vessels available or expected to be available at the time such cargoes need to be transported. The demand for shipments is significantly affected by the state of the global economy and in discrete geographical areas. The number of vessels is affected by newbuilding deliveries and by the removal of existing vessels from service, principally due to scrapping.
The mix of charters between voyage charters and time charters also affects revenues. Because the mix between voyage charters and time charters significantly affects shipping revenues and voyage expenses, vessel revenues are benchmarked based on net charter hire income. Net charter hire income comprises revenue from vessels operating on time charters, and voyage revenue less voyage expenses from vessels operating on voyage charters in the spot market and charter hire expenses. Net charter hire income serves as a measure of analyzing fluctuations between financial periods and as a method of equating revenue generated from a voyage charter to time charter revenue.
The following table represents the reconciliation of Net charter hire income, a non-GAAP measure, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Our economic decisions are primarily based on anticipated net charter hire rates and we evaluate financial performance based on net charter rates achieved. Our revenues are driven primarily by the number of vessels in our fleet, the number of days during which our vessels operate and the net charter hire that our vessels earn under charters, which, in turn, are affected by a number of factors, including:
•the duration of our charters;
•our decisions relating to vessel acquisitions and disposals;
•the amount of time that we spend positioning our vessels;
•the amount of time that our vessels spend in drydock undergoing repairs;
•maintenance and upgrade work;
•the age, condition and specifications of our vessels;
•levels of supply and demand in the drybulk shipping industry; and
•other factors affecting spot market charter rates for drybulk carriers.
Our revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were earned from time and voyage charters. We did not have any vessels employed in commercial pools for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. As is common in the shipping industry, we pay commissions ranging from 1.25% to 5.00% of the total daily charter hire rate of each charter to unaffiliated ship brokers and in-house brokers associated with the charterers, depending on the number of brokers involved with arranging the charter. We record such broker commissions as voyage expenses.
Revenues, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $275.1 million, a decrease of 6% compared to the prior year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a decline in fuel prices which impacted our revenue from voyage charters where the freight rate earned per metric ton of cargo is based on the fuel expense expected to be incurred partly offset by an increase in the available days. The available days increased year over year because the scrubber installations were completed in April 2020. The available days including chartered-in days for the year ended December 31, 2020 were 19,612 as compared to 19,214 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Voyage expenses
To the extent that we employ our vessels on voyage charters, we incur expenses that include but are not limited to bunkers, port charges and canal tolls, as these expenses are borne by the vessel owner on voyage charters. Bunkers, port charges, and canal toll expenses primarily increase in periods during which more vessels are employed on voyage charters.
Voyage expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $89.5 million, compared with $87.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Voyage expenses have primarily increased due to an increase in port expenses and hold cleaning expenses due to an increase in the voyage charter business offset by a decrease in bunker prices in the current year compared to the prior year.
Vessel operating expenses
Vessel operating expenses include expenses relating to crewing costs, vessel operations, general vessel maintenance, regulatory and classification society compliance, repairs, stores, supplies, spare parts, and technical consultants.
Vessel operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $86.5 million, which represents an increase of $4.2 million, compared with $82.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in vessel expenses is attributable to an increase in ownership days after the purchase of six Ultramax vessels in the second half of 2019, offset by the sale of two vessels Thrasher and Kestrel in the second half of 2019 and sale of five vessels (Goldeneye, Skua, Osprey I, Hawk I, and Shrike) in the later half of 2020. Additionally, the Company incurred $1.0 million in additional costs relating to COVID-19 for procurement of personal protective equipment, test kits and crew changes. The ownership days for the year ended December 31, 2020 were 18,065 compared to 16,945 for the prior year ended December 31, 2019.
We believe daily vessel expenses are a good measure for comparative purposes over a 12-month period in order to take into account all of the expenses that each vessel in our fleet will incur over a full year of operation.
Average daily vessel expenses for our fleet for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $4,790 as compared to $4,859 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Insurance expense varies with overall insurance market conditions as well as the insured's loss record, level of insurance and desired coverage. The main insurance expenses include hull and machinery insurance (i.e. asset insurance) costs, loss of hire insurance, Protection, and Indemnity ("P&I") insurance (i.e. liability insurance) costs. Certain other insurances, such as basic war risk premiums based on voyages into designated war risk areas are often for the account of the charterers for time charter voyages and on owners’ account for voyage charters.
Our vessel expenses, which generally represent costs under the vessel operating budgets, cost of insurance and vessel registry and other regulatory fees, will increase with the enlargement of our fleet. Other factors beyond our control, some of which may affect the shipping industry in general, may also cause these expenses to increase, including, for instance, developments relating to market prices for crew, insurance, lubricants, and supplies.
Charter hire expense
Charter hire expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $21.3 million compared to $42.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in charter hire expenses in 2020 compared with 2019 was mainly due to a decrease in charter-in days as well as a decrease in charter hire rates due to COVID-19. The chartered-in days for 2020 were 2,179 compared to 3,583 in 2019. The Company chartered in three vessels on a long term basis for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Depreciation and amortization
We depreciate the cost of our vessels on a straight-line basis over the expected useful life of each vessel. Depreciation is based on the cost of the vessel less its estimated residual value. We estimate the useful life of our vessels to be 25 years from the date of initial delivery from the shipyard to the original owner. We estimate the scrap rate to be $300/lwt to compute each vessel's residual value.
Depreciation and amortization expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $50.2 million and $40.5 million, respectively. The increase in depreciation expense is due to an increase in the cost base of our owned fleet due to the capitalization of scrubbers and BWTS on our vessels, and the acquisition of six Ultramax vessels in the second half of 2019, offset by the sale of two vessels in 2019 and five vessels in the third and fourth quarter of 2020. The increase in drydock amortization is due to the completion of eleven additional drydocks since the end of 2019. Total depreciation and amortization expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $42.8 million of depreciation and $7.4 million of deferred drydocking amortization. Total depreciation and amortization expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes $34.3 million of depreciation and $6.2 million of amortization of deferred drydocking costs.
Drydocking relates to our regularly scheduled maintenance program necessary to preserve the quality of our vessels as well as to comply with international shipping standards and environmental laws and regulations. Management anticipates that vessels are to be drydocked every two and a half years for vessels older than 15 years and every five years for vessels younger than 15 years, accordingly, these expenses are deferred and amortized over that period.
General and administrative expenses
Our general and administrative expenses include legal, professional expenses, recurring administrative and other expenses including payroll and expenses relating to our executive officers and office staff, office rent, directors fees, and directors and officers insurance. General and administrative expenses also include stock-based compensation expenses.
General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $31.5 million and $35.0 million, respectively. The decrease in general and administrative expenses in 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. The general and administrative expenses excluding stock-based compensation expense are lower compared to the prior year primarily due to decreases in corporate travel and office expenses due to COVID-19.
General and administrative expenses include stock-based compensation charges of $3.0 million and $4.8 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. These stock-based compensation charges relate to the stock options and restricted stock units granted to certain members of management, employees, and certain directors of the Company under the 2016 Plan. Please see Note 10 Stock Incentive Plans to the consolidated financial statements.
Operating lease impairment
During the second quarter of 2020, the Company determined that there were impairment indicators present for one of our chartered-in vessel contracts and, as a result, we recorded an operating lease impairment of $0.4 million in the second quarter of 2020. The operating lease impairment was included as a component of operating (loss)/income in our Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss/(gain) on sale of vessels
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded a loss of $0.5 million and a gain of $6.0 million, respectively. The loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, includes a loss on sale of five vessels
Goldeneye, Shrike, Skua, Osprey I and Hawk I. The gain for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes a gain of $6.0 million, in connection with the sales of the vessels Condor, Merlin, Thrasher, and Kestrel.
Interest and Finance Costs
Interest expense consisted of:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the interest rate on the Convertible Bond Debt was 5.00%. The weighted average effective interest rate including the amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs for the year was 10.14%.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the interest rate on the New Ultraco Debt Facility ranged from 2.73% to 4.68% including a margin over LIBOR applicable under the terms of the New Ultraco Debt Facility and commitment fees of 40% of the margin on the undrawn portion of the revolver credit facility of the New Ultraco Debt Facility. The weighted average effective interest rate including the amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs for the year was 3.98%.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the interest rate on the Norwegian Bond Debt was 8.25%. The weighted average effective interest rate including the amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs for the year was 8.75%.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the interest rate on our outstanding debt under the Super Senior Facility ranged between 2.24% and 2.89%. The weighted average effective interest rate including the amortization of debt issuance costs for the year was 3.00%. Additionally, we pay commitment fees of 40% of the margin on the undrawn portion of the Super Senior Revolver Facility.
Forward freight agreements
The Company trades in FFAs and bunkers swaps, with the objective of utilizing this market as economic hedging instruments that reduce the risk to the changes in the freight market. The Company’s FFAs and bunker swaps have not qualified for hedge accounting treatment. As such, unrealized and realized gains are recognized as a component of other expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
For our bunker swaps, the Company may enter into master netting, collateral, and offset agreements with counterparties. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has International Swaps and Derivatives Association ("ISDA") agreements with two applicable banks and financial institutions which contain netting provisions. In addition to a master agreement with the Company supported by a primary parent guarantee on either side, the Company also has associated credit support agreements in place with the two counterparties which, among other
things, provide the circumstances under which either party is required to post eligible collateral, when the market value of transactions covered by these agreements exceeds specified thresholds. The Company does not anticipate non-performance by any of the counterparties. As of December 31, 2020, no collateral had been received or pledged related to these bunker swaps.
The effect of non-designated derivative instruments on the Consolidated Statements of Operations is as follows:
Cash Collateral Disclosures
The Company does not offset fair value amounts recognized for derivatives by the right to reclaim cash collateral or the obligation to return cash collateral. The amount of collateral to be posted is defined in the terms of respective master agreement executed with counterparties or exchanges and is required when agreed upon threshold limits are exceeded. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company posted cash collateral related to derivative instruments under its collateral security arrangements of $0.1 million and $0.6 million, respectively, which is recorded within Other current assets in the consolidated balance sheets.
Effects of Inflation
The Company does not believe that inflation has had or is likely, in the near future, to have a significant impact on vessel operating expenses, drydocking expenses and general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table presents the cash flow information for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $12.6 million, compared with $21.7 million in 2019. The decrease in cash flows provided by operating activities resulted primarily from increase in drydock expenditures, payments related to bunkers in the first quarter of 2020 relating to prior year bunker liftings in advance of IMO 2020 regulations partly offset by decline in fuel prices resulting in decrease in the value of our bunker inventory year over year.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $5.5 million, compared to $168.6 million in the prior year. During 2020, the Company paid $28.4 million for the purchase and installation of scrubbers and ballast water treatment systems on our fleet. Additionally, the Company paid advances on two Ultramax vessels of $3.3 million and paid $1.0 million towards vessel improvements. This use of cash was partially offset by the proceeds from the sale of five vessels for $23.2 million and $3.9 million of insurance proceeds received on hull and machinery claims.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $22.6 million, compared to $127.9 million in the prior year ended December 31, 2019. During 2020, the Company received $55.0 million in proceeds from the revolver loan under the New Ultraco Debt Facility, $22.6 million from the New Ultraco Debt Facility, $15.0 million from the revolver loan under the Super Senior Facility, and $23.5 million in proceeds, net of issuance costs from the Equity Offerings in December 2020. The Company repaid $28.7 million of the term loan, $55.0 million of the revolver loan under the New Ultraco Debt Facility, and $8.0 million of the Norwegian Bond Debt. Additionally, the Company paid $1.2 million to settle net share equity awards, and $0.4 million as financing costs to the lenders of the New Ultraco Debt Facility.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents balance was $69.9 million compared to a cash and cash equivalents balance of $53.6 million at December 31, 2019. In addition, our restricted cash balance at December 31, 2020 was $18.9 million which includes $18.8 million in net proceeds from the sale of vessels and $0.1 million for collateralizing letters of credit relating to our office leases. As of December 31, 2019, our restricted cash balance was $5.5 million which includes $5.4 million in proceeds from the sale of vessels and $0.1 million for collateralizing letters of credit relating to our office leases.
At December 31, 2020, the Company’s debt, net of $23.4 million debt discount and debt issuance costs totaled $452.2 million of which $39.2 million is shown in the current portion of long-term debt and $412.9 million in noncurrent liabilities.
In addition, as of December 31, 2020, we had $55.0 million in undrawn revolver facilities available under the New Ultraco Debt Facility.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic resulted in the decline in charter hire rates, which impacted our revenues and cash flow from operations in the first half of 2020. As mentioned above, the total cash provided by operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $12.6 million. Although the cash used in operations for the first six months of 2020 was $15.2 million, the charter hire rates have rebounded during the second half of 2020, the Company generated positive operating cash flows of $27.8 million. Looking forward into the first quarter of 2021, the charter hire rates have rebounded with the rates achieved so far higher than fourth quarter of 2020. The Company borrowed additional debt of $22.6 million under the New Ultraco Debt Facility by adding two vessels to the debt collateral package, which were previously unlevered. The Company also borrowed $70.0 million by fully drawing on its existing revolving credit facilities under the New Ultraco Debt Facility and Super Senior Facility in second quarter of 2020 of which the Company repaid $55.0 million in December 2020. Additionally, the Company concluded two concurrent Equity Offerings in December 2020 and raised an aggregate amount of $23.5 million. The proceeds were used for the purchase of two Ultramax vessels and for general corporate purposes. The Company applied and received extensions for BWTS installation on 18 of our vessels, which allowed us to postpone our capital expenditure outlays for up to one year or more. Additionally, the Company cancelled the BWTS installation orders of three of the oldest vessels.
Our principal sources of funds are operating cash flows, long-term bank borrowings and borrowings under our revolving credit facilities. Our principal use of funds is capital expenditures to establish and grow our fleet, maintain the quality of our vessels, comply with international shipping standards and environmental laws and regulations, fund working capital requirements and repayments of interest and principal on our outstanding loan facilities.
We believe that our current financial resources, together with the undrawn revolver under the New Ultraco Debt Facility and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our ongoing business needs and other obligations over the next twelve months. Our ability to generate sufficient cash depends on many factors beyond our control including, among other things, general charter rate environment.
Dividends
The Company did not make any dividend payments in 2020 or 2019. In the future, the declaration and payment of dividends, if any, will always be subject to the discretion of the board of directors, restrictions contained in the Company’s debt facilities, and the requirements of Marshall Islands law. The timing and amount of any dividends declared will depend on, among other things, the Company's earnings, financial condition and cash requirements and availability, the ability to obtain debt and equity financing on acceptable terms as contemplated by the Company's growth strategy, the terms of its outstanding indebtedness and the ability of the Company's subsidiaries to distribute funds to it. The Company does not currently expect to pay dividends in the near term.
Debt Agreements
Refer to Note 6 Debt to our consolidated financial statements above for a summary of our credit agreements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth our expected contractual obligations and their maturity dates as of December 31, 2020:
(1)The debt payments represent the amortization payments due to be paid under New Ultraco Debt Facility.
(2)Includes charter hire obligations on three chartered-in vessels with daily charter rates between $11,600 and $12,800. Please see Note 2 Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements. It does not include charter hire obligation on a chartered-in vessel which will be delivered in the second quarter of 2021.
(3)Interest is based on LIBOR assumption of 0.24% for Super Senior Facility. Interest is based on a fixed LIBOR rate of approximately 0.58% for the New Ultraco Debt Facility. Interest rate is fixed at 8.25% for the Norwegian Bond Debt and 5% for the Convertible Bond debt.
(4)This amount represents the total amount of Convertible Bond Debt that would be paid in cash at the election of the Company upon maturity.
(5)During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company entered into a series of memorandum of agreements to purchase three high specification scrubber-fitted Ultramax bulkcarriers for a total purchase price of $50.2 million excluding direct expenses of acquisition. As of December 31, 2020, the Company paid $3.3 million as advance on purchase of two of the above mentioned vessels. The Company took delivery of the vessels during the first quarter of 2021. The table excludes vessel acquisitions where the memorandum of agreement was signed after December 31, 2020. Please refer to Note 12 Subsequent events to our consolidated financial statements for further information on these vessel acquisitions.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures relate to the purchase of vessels and capital improvements to our vessels, which are expected to enhance the revenue earning capabilities and compliance with new regulations.
In addition to acquisitions that we may undertake in future periods, the Company's other major capital expenditures include funding the Company's program of regularly scheduled drydocking and vessel improvements necessary to comply with international shipping standards and environmental laws and regulations. Although the Company has some flexibility regarding the timing of its drydocking, the costs are relatively predictable. In accordance to the statutory requirements, management anticipates that vessels are to be drydocked every five years for vessels younger than 15 years and two and a half years for vessels older than 15 years. Funding of these requirements is anticipated to be met with cash from operations. We anticipate that the process of recertification will require us to reposition these vessels from a discharge port to shipyard facilities, which will reduce our available days and operating days during that period.
During the third quarter of 2018, the Company entered into a contract for installation of BWTS on 39 of our owned vessels. The projected costs, including installation, are approximately $0.5 million per BWTS. The Company intends to complete the installation during scheduled drydockings. The Company completed installation of BWTS on 15 vessels and recorded $7.1 million in vessels and vessel improvements in the Consolidated Balance
Sheet as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, the Company recorded $2.3 million as advances paid towards installation of BWTS as a noncurrent asset in its Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company applied for and received extensions from the USCG of up to one year from their deadline for BWTS installation on 18 of our vessels. Additionally, the Company cancelled the BWTS installation orders on three of its oldest vessels.
During the third quarter of 2018, the Company entered into a series of agreements to purchase up to 37 scrubbers which were fitted on the Company's vessels. The actual costs, including installation, were approximately $2.4 million per scrubber. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company completed and commissioned all 37 scrubbers and recorded $88.9 million in vessels and vessel improvements in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020.
Drydocking costs incurred are deferred and amortized to expense on a straight-line basis over the period through the date of the next scheduled drydocking for those vessels. In 2020, 11 of our vessels were drydocked and one vessel was undergoing drydock as of December 31, 2020 and we incurred $14.3 million in drydocking related costs. In 2019, 11 of our vessels were drydocked and we incurred $11.9 million in drydocking related costs.
The following table represents certain information about the estimated costs for anticipated vessel drydockings, BWTS, and scrubber installations in the next four quarters, along with the anticipated off-hire days:
(1) Actual costs will vary based on various factors, including where the drydockings are actually performed.
(2) Actual duration of off-hire days will vary based on the age and condition of the vessel, yard schedules and other factors.
(3) Vessel upgrades represents capex relating to items such as high-spec low friction hull paint which improves fuel efficiency and reduces fuel costs, NeoPanama Canal chock fittings enabling vessels to carry additional cargo through the new Panama Canal locks, as well as other retrofitted fuel-saving devices. Vessel upgrades are discretionary in nature and evaluated on a business case-by-case basis.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Other Contingencies
We refer you to Note 8 Commitment and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for a discussion of our contingencies related to claim litigation. The potential impact from legal proceedings on our business, liquidity, results of operations, financial position and cash flows, could change in the future.