Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is provided to enhance the understanding of, and should be read in conjunction with, Part I, Item 1, “Business” and Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” For information on risks and uncertainties related to our business that may make past performance not indicative of future results, or cause actual results to differ materially from any forward-looking statements, see “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are an integrated pharmaceutical company focused on finding ways to help medicines do more for patients. Along with our collaborators, we have the capabilities to take a molecule from preclinical research through regulatory approval and into the marketplace, including development, manufacturing and commercialization of our products and product candidates. Our business model applies our scientific expertise, proprietary research-based insights and marketplace proficiency to identify challenging-to-treat diseases of the central nervous system or metabolic critical care therapeutic areas as well as in oncology. By focusing on patients’ unmet needs, we strive to provide healthcare professionals with urgently needed treatment solutions that are designed to improve patient care and outcomes and create near- and long-term value for our stakeholders, including patients and healthcare providers and our employees, marketing partners, collaborators and stockholders.
Our science-based business model has a proven track record with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, approval and commercial launches of three products: Ryanodex, Belrapzo and Bendeka. We market our products through marketing partners and/or our internal direct sales force. We market Ryanodex and Belrapzo, and Teva markets Bendeka through its subsidiary, Cephalon, Inc. Reflecting further expansion of our oncology portfolio, in February 2020, we received final FDA approval for Pemfexy, a branded alternative to Alimta for metastatic non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer and malignant pleural mesothelioma. We expect to launch Pemfexy in early 2022.
With several pipeline projects underway and the potential for up to five or more product launches over the next several years, we believe we have many growth opportunities ahead. We believe that each of our pipeline projects currently has the potential to enter the market as a first-in-class, first-to-file or best-in-class product. In particular, we are applying our expertise to conduct novel research regarding the potential for Ryanodex to address conditions including Alzheimer’s disease, traumatic brain injury/concussion, nerve agent exposure and acute radiation syndrome. In addition, our clinical development program includes a strategic partnership with Tyme for SM-88, a product candidate for the treatment of patients with pancreatic or other advanced cancers, as well as investigations of compounds such as EA-114 and our Fulvestrant product candidate for patients with HR-positive advanced breast cancer. Other products in development include Vasopressin, our first-to-file Abbreviated New Drug Application, or ANDA, that references Endo International plc’s Vasostrict indicated to increase blood pressure in adults with vasodilatory shock who remain hypotensive despite fluids and catecholamines; and EA-111, a new chemical entity and next-generation ryanodine receptor antagonist, in an intramuscular formulation that that would allow for easier and more rapid administration in emergency situations (military and civilian).
Recent Developments
Vasopressin - FDA
On February 2, 2021, we announced that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, issued a complete response letter, or CRL, for our ANDA for vasopressin. Eagle has now had two conversations with FDA regarding the CRL and expects to have an additional meeting with FDA in the near-term. Importantly, Eagle has completed an extensive amount of developmental work and continues to do so for its first-to-file polypeptide, where brand sales of the product are over $700 million annually. In its communication with the Company, FDA restated that it has prioritized Eagle's ANDA, and that the ANDA has also been flagged as a COVID-19 priority by FDA. Eagle believes it can fully respond to the questions raised. There is one additional short duration study that will need to be completed and analyzed. The study will be run in mid-March. Based on similar studies previously run on our vasopressin product, we expect the results will be satisfactory. In addition, we expect we will have a 180 day period of exclusivity for Vasopressin.
Vasopressin - Patent litigation
On February 2, 2021, we also announced that our ongoing patent suit with Par Pharmaceutical, Inc., Par Sterile Products, LLC, and Endo Par Innovation Company, LLC, or together, Par, is now scheduled to begin on July 7, 2021. Eagle remains confident about this litigation given that Par's asserted patents claim a formulation with a pH of 3.7-3.9 and Eagle's proposed ANDA product specifies a pH outside of that range. The Company is confident that its ANDA will be approved in a reasonable timeframe.
Complete Response Letter for NDA for Ryanodex
On August 7, 2020, we received a Complete Response Letter for our NDA for Ryanodex for the treatment of exertional heat stroke, or EHS; we decided that we will no longer pursue this indication in order to direct our resources to other product candidates.
Executive Officer Transitions
Chief Medical Officer
Effective July 31, 2020, Adrian J. Hepner, M.D., Ph.D. resigned as our Executive Vice President and Chief Medical Officer. On July 31, 2020, we entered into a consulting agreement with Dr. Hepner, or the Consulting Agreement. Pursuant to the
Consulting Agreement, Dr. Hepner will provide consulting services to us until July 31, 2021, unless earlier terminated, or the Consulting Period. In consideration of Dr. Hepner’s provision of consulting services, we have agreed to pay Dr. Hepner (i) a weekly retainer of $8,000 for 20 hours of services each week for the first six months of the Consulting Period and (ii) a weekly retainer of $4,000 for 10 hours of services each week for the remaining six months of the Consulting Period. We will also continue to pay the employer portion of Dr. Hepner’s COBRA medical continuation benefits until January 31, 2022.
On October 29, 2020, Judith Ng-Cashin, M.D. was appointed as our Chief Medical Officer.
Chief Financial Officer
As of October 29, 2020, Pete Meyers ceased to serve as our Chief Financial Officer. In connection with his departure, Mr. Meyers received the severance compensation provided for under our previously disclosed Amended and Restated Severance Benefit Plan and Mr. Meyers’ participation agreement thereunder, for a non-change in control covered termination.
On October 29, 2020, Brian Cahill was appointed as our Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Cahill has served as our Vice President of Finance since January 2018 and previously served as our Corporate Controller from October 2016 to December 2017. O
n December 18, 2020, in connection with his new role, the compensation committee of our board of directors approved an annual base salary for Mr. Cahill of $380,000 effective as of October 29, 2020 and a target annual bonus for fiscal year 2021 set at 60% of his base salary, with the amount of his bonus to be determined by the compensation committee based on our achievement of our annual corporate objectives established by the compensation committee. The compensation committee also approved equity grants to Mr. Cahill of 5,000 restricted stock units and 10,000 stock options.
Change in Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
On September 25, 2020, the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors approved the engagement of Ernst & Young, LLP as our independent registered public accounting firm for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2020, and dismissed BDO USA, LLP, as our current independent registered public accounting firm.
COVID-19 Business Update
In response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken and continue to take active measures designed to address and mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its business, such as remote working policies, facilitating management’s daily communication to address employee and business concerns and providing frequent updates to the Board. We anticipate that the COVID-19 pandemic may have an impact on the clinical development timeline for EA-114. We anticipate that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to delay our supply chain and marketing and sales efforts for certain of its products, including Bendeka, although it is not currently expected that any disruption would be material. The COVID-19 pandemic and associated lockdowns have resulted in a decrease in healthcare utilization broadly and specifically lead to a continuing reduction in the utilization of physician-administered oncology products including Belrapzo and Bendeka. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has delayed the timing of ongoing litigation, including the litigation with Par Pharmaceutical, Inc. and its affiliated entities with respect to Vasopressin, and we anticipate that such delays will continue for the duration of the pandemic. While we have experienced variable financial impacts to date, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including the global economic slowdown, government measures taken in response thereto, the overall disruption of global healthcare systems and other risks and uncertainties associated with the pandemic, could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects. We continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 pandemic as we evaluate and evolve our business plans and response strategy. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and financial condition is more fully described below in Trends and Uncertainties.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
Our revenue consists of product sales, royalty revenue and license and other revenue.
Product Sales. Through December 31, 2020, we have recognized revenues from product sales of Bendeka, Argatroban, Ryanodex and Belrapzo. Sales of Bendeka were made to our commercial partner, Teva, while Argatroban was sold directly to our commercial partners, Chiesi USA, Inc. ("Chiesi") and Sandoz AG, or Sandoz. Sales to our commercial partners are typically made at little or no profit for resale. Ryanodex and Belrapzo were sold directly to wholesalers, hospitals and surgery centers through a third-party logistics partner.
We typically enter into agreements with group purchasing organizations acting on behalf of their hospital members, in connection with the hospitals’ purchases of our direct commercial products. Based on these agreements, most of our hospital customers have contracted prices for products and volume-based rebates on product purchases. These amounts are estimated
and recorded at the time of sale. In the case of discounted pricing, we typically pay a chargeback, representing the difference between the price invoiced to the wholesaler and the customer contract price.
Royalty Revenue. We recognize revenue from royalties based on a percentage of Teva’s net sales of Bendeka and Sandoz’s and Chiesi’s gross profits of Argatroban, both net of discounts, returns and allowances incurred by our commercial partners. Royalty revenue is recognized as earned in accordance with contract terms when it can be reasonably estimated and collectability is reasonably assured.
License and Other Revenue. Our revenues may either be in the form of the recognition of deferred revenues upon milestone achievement for which cash has already been received or recognition of revenue upon milestone achievement for which the payment is reasonably assured to be received in the future.
The primary factors that determine our revenues derived from Bendeka are:
•the level of orders submitted by our commercial partner, Teva;
•the rate at which Teva can convert the current market to Bendeka;
•the level of institutional demand for Bendeka;
•unit sales prices charged by Teva, net of any sales reserves; and
•the level of orders submitted by wholesalers, hospitals and surgery centers.
The primary factors that may determine our revenues derived from Argatroban are:
•the level of orders submitted by our commercial partners, Sandoz and Chiesi;
•the level of institutional demand for Argatroban; and
•unit sales prices charged by Sandoz and Chiesi, net of any sales reserves.
The primary factors that may determine our revenues derived from Ryanodex, Belrapzo and our future products are:
•the effectiveness of our sales force;
•the level of orders submitted by wholesalers, hospitals and surgery centers;
•the level of institutional demand for our products; and
•unit sales prices, net of any sales reserves.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenue consists of the costs associated with producing our products for our commercial partners. In particular, our cost of revenue includes production costs of our products paid to a contract manufacturing organization coupled with shipping and customs charges, cost of royalty and the amortization of intangible assets. Cost of revenue may also include the effects of product recalls, if applicable.
Research and Development
Costs for research and development are charged to expenses as incurred and include: employee-related expenses including salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense for research and development personnel; expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, contract manufacturing organizations and service providers that assist in conducting clinical and preclinical studies; costs associated with preclinical activities and development activities; costs associated with regulatory operations; and depreciation expense for assets used in research and development activities.
Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical studies, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations, or information provided to the Company by its vendors on their actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the patterns of costs incurred, and are reflected in the consolidated financial statements as prepaid expenses or accrued expenses as deemed appropriate. Recoveries of previously recognized research and development expenses from third parties are recorded as a reduction to research and development expense in the period it becomes realizable.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative costs consist of employee-related costs including salaries, benefits and other related costs, stock-based compensation for executive, finance, sales and operations personnel. Selling, general and administrative expenses also include facility and related costs, professional fees for legal, consulting, tax and accounting services, insurance, selling, marketing, market research, advisory board and key opinion leaders, depreciation and general corporate expenses.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the liability method in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740, “Income Taxes,” or ASC 740. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured by applying enacted rates and laws to taxable years in which differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Further, the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income (loss) in the period that the rate changes. A valuation allowance is required when it is “more likely than not” that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized. ASC 740 also prescribes a comprehensive model for how a company should recognize, measure, present and disclose in its financial statements uncertain tax positions that it has taken or expects to take on a tax return, including a decision whether to file or not file a return in a particular jurisdiction. We recognize any interest and penalties accrued related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. The provision for income taxes was based on the applicable federal and state tax rates for those periods. The effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 reflect items such as the impact of a valuation allowance established and adjusted for the fair value adjustments on our investment in Tyme, certain non-deductible executive compensation, changes in state filing positions partially offset by credits for research and development activity.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Revenues
Product sales decreased $1.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by decreases in product sales of Bendeka of $15.7 million coupled with decreases in Belrapzo’s product sales of $2.1 million primarily due to volume decreases. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic and associated lockdowns have resulted in a decrease in healthcare utilization broadly and specifically have led to a reduction in the utilization of physician-administered oncology products including Belrapzo and Bendeka. The decreased sales were partially offset by increases in product sales of Ryanodex of $15.2 million due to higher volume coupled with product sales of $0.9 million from the 2020 product launch of Treakisym.
Royalty revenue decreased $2.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of decreases in royalties on Teva's sales of Bendeka of $1.1 million and royalties on sales of Argatroban of $1.3 million.
Our license and other revenue decreased $4.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. In 2019, we received an upfront cash payment of $9.0 million upon execution of an amendment to the Bendeka License Agreement, dated March 29, 2019 to terminate Teva’s obligation to pay future milestones and royalties on Bendeka sales outside of the U.S. In 2020, we received a $5.0 million milestone payment earned in the three months ended September 30, 2020 from SymBio upon regulatory approval of Treakisym ready-to-dilute (250 ml) liquid bendamustine formulation from the Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency in Japan.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of product sales decreased $14.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of decreased product sales of Belrapzo and Bendeka, partially offset by increased product sales of Ryanodex and the 2020 product launch of Treakisym.
Cost of royalty revenue decreased $1.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily as a result of a decrease in royalty revenue on Teva’s sales of Bendeka.
Research and Development
The table below details our research and development expenses by significant project for the periods presented.
The decrease primarily resulted from a decrease in clinical study project spending for vasopressin and Ryanodex for EHS indication, and employee-related costs, primarily stock compensation expense. This decrease was partially offset by increased spend related to our EGL-5385-C-1701 (our fulvestrant formulation) initiative.
Selling, General and Administrative
The increase is primarily related to $2.5 million of costs related to the collaboration with Tyme, coupled with $4.5 million increase in stock compensation. These increases were partially offset by travel and entertainment expense which decreased by $2.0 million primarily due to Covid-19 restrictions on travel coupled with a decrease in external legal fees related to ongoing litigation matters of $3.2 million.
Other (Expense) Income, net
Interest income decreased primarily due to lower interest rates associated with money market funds as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest expense decreased primarily due to lower total long-term debt outstanding due to recurring principal payments required by the Revised Credit Agreement.
Our other (expense) income, net increased $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is related to fair value adjustments on equity investment in Tyme in the amount of $5.3 million and the related fair value adjustments related to the final settlement of the $25.0 million ASR transaction with JPMorgan as part of the Company’s Share Repurchase Program. The Company determined the ASR contained a forward contract and therefore the Company recorded fair value adjustments on the accelerated share repurchase agreement in the amount of $3.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in other expense is also related to our settlement agreement in December 2019 with Lilly for $0.7 million.
Provision for income taxes
Our provision for income taxes was based on the applicable federal and state tax rates for those periods. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects the impact of a valuation allowance established on the deferred tax asset for an unrealized capital loss in our investment in Tyme, certain non-deductible executive compensation, non-deductible nature of the fair value adjustment of our ASR agreement and changes in state filing positions partially offset by credits for research and development activity. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 reflects the impact of certain non-deductible executive compensation partially offset by credits for research and development activity.
Net Income
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $12.0 million as compared to a net income of $14.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as a result of the factors discussed above.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018
Product sales increased $3.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by increases in product sales of
Belrapzo of $6.8 million, which was due to volume increases and Bendeka of $6.4 million, which was also due to volume
increases. The increased sales were partially offset by decreases in product sales of Ryanodex of $7.2 million due to lower
volume on a low reorder cycle period and the discontinuation of Non-Alcohol Docetaxel Injection in September 2018 that
resulted in a negative impact to revenues of $2.6 million.
Royalty revenue decreased $30.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of decreases in royalties on Teva's
sales of Bendeka of $23.2 million and royalties on sales of Argatroban of $6.8 million.
License and other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 represents an upfront cash payment of $9.0 million upon
execution of an amendment to the Cephalon License to terminate Teva’s obligation to pay future milestones and royalties on
Bendeka sales outside of the U.S.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of product sales increased $5.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of increased product
sales of Belrapzo and Bendeka, partially offset by the discontinuation of Non-Alcohol Docetaxel Injection in September 2018
and decreased product sales of Ryanodex and Argatroban.
Cost of royalty revenue decreased $6.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the decrease in royalty revenue
for Bendeka and Argatroban.
Research and Development
The decrease primarily resulted from a decrease in project spending for EGL-5385-C-1701 (our fulvestrant
formulation) relating to the clinical study which completed randomization of 600 subjects in the first half of 2018. This
decrease was partially offset by increased spend related to our vasopressin injection ANDA filing and spending on
the resubmitted NDA for Ryanodex® (dantrolene sodium for injectable suspension) for the treatment of EHS.
Selling, General and Administrative
This increase is primarily related to an increase of $9.6 million in external legal fees related to ongoing litigation matters,
increased compensation costs, including stock compensation expense, of $6.6 million and $0.6 million increase in professional
fees. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.9 million in sales and marketing direct costs.
Other income (expense), net
Interest income increased $2.0 million primarily due to our short term investing initiatives with cash on hand throughout 2019 as compared to 2018.
Interest expense decreased primarily due to lower total long-term debt outstanding due to recurring principal payments
required by the Revised Credit Agreement.
Other income represents an amount we received pursuant to a settlement agreement executed in December 2019 with Lilly related to the Company’s product, PEMFEXY™ (pemetrexed for injection), a branded alternative to ALIMTA®. The
agreement provides for a release of all claims by the parties related to an antitrust complaint filed by the Company and an
alleged patent infringement based on the filing of the Company’s 505(b)(2) NDA. The Settlement also allows for an initial
entry of PEMFEXY™ into the market (equivalent to approximately a three week supply of current ALIMTA® utilization) on
February 1, 2022 and a subsequent uncapped entry on April 1, 2022.
Provision for income taxes
The provision for income taxes was based on the applicable federal and state tax rates for those periods. The effective tax rate
for 2019 reflects the impact of certain non-deductible executive compensation partially offset by credits for research and
development activity. The effective tax rate for 2018 reflects tax benefits related to stock option exercises in the period as well
as credits for research and development activity partially offset by the impact of certain non-deductible executive
compensation.
Net Income
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $14.3 million as compared to a net income of $31.9 million for the
year ended December 31, 2018, as a result of the factors discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary uses of cash are to fund working capital requirements, including repayment of debt, product development costs, operating expenses as well as repurchases of our common stock. Cash and cash equivalents were $103.2 million, and $109.8 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded net income of $12.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had a working capital surplus of $128.0 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded net income of $14.3 million.
We believe that future cash flows from operations will be sufficient to fund our currently anticipated working capital requirements for at least the next twelve months.
The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted and continues to disrupt the U.S. healthcare system, global economies and global capital markets. There are significant uncertainties surrounding the full extent and duration of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations. We have experienced variable financial impacts to date, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing pandemic could have a material adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations in the future, including our ability to obtain financing when and if needed. The impact of COVID-19 on our business and financial condition is more fully described below in Trends and Uncertainties.
Operating Activities:
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $49.5 million. Net income for the same period was $12.0 million before non-cash adjustments of approximately $36.7 million from deferred income taxes, depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, stock-based compensation expense, fair value adjustments on equity investment, fair value adjustments on ASR, and amortization of debt issuance costs and other items. Net changes in working capital decreased cash provided from operating activities by approximately $0.8 million, due to an increase in accounts receivable of $3.1 million, an increase in inventory of $1.5 million, a decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $4.4 million,
coupled with a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $11.4 million, and an increase in accounts payable of $0.8 million. The total amount of accounts receivable as of December 31, 2020 was approximately $51.1 million. Receivables from our product sales have payment terms ranging from 30 to 75 days with select extended terms to wholesalers on initial purchases of product launch quantities. Our receivables from royalty revenue are due 45-days from the end of the quarter.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $56.0 million. Net income for the same period was $14.3 million before non-cash adjustments of approximately $27.3 million from deferred income taxes, depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, stock-based compensation expense, and amortization of debt issuance costs.
Net changes in working capital increased cash provided from operating activities by $14.4 million, due to a decrease in
accounts receivable of $18.5 million primarily due to Belrapzo launch in 2018, a decrease in inventory of $1.7 million, an
increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $4.1 million, partially offset by an increase in other assets of $0.6 million,
a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $4.8 million, and a decrease in accounts payable of $4.5 million.
The total amount of accounts receivable at December 31, 2019 was approximately $48.0 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $52.4 million. Net income for the same period was $31.9 million offset by non-cash adjustments of approximately $28.4 million from deferred income taxes, depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, stock-based compensation expense, amortization of debt issuance costs, change in fair value of contingent consideration, asset impairment charge and fair value adjustment related to restructuring. Net changes in working capital decreased cash provided from operating activities by $7.9 million, due to an increase in accounts receivable of $12.7 million, an increase in inventory of $5.6 million, an increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $8.1 million, an increase in other assets of $0.6 million partially offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $4.8 million, and a decrease in accounts payable of $2.1 million. The total amount of accounts receivable at December 31, 2018 was approximately $66.5 million, which included approximately $25.3 million from product sales, $35.7 million from royalty income, and $5.5 million related to cost reimbursements.
Investing Activities:
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we invested $0.7 million, $0.8 million, and $0.1 million, respectively, for the purchase of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year December 31, 2020 primarily was $17.5 million related to our purchase of 10 million restricted shares of Tyme’s common stock.
Financing Activities:
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $37.9 million, as a result of $5.0 million of principal payments for debt required by the Company’s Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent and the lenders party thereto, or the Revised Credit Agreement, $35.0 million in payments related to the repurchases of our common stock, $1.5 million of payments associated with employee withholding tax upon vesting of stock-based awards, partially offset by $3.7 million of proceeds from common stock exercises of employee stock options.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $24.2 million, primarily resulting from principal payments for debt required by the Revised Credit Agreement of $6.0 million and payments related to the repurchases of our common stock of $18.0 million.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $88.1 million, primarily resulting from a $15 million payment of contingent consideration in connection with our acquisition of Arsia Therapeutics, Inc. in 2018, $73.1 million in cash settlements on repurchases of common stock, $3.7 million payment of debt financing costs and a $4.9 million payment of employee withholding tax for net option exercises. This was offset by the issuance of common stock for stock option exercises of $8.6 million.
Trends and Uncertainties
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in authorities implementing aggressive actions. Government authorities in the United States have recommended or imposed various social distancing, quarantine, and isolation measures on large portions of the population, and similar measures have also been taken in many other countries around the world. Both the COVID-19
pandemic and the containment and mitigation efforts related to the pandemic have had a serious adverse impact on the U.S. economy and the economies of other countries around the world, the severity and duration of which are uncertain. The extent of and timing for such lifting of government restrictions remains uncertain as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. There is no guarantee that prior or new restrictions will not be reinstated in response to the continued spread of COVID-19.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we have experienced a variable impact on our business and financial condition due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which impacts include a decrease in revenue from sales of Belrapzo resulting, in part, from a decrease in inventory stocking and utilization rates, as well as a decrease in research and development expenses partially resulting from preclinical program delays. We also incurred an insignificant amount of incremental administrative costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic, including containment and mitigation measures, has impacted, and is expected to continue to impact, our business and operations in a number of ways, including:
•Day-to-Day Operations: Since mid-March 2020, our employees, including customer-facing employees, have been working remotely. The duration and extent of these restrictions are uncertain. We have developed plans to resume in-person work practices as we determine it to be safe to do so and pending relevant health authority guidance. We expect to incur additional expenses in 2021 related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, including procurement of personal protective equipment for our employees and updates to our facilities to align with safety protocols.
•Manufacturing and Supply Chain: We are working closely with our commercial partners and third-party manufacturers to mitigate potential disruptions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic by continuing to monitor the supply and availability of Bendeka, Ryanodex and Belrapzo for the patients who rely on these products. We anticipate that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to delay our supply chain and marketing and sales efforts for certain of our products, including Bendeka, although it is not currently expected that any disruption would be material. If the COVID-19 pandemic continues to persist for an extended period of time and impacts essential distribution systems such as FedEx and postal delivery, we could experience future disruptions to our supply chain and operations, and associated delays in the manufacturing and our clinical supply, which would adversely impact our development activities.
•Marketing and Sale of Products: In addition to the impact on our product revenues resulting in a decrease in sales from Belrapzo, driven, in part, by the COVID-19 pandemic, we have also observed a reduction in the number of Bendeka patients visiting infusion centers, hospitals and clinics for intravenous administration of Bendeka due to interruptions in healthcare services, and the patients’ inability to visit administration sites as well as desire to avoid contact with infected individuals. In addition, our sales and marketing teams have been working remotely and our virtual initiatives with respect to marketing and supporting the sale and administration of our products have not been as effective as our in-person sales and marketing activities.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources: We believe that future cash flows from operations will be sufficient to fund our currently anticipated working capital requirements for the next 12 months. While the COVID-19 pandemic has not had, and we do not expect it to have, a material adverse effect on our liquidity, the situation continues to rapidly evolve and has already resulted in a significant disruption of global financial markets. If the disruption persists or deepens, we could experience an inability to access additional capital when and if needed. If we are unable to obtain funding, we could be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate distribution of our commercialized products, product portfolio expansion or some or all of our research and development programs, which would adversely affect our business prospects. We expect to use be able to obtain any future funding under the terms of the Revised Credit Agreement, for general corporate purposes and any strategic acquisitions.
•Regulatory Activities: We may experience further delays in the timing of NDA review and/or our interactions with FDA due to, for example, absenteeism by governmental employees, inability to conduct planned physical inspections related to regulatory approval, or the diversion of FDA’s efforts and attention to approval of other therapeutics or other activities related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which could further delay approval decisions with respect to regulatory submissions or obtain new product approvals.
•Clinical Development Timelines: The clinical trial timelines for certain of our product candidates, including EA-114 (our fulvestrant product candidate), have been delayed given difficulties with limited patient enrollment resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and we expect that our clinical trial timelines will continue to be impacted for the duration of the pandemic.
There are significant uncertainties surrounding the extent and duration of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations. We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operating results and financial condition. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a variable impact our results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 and, it could have a material adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations in the future.
Contractual Obligations
Our future material contractual obligations include the following (in thousands):
(1) We lease our corporate office location. On August 8, 2019, we amended the lease for our corporate office location in order to rent additional office space and extend the term of our existing lease to June 30, 2025. The Company also leases its lab space under a lease agreement that expires on April 30, 2024. Rental expense was $1,323, $1,146, and $571, for the year ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The remaining future lease payments under the operating leases, exclusive of any renewal option periods, are $5,720 as of December 31, 2020, payable monthly through June 30, 2025 and April 30, 2024.
(2) As of December 31, 2020, the Company has purchase obligations in the amount of $68,644 which represents the contractual commitments under contract manufacturing and supply agreements with suppliers. The obligation under the supply agreement is primarily for finished product, inventory, and research and development.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent Accounting Pronouncements - Not Yet Adopted
In March 2020, the FASB issued Update 2020-04 Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848), Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting to provide temporary optional guidance to ease the potential burden in accounting for reference rate reform. The amendments in Update 2020-04 are elective and apply to all entities that have contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions that reference LIBOR, formerly known as the London Interbank Offered Rate,
or another reference rate expected to be discontinued due to reference rate reform. The new guidance provides optional expedients, including; (1) Simplify accounting analyses under current GAAP for contract modifications, such as modifications of contracts within the scope of Topic 470, Debt, that will be accounted for by prospectively adjusting the effective interest rate, as if any modification was not substantial. That is, the original contract and the new contract shall be accounted for as if they were not substantially different from one another; (2) Simplify the assessment of hedge effectiveness and allow hedging relationships affected by reference rate reform to continue; (3) Allow a one-time election to sell or transfer debt securities classified as held to maturity before January 1, 2020 that reference a rate affected by reference rate reform. The amendments are effective for all entities from the beginning of an interim period that includes the issuance date of the ASU. An entity may elect to apply the amendments prospectively through December 31, 2022. The adoption of ASU 2020-4 is not expected to have a material impact on the Company's financial position or results of operations.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses which requires financial assets measured at amortized cost basis to be presented at the net amount expected to be collected. This standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 and the Company adopted the standard effective January 1, 2020. The adoption of ASU 2016-13 had no material impact on the Company's financial position and results of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Impact of Inflation
While it is difficult to accurately measure the impact of inflation due to the imprecise nature of the estimates required, we believe the effects of inflation, if any, on our results of operations and financial condition have been immaterial.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial
statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and other financial information. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. In addition, our reported financial condition and results of operations could vary due to a change in the application of a particular accounting standard.
We regard an accounting estimate or assumption underlying our financial statements as a “critical accounting estimate” where:
•the nature of the estimate or assumption is material due to the level of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change; and
•the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material.
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Not all of these significant accounting policies, however, require that we make estimates and assumptions that we believe are “critical accounting estimates.” We have discussed our accounting policies with the audit committee of our board of directors, and we believe that our estimates relating to revenue recognition described below are “critical accounting estimates.”
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the Company performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, the Company assesses the goods or services promised within each contract and determines those that are performance obligations, and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied. Sales, value add, and other taxes collected on behalf of third parties are excluded from revenue.
Product revenue - The Company recognizes net revenue on sales to its commercial partners and to end users. In each instance, revenue is generally recognized when the customer obtains control of the Company’s product, which occurs at a point in time, and may be upon shipment or upon delivery based on the contractual shipping terms of a contract.
Revenue on sales to commercial partners relates to Argatroban and Bendeka. Sales to our commercial partners are presented gross because the Company is primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide the product, is responsible to ensure that the product is produced in accordance with the related supply agreement and bears risk of loss while the inventory is in-transit to the commercial partner.
Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring products or services to a customer. To the extent the transaction price includes variable consideration, the Company estimates the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing the expected value method to which the Company expects to be entitled. As such, revenue on sales to end users for Belrapzo and Ryanodex are recorded net of chargebacks, rebates, returns, prompt pay discounts, wholesaler fees and other deductions. Our products are contracted with a limited number of oncology distributors and hospital buying groups with narrow differences in ultimate realized contract prices used to estimate our chargeback and rebate reserves. The Company has a product returns policy on some of its products that allows the customer to return pharmaceutical products within a specified period of time both prior to and subsequent to the product’s expiration date. The Company's estimate of the provision for returns is analyzed quarterly and is based upon many factors, including historical experience of actual returns and analysis of the level of inventory in the distribution channel, if any. The Company has terms on sales of Ryanodex by which the Company does not accept returns. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in the Company’s judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. Estimates of variable consideration are made using the expected value method and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of the Company’s anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available. The Company believes that the estimates it has established are reasonable based upon current facts and circumstances. Applying different judgments to the same facts and circumstances could result in the estimated amounts to vary.
Components of Gross-to-Net (GTN) Estimates
Chargebacks: Chargebacks are discounts that occur when certain contracted customers, including group purchasing organizations (“GPOs”), public health service institutions and federal government entities purchasing via the Federal Supply Schedule, purchase from the Company's distributors. The Company's distributors purchase product from us at invoice price, then resell the product to certain contracted customers on the basis of prices negotiated between us and the providers. The difference between the distributors’ purchase price and the typically lower certain contracted customers’ purchase price is refunded to the distributors through a chargeback credit. We record estimates for these chargebacks at the time of sale as deductions from gross revenues, with corresponding adjustments to our accounts receivable reserves and allowances.
Commercial and Medicaid Rebates: The Company contracts with government agencies or collectively, third-party payors, so that Belrapzo and Ryanodex will be eligible for purchase by, or partial or full reimbursement from, such third-party payors. The Company estimates the rebates it will provide to third-party payors and deducts these estimated amounts from total gross product revenues at the time the revenues are recognized. These reserves are recorded in the same period in which the revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and the establishment of a current liability. The current liability is included in accrued expenses on the consolidated balance sheets. The Company estimates the rebates that it will provide to third-party payors based upon (i) the Company’s contracts with these third-party payors, (ii) the government mandated discounts applicable to government-funded programs, (iii) a range of possible outcomes that are probability-weighted for the estimated payer mix, and (iv) information obtained from the Company’s distributors.
The information that the Company also considers when establishing its rebate reserves are purchases by customers, projected annual sales for customers, actual rebates payments made, processing time lags, and for indirect rebates, the level of inventory in the distribution channel that will be subject to indirect rebates. We do not provide incentives designed to increase shipments to our customers that we believe would result in out-of-the-ordinary course of business inventory for them. The Company regularly reviews and monitors estimated or actual customer inventory information at its largest distributors for its key products to ascertain whether customer inventories are in excess of ordinary course of business levels.
Product Returns: The Company’s distributors have the right to return unopened unprescribed Belrapzo during certain time periods around the period beginning prior to the labeled expiration date and ending after the labeled expiration date. The Company estimates future product returns on sales of Belrapzo based on: (i) data provided to the Company by its distributors (including weekly reporting of distributors’ sales and inventory held by distributors that provided the Company with visibility into the distribution channel in order to determine what quantities were sold to retail pharmacies and other providers), (ii) information provided to the Company from retail pharmacies, (iii) data provided to the Company by a third-party data provider which collects and publishes prescription data, and other third parties, (iv) historical industry information regarding return rates for similar pharmaceutical products, (v) the estimated remaining shelf life of Belrapzo previously shipped and currently being shipped to distributors and (vi) contractual agreements intended to limit the amount of inventory maintained by the Company’s distributors. These reserves are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and the establishment of a current liability which is included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
The Company's provision for product returns based on the factors noted above generally encompass a time range from 12 to 48 months after revenue is recognized. Additionally, we consider other factors when estimating our current period return provision, including levels of inventory in the distribution channel, significant market changes that may impact future expected returns, and actual product returns, and may record additional provisions for specific returns that it believes are not covered by the historical rates. The Company’s commercial returns policy and terms with certain customers also states that certain products are sold as non-returnable.
Wholesaler fees and other incentives: The Company generally provides invoice discounts on Belrapzo and Ryanodex sales to its distributors for prompt payment and fees for distribution services, such as fees for certain data that distributors provide to the Company. The payment terms for sales to distributors generally include a 2% discount for prompt payment which is generally defined in invoice terms as a range from 15 to 45 days, while the fees for distribution services are based on contractual rates agreed with the respective distributors. Based on historical data, the Company expects its distributors to earn these discounts and fees, and deducts the full amount of these discounts and fees from its gross product revenues and accounts receivable at the time such revenues are recognized.
Other GTN considerations
We may at our discretion provide price adjustments due to various competitive factors. There are circumstances under which we may not provide price adjustments to certain customers as a matter of business strategy, and consequently may lose future sales volume to competitors and risk a greater level of product returns.
As detailed above, we have the experience and access to relevant information that we believe are necessary to reasonably estimate the amounts of such deductions from gross revenues. Some of the assumptions we use for certain of these estimates
are based on information received from third parties, such as wholesale customer inventories and market data, or other market factors beyond our control. The estimates that are most critical to the establishment of these reserves, and therefore, would have the largest impact if these estimates were not accurate, are estimates related to contract sales volumes, average contract pricing, customer inventories and return volumes. We regularly review the information related to these estimates and adjust our reserves accordingly, if and when actual experience differs from previous estimates. With the exception of the product returns allowance, the ending balances of accounts receivable reserves and allowances generally are processed during a two-month to four-month period.