Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management’s discussion and analysis describes the principal factors affecting our capital resources, liquidity, and results operations. This management’s discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the accompanying Financial Statements and related notes, information about our business practices, significant accounting policies, risk factors, and the transactions that underlie our financial results, which are included in various parts of this Annual Report. For discussion related to changes in financial condition and results of operations for 2019 as compared with 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2019 Form 10-K, which was filed with the SEC on March 10, 2020. Our website address is www.vaalco.com. All of our filings with the SEC are available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after we file them with, or furnish them to, the SEC. Information on our website does not form part of this Annual Report.
INTRODUCTION
VAALCO is a Houston, Texas based independent energy company engaged in the acquisition, exploration, development and production of crude oil. As operator, we have production operations and conduct exploration activities in Gabon, West Africa. We also have opportunities to participate in development and exploration activities in Equatorial Guinea, West Africa. For further discussion of our two operating segments see “Item 1. Business - Segment and Geographical Information - “Gabon Segment” and “Equatorial Guinea Segment”. As discussed further in Note 4 to the Financial Statements, we have discontinued operations associated with our activities in Angola, West Africa.
A significant component of our results of operations is dependent upon the difference between prices received for our offshore Gabon crude oil production and the costs to find and produce such crude oil. Historically, crude oil and natural gas prices have been volatile and subject to fluctuations based on a number of factors beyond our control. More recently, crude oil and natural gas prices have been in the midst of an unprecedented decline due to a combination of factors, including a substantial decline in global demand for oil caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent mitigation efforts. Despite these challenges, we remain committed to generating long-term value for our stockholders by focusing on exploration and development of existing properties, adding value with accretive acquisitions, controlling costs and optimizing production.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Impact on Operations of COVID-19 Pandemic and the Current Crude Oil Pricing Environment
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in global exposure. The COVID-19 pandemic and related economic repercussions have created significant volatility, uncertainty, and turmoil in the oil and gas industry, and the full impact of the outbreak continues to evolve. The adverse economic effects of the COVID-19 outbreak have materially decreased demand for crude oil based on the restrictions in place by governments trying to curb the outbreak and changes in consumer behavior. This has led to a significant global oversupply of oil and consequently a substantial decrease in crude oil prices. In April 2020, countries within OPEC+, which includes Gabon, reached an agreement to cut crude oil production to reduce the gap between excess supply and demand, in an effort to stabilize the international oil market. Gabon has undertaken measures to comply with such OPEC+ production quota agreement and, as a result, the Minister of Hydrocarbons in Gabon requested that we reduce our production. In response to such request from the Minister of Hydrocarbons, we temporarily reduced production from the Etame Marin block beginning in July 2020 and expect such reduction to continue through March 31, 2021. Reductions in production have significantly improved the demand/supply imbalance, and crude oil prices have improved from the lows seen in March and April of 2020. The Company currently has crude oil commodity swap agreements for a total of 709,262 barrels at a Dated Brent weighted average price of $53.10 per barrel for the period from and including February 2021 through January 2022 to mitigate the effects of potential future price declines. The Company will consider entering into additional commodity derivative instruments from time to time. However, there can be no assurance when, or upon what terms, the Company may enter into any future commodity derivative instruments.
While we did not incur significant disruptions to operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are unable to predict the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on us in the future, including our financial position, operating results, liquidity and ability to obtain financing in future reporting periods, due to numerous uncertainties. These uncertainties include the severity of the virus, the duration of the outbreak, governmental or other actions taken to combat the virus (which could include limitations on our operations or the operations of our customers and vendors), and the effect that the COVID-19 pandemic and the current crude oil price wars among global suppliers will have on the demand for crude oil. The health of our employees, contractors and vendors, and our ability to meet staffing needs in our operations and certain critical functions cannot be predicted and is vital to our operations. We are unable to predict the extent of the impact that the continuing spread of COVID-19 throughout Gabon may have on our ability to continue to conduct our operations.
Further, the impacts of a potential worsening of global economic conditions and the continued disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets as well as other unanticipated consequences remain unknown. In addition, we cannot predict the impact that COVID-19 will have on our customers, vendors and contractors; however, any material effect on these parties could adversely impact our business. The situation surrounding COVID-19 remains fluid and unpredictable, and we are actively managing our
response and assessing potential impacts to our financial position and operating results, as well as any adverse developments that could impact our business.
In response to the COVID-19 outbreak and the current pricing environment, we have taken the following measures:
put in place social distancing measures at our work sites;
actively screened and monitored employees and contractors that come on to our facilities including testing and quarantines with onsite medical supervision;
engaged in regular company-wide COVID-19 updates to keep employees informed of key developments;
implemented cost cutting measures with vendors;
implemented sharing certain costs, such as shipping vessels, helicopter, and personnel with other operators in the region; and
ceased or deferred certain discretionary capital spending.
We expect to continue to take proactive steps to manage any disruption in our business caused by COVID-19 and to protect the health and safety of our employees. However, the health and safety measures we and our vendors have taken have resulted in us incurring higher costs. As a result of these factors and the conditions described above, 2020 was one of the most uncertain and disruptive years that the industry has ever seen. Accordingly, the results presented herein are not necessarily indicative of future operating results.
Recent Operational Updates
In September 2019, we commenced our 2019/2020 drilling campaign. During the remainder of 2019, we drilled one development well and one appraisal wellbore, and during the first quarter of 2020, we drilled two development wells and one appraisal wellbore.
In September 2020, we implemented a planned routine full-field maintenance shutdown that took five days to complete. With the exception of this planned shutdown, we maintained field integrity and our crude oil production schedule throughout the year without any material operational disruptions or reportable accidents despite the challenges presented by the COVID-19 pandemic.
We completed the acquisition of approximately 1,000 square kilometers of new dual-azimuth proprietary 3-D seismic data over the entire Etame Marin block. We expect the seismic data to enhance sub-surface imaging by merging legacy data with newly acquired seismic allowing for the first continuous 3-D seismic over the entire block. The processing of the seismic data began in January 2021, and we expect all the data to be fully processed and analyzed by the fourth quarter of 2021. The seismic data will be used to optimize and de-risk future drilling locations and potentially identify new drilling locations. We plan to commence the next drilling campaign at Etame in late 2021 or early 2022 with two development wells and two appraisal wells at an estimated cost of $115.0 million to $125.0 million gross, or $73.0 million to $79.0 million, net to VAALCO’s 63.6% participating interest. The locations of these wells will be determined in conjunction with the new seismic processing and interpretation.
We are currently a party to an FPSO charter for the storage of all of the crude oil that we produce. This contract will expire in September 2022. Our options include securing a new storage vessel, either under a charter agreement or a purchase, purchasing the vessel under the current FPSO charter pursuant to an option in the charter contract or extending the charter agreement for the current FPSO. Execution of any of these options requires significant lead time and may require a capital investment due to the specialized nature of such vessels. We are currently evaluating our alternatives so that we will be in position to have an alternative in place when the current charter expires.
Acquisition of Additional Working Interest at Etame Marin Block
In November 2020, the Company signed an SPA to acquire Sasol’s 27.8% working interest in the Etame Marin block offshore Gabon (the “Sasol Acquisition”). In conjunction with the signing of the SPA, we paid a $4.3 million deposit as initial consideration. The effective date of the transaction is July 1, 2020. We completed the Sasol Acquisition on February 25, 2021 for a final cash settlement payment of $29.6 million, which was paid from cash on hand and reflected the $44.0 million purchase price less (i) a cash deposit of approximately $4.3 million paid on the SPA execution date, (ii) net cash flows generated from the Sasol interest from July 1, 2020 through the closing date and (iii) other purchase price adjustments pursuant to the SPA. In addition, under the terms of the SPA, a contingent payment of $5.0 million will be payable to Sasol should the average Dated Brent price over a consecutive 90-day period from July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2022 exceed $60.00 per barrel. Since we previously owned and operated a 31.1% working interest in
Etame, the transaction increased our working interest to 58.8% of total production and reserves. Reserves, production and financial results for the interests acquired will be included in VAALCO’s results beginning February 25, 2021.
NYSE Noncompliance Notice
On April 22, 2020, we were notified by the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”) that the average closing price of our common stock over the prior 30 consecutive trading days was below $1.00 per share, which is the minimum average closing price required to maintain listing on the NYSE under Section 802.01C of the NYSE Listed Company Manual. On July 1, 2020, we received notification that we regained full compliance with all NYSE continued listing standards.
DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS-ANGOLA
In November 2006, we signed a production sharing contract for Block 5 offshore Angola (“PSA”). Our working interest is 40%, and we carried Sonangol P&P, for 10% of the work program. On September 30, 2016, we notified Sonangol P&P that we were withdrawing from the joint operating agreement effective October 31, 2016. On November 30, 2016, we notified the national concessionaire, Sonangol E.P. that we were withdrawing from the PSA. Further to our decision to withdraw from Angola, we have closed our office in Angola and do not intend to conduct future activities in Angola. As a result of this strategic shift, the Angola segment has been classified as discontinued operations in the Financial Statements for all periods presented. See Note 4 to the Financial Statements. In the first quarter of 2019, the Company and Sonangol E.P. entered into a settlement agreement finalizing the Company’s rights, liabilities and outstanding obligations for Block 5 in Angola. Pursuant to the settlement agreement, the Company agreed to pay $4.5 million to Angola National Agency of Petroleum, Gas, and Biofuels, as National Concessionaire, and to eliminate the $3.3 million receivable from Sonangol P&P. The receivable was related to joint interest billings and was reflected as current assets from discontinued operations at year-end 2018. As a result, the Company adjusted a previously accrued liability and recognized a net of tax non-cash benefit from discontinued operations of $5.7 million in the first quarter of 2019. In July 2019, subsequent to the publication of an executive decree from the Ministry of Mineral Resources and Petroleum, the Company paid the $4.5 million due under the settlement agreement
CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY
Cash Flows
Our cash flows for the years 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
The increase in net cash provided by our operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019 includes a $3.7 million decrease in cash generated by continuing operations before change in operating assets and liabilities, which was mainly due to lower revenue as referenced below in Results of Operations, which was more than offset by a $4.2 million decrease in cash used in discontinued operations. The increase in cash resulting from the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects decreases of $22.8 million in trade and other receivables offset by increases of $2.6 million in “Crude oil inventory” as well as decreases of $6.9 million in accounts payable, decreases of $5.5 million in “Accrued liabilities and other” and a $7.3 million decrease in “Foreign taxes payable”.
Property and equipment expenditures have historically been our most significant use of cash in investing activities. For 2020, the $20.0 million cash basis expenditures consisted of $19.7 million related to the 2019/2020 drilling program and $0.3 million paid for equipment and enhancements. For 2019, the $10.3 million in cash basis expenditures consisted of $8.0 million related to the 2019/2020 drilling program and $2.3 million paid for equipment and enhancements. See “-Capital Expenditures and Capital Resources, Liquidity, and Cash Requirements” below for further discussion. In addition to property and equipment expenditures, $4.3 million of cash was used in investing activities related to the Sasol Acquisition. This transaction was completed on February 25, 2021, and an additional $29.6 million was paid at closing. An additional $5.0 million will be paid should the average Dated Brent
price over a consecutive 90-day period from July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2022 exceed $60.00 per barrel. For 2020 and 2019, there were no other significant investing activities.
Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 included $1.0 million for treasury stock purchases primarily made under the Company’s stock repurchase plan. Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 included $3.9 million for treasury stock purchases primarily made under the Company’s stock repurchase plan.
Capital Expenditures
At December 31, 2018, pursuant to the PSC Extension, we had commitments for capital expenditures related to the drilling of two wells and two appraisal wellbores by September 16, 2020. In February 2020, these commitments were fully met as a result of drilling the Etame 9P and SE Etame 4P appraisal wellbores in 2019 and 2020, respectively, as well as the completion of the Etame 9H and Etame 11H development wells in 2019 and 2020, respectively. See “-Capital Expenditures and Capital Resources, Liquidity, and Cash Requirements” below for further discussion.
During 2020, we had accrual basis capital expenditures attributable to continuing operations of $10.5 million compared to $22.2 million accrual basis capital expenditures in 2019. The difference between capital expenditures and the property and equipment expenditures reported in the consolidated statements of cash flows is attributable to changes in accruals for costs incurred but not yet invoiced or paid on the report dates. Capital expenditures in 2020 and 2019 were attributable to expenditures related to the 2019/2020 drilling program, seismic acquisition costs, equipment and enhancements. See table below in “Capital Resources, Liquidity and Cash Requirements” for further information. As discussed above, we anticipate beginning a drilling program late in 2021 which will continue into 2022 which will require significant capital investment in 2021 and 2022. Also, as a result of the FPSO charter expiring in September 2022, securing either the FPSO or a new storage vessel may require a capital investment in 2021 and 2022.
Regulatory and Joint Interest Audits
We are subject to periodic routine audits by various government agencies in Gabon, including audits of our petroleum Cost Account, customs, taxes and other operational matters, as well as audits by other members of the contractor group under our joint operating agreements. See Note 12 to the Financial Statements for further discussion.
Commodity Price Hedging
The price we receive for our crude oil significantly influences our revenue, profitability, liquidity, access to capital and prospects for future growth. Crude oil commodities and, therefore their prices can be subject to wide fluctuations in response to relatively minor changes in supply and demand. We believe these prices will likely continue to be volatile in the future.
Due to the inherent volatility in crude oil prices, we use commodity derivative instruments such as swaps to hedge price risk associated with a portion of our anticipated crude oil production. These instruments allow us to reduce, but not eliminate, the potential effects of variability in cash flow from operations due to fluctuations in commodity prices. The instruments provide only partial protection against declines in crude oil prices and may limit our potential gains from future increases in prices. None of these instruments are used for trading purposes. We do not speculate on commodity prices but rather attempt to hedge physical production by individual hydrocarbon product in order to protect returns. The counterparty to our derivative transactions is a major oil company’s trading subsidiary, and our derivative positions are generally reviewed on a monthly basis. We have not designated any of our derivative contracts as fair value or cash flow hedges. The changes in fair value of the contracts are included in the consolidated statement of operations. We record such derivative instruments as assets or liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet. We do not anticipate any substantial changes in our hedging policy.
For the period from January to June 2019, we had commodity swap contracts for approximately 172,000 barrels of crude oil. On May 6, 2019, the Company entered into commodity swaps at a Dated Brent weighted average of $66.70 per barrel for the period from and including July 2019 through June 2020 for an approximate quantity of 500,000 barrels. As of December 31, 2020, we did not have unexpired swaps. On January 22, 2021, we entered into commodity swaps at a Dated Brent weighted average of $53.10 per barrel for the period from and including February 2021 through January 2022 for 709,262 barrels.
Cash on Hand
At December 31, 2020, we had unrestricted cash of $47.9 million. We invest cash not required for immediate operational and capital expenditure needs in short-term money market instruments primarily with financial institutions where we determine our credit exposure is negligible. As operator of the Etame Marin block in Gabon, we enter into project-related activities on behalf of our working interest joint venture owners. We generally obtain advances from joint venture owners prior to significant funding commitments. Our cash on hand will be utilized, along with cash generated from operations, to fund our operations.
We currently sell our crude oil production from Gabon under a term contract that began in February 2020 and ends in July 2021. Pricing under this contract is based upon an average of Dated Brent in the month of lifting, adjusted for location and market factors.
Capital Resources, Liquidity and Cash Requirements
Liquidity is the ability of an enterprise to generate adequate amounts of cash to meet its needs for cash requirements. The table below summarizes by period our estimated material cash requirements net to VAALCO as of December 31, 2020 and based on our 31.1% working interest in the Etame Marin block at this time.
(1)References are to the notes to Financial Statements accompanying Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
(2)Obligations based on a 31.1% working interest in the Etame as of December 31, 2020. Following the completion of the Sasol Acquisition on February 25, 2021, our obligations will be based on a 58.8% working interest in the Etame, and our obligations will increase accordingly.
(3)Associated with operating leases accounted for under ASC 842 as discussed in Note 13 to the Financial Statements.
(4)Associated with capital expenditures and processing of 3D seismic. This amount does not include capital expenditures for years after 2021 because we do not currently have contractual commitments with respect to such expenditures nor does it include expenditures associated with potentially replacing the FPSO.
(5)Associated with the non-lease components not accounted for under ASC 842 as discussed in Note 13 to the Financial Statements.
(6)See “Acquisition of Additional Working Interest in Etame Marin Block” in Recent Developments above. This amount includes cash payment made on February 25, 2021 upon closing and additional contingent payment of $5.0 million should the average Dated Brent price over a consecutive 90-day period from July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2022 exceed $60.00 per barrel.
(7)See “Abandonment funding” in Note 12 to the Financial Statements for further information.
Historically, our primary source of liquidity has been cash flows from operations and our primary uses of cash has been to fund capital expenditures for development activities in the Etame Marin block. As a result of completing the Sasol Acquisition on February 25, 2021, our obligations with respect to development activities in the Etame have increased based on the increase in our working interest in the Etame from 31.1 % at December 31, 2020, to 58.8%. We expect that part of this increase will be offset by an increase in our operating cash flows based on our increased portion of the Etame production. We continually monitor the availability of capital resources, including equity and debt financings that could be utilized to meet our future financial obligations, planned capital expenditure activities and liquidity requirements including those to fund opportunistic acquisitions.
Our future success in growing proved reserves, production and balancing the long-term development of our assets with a focus on generating attractive corporate-level returns will be highly dependent on the capital resources available to us. In early March 2020, crude oil prices declined significantly ending at approximately $15 per barrel for Brent crude, as of March 31, 2020, as a result of market concerns about the ability of OPEC and Russia to agree on a perceived need to implement further production cuts in response to weaker worldwide demand. While OPEC and Russia were able to reach an agreement to cut production in April 2020, crude oil prices continued to decline below $20 per barrel for Brent crude as a result of the substantial decline in the global demand for crude oil caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent mitigation efforts. The reduced demand for crude oil as a result of measures taken to prevent the spread of COVID-19 led to a surplus in the global supply of crude oil. Reductions in production have significantly improved the demand/supply imbalance and crude oil prices have improved from the lows seen in March and April of 2020. Brent crude prices were approximately $51 per barrel as of December 31, 2020. On January 22, 2021, we entered into commodity swaps at a Dated Brent weighted average of $53.10 per barrel for the period from and including February 2021 through January 2022 for 709,262 barrels.
Despite the lower Brent crude oil prices, based on current expectations, we believe we have sufficient liquidity through our existing cash balances and cash flow from operations to support our cash requirements, including those related to the Sasol Acquisition, through March 2022. We are continuing to evaluate all uses of cash and whether to pursue growth opportunities or preserve our resources in light of ongoing economic conditions.
At December 31, 2020, we had 3.2 MMBbls of estimated net proved reserves, all of which are related to the Etame Marin block offshore Gabon. The current term for exploitation of the reserves in the Etame Marin block ends in September 2028 with rights for two five-year extension periods. Except to the extent that we conduct successful exploration or development activities or acquire properties containing proved reserves, our estimated net proved reserves will generally decline as reserves are produced. While both short-term and long-term liquidity are impacted by crude oil prices, our long-term liquidity also depends upon our ability to find, develop or acquire additional crude oil and natural gas reserves that are economically recoverable.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
We incurred a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $(48.2) million, compared to net income of $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The year-over-year decrease in earnings was mainly due to a $30.6 million impairment and lower revenues as a result of receiving lower crude oil prices. Substantially all of our operations are attributable to our Gabon segment. Further discussion of results by significant line item follows.
Crude oil revenues decreased $17.3 million, or approximately 20.5%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019. The decrease in revenue is primarily attributable to lower prices as described below partially offset by higher sales volumes. While sales volumes increased as a result of additional production from the new wells drilled during the 2019/2020 drilling program, the increase in sales volume was partially offset by curtailments mandated by Gabon to meet OPEC+ production cuts as well as a delay to January 2021 in the lifting scheduled for December 2020.
The revenue changes between the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 identified as related to changes in price or volume are shown in the table below:
The table below shows net production, sales volumes and realized prices for both years.
Crude oil sales are a function of the number and size of crude oil liftings in each year from the FPSO, and as a result, crude oil sales do not always coincide with volumes produced in any given year. We made eleven liftings for the year ended December 31, 2020 and fifteen liftings for the year ended December 31, 2019. Production volumes for the year ended December 31, 2020 were higher than the comparable 2019 period due to new development wells brought onto production. The increase from new wells was partially offset by production curtailments. Sales volumes were higher in 2020 as compared to 2019 due to the new development wells brought onto production. Our share of crude oil inventory aboard the FPSO, excluding royalty barrels, was approximately 172,276 and 38,476 barrels at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The crude oil inventory was higher at December 31, 2020 due to the scheduled December 2020 lifting being delayed to January 2021, as discussed above.
Production expenses decreased $0.4 million, or approximately 1.0%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019. The decrease in expense was associated with an increase in crude inventory levels as discussed above offset by higher workover expense related to two workovers. On a per barrel basis, production expense, excluding workover expense, for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $21.38 per barrel from $29.70 per barrel for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily as a result of an increase in sales volumes. While we have not experienced any significant operational disruptions associated with the current worldwide COVID-19 pandemic, we have incurred approximately $1.6 million in higher costs related to the proactive measures taken in response to the pandemic.
Exploration expenses of $3.6 million were related to the acquisition of proprietary 3-D seismic data over the entire Etame Marin block as discussed in Item 1. Business - Segment and Geographic Information - Gabon Segment - Development.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization increased $2.3 million, or approximately 32.5%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019 due to higher sales volumes and higher depletable costs associated with the new development wells.
Impairment of proved crude oil and natural gas properties for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $30.6 million was the result of declining forecasted crude oil prices. See Note 9 to the Financial Statements for further discussion.
Gain on revision of asset retirement obligations for the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted from a downward revision of $0.4 million as discussed in Note 11 to the Financial Statements.
General and administrative expenses decreased $4.2 million, or approximately 28.0% in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019. The decrease in expense was in part related to a $3.3 million decrease in stock appreciation rights (“SARs”) expense. SARs liability awards are fair valued. The primary driver to changes in the fair value of these awards is changes in the Company’s stock price. See Note 17 to the Financial Statements for further discussion. Other expense categories that decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 were accounting and audit fees and travel costs, which were higher in the prior year as a result of our listing on the London Stock Exchange in September 2019.
Bad debt (recovery) expense and other reflected bad debt expense associated with the VAT allowance for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the bad debt recoveries during 2019.
Other operating income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily related to a $0.8 million payment to resolve claims made by one of the Etame Marin block joint venture owners, Addax Petroleum Gabon S.A. related to audits for the years 2017 and 2018 as well as $0.9 million in inventory obsolescence. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred costs related to a $4.4 million agreement to resolve a legacy issue related to findings from Etame joint ventures owners’ audits for the periods from 2007 through 2016.
Derivative instruments gain (loss), net is attributable to our commodity swaps as discussed in Note 10 to the Financial Statements and the $6.6 million gain is a result of a decrease in the price of Dated Brent crude oil during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to an increase in the price of Dated Brent crude oil that resulted in a $0.4 million loss during the comparable prior year.
Interest income (expense), net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 relate to interest income on cash balances.
Other, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consists primarily of foreign currency gains (losses) as discussed in Note 1 to the Financial Statements.
Income tax expense (benefit) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $27.7 million. This is comprised of $24.2 million of deferred tax expense and a current tax provision of $3.5 million. The deferred income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a $41.6 million charge to increase the valuation allowances on U.S. and Gabon deferred tax assets due to a decrease in future estimated taxable earnings primarily as a result of lower crude oil prices as well as the overall economic conditions of the industry. The income tax expense of $23.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 is comprised of $14.5 million of deferred income tax expense and a current tax provision of $9.4 million. The deferred income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a $3.1 million benefit to decrease the valuation allowances on deferred tax assets due to a decrease in future estimated taxable earnings primarily as a result of lower crude oil prices. The current tax provision in both periods is primarily attributable to our operations in Gabon and is lower in 2020 than income tax for the comparable 2019 period as a result of lower revenues. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for further discussion.
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are attributable to our Angola segment as discussed further in Note 4 to the Financial Statements. The loss from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to Angola administration costs. The gain from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily related to recording a $5.7 million after tax gain on the finalized Angola settlement.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of Financial Statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the Financial Statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the respective reporting periods. Accounting estimates are considered to be critical if (1) the nature of the estimates and assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment
necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change, and (2) the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material. Actual results could differ from the estimates and assumptions used. Further, in some cases, GAAP allows more than one alternative accounting method for reporting. In those cases, our reported results of operations would be different should we employ an alternative accounting method. See Note 2 to the Financial Statements for our accounting policy elections.
Income Taxes
Our annual tax provision is based on expected taxable income, statutory rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. The determination and evaluation of our annual tax provision and tax positions involves the interpretation of the tax laws in the various jurisdictions in which we operate and requires significant judgment and the use of estimates and assumptions regarding significant future events such as the amount, timing and character of income, deductions and tax credits. Changes in tax laws, regulations, agreements and tax treaties or our level of operations or profitability in each jurisdiction would impact our tax liability in any given year. We also operate in foreign jurisdictions where the tax laws relating to the crude oil and natural gas industry are open to interpretation, which could potentially result in tax authorities asserting additional tax liabilities. While our income tax provision (benefit) is based on the best information available at the time, a number of years may elapse before the ultimate tax liabilities in the various jurisdictions are determined.
Judgment is required in determining whether deferred tax assets will be realized in full or in part. Management assesses the available positive and negative evidence to estimate if existing deferred tax assets will be utilized. When it is estimated to be more-likely-than-not that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance must be established for the amount of the deferred tax assets that are estimated to not be realizable. Factors considered include earnings generated in previous periods, forecasted earnings, the expiration period of carryovers, and overall economic conditions of the industry. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had deferred tax assets of $126.3 million primarily attributable to Gabon and U.S. federal taxes related to basis differences in fixed assets, foreign tax credit carryforwards, and U.S. and foreign net operating loss carryforwards. A valuation allowance of $126.3 million has been established against the deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020, as management has concluded that it was more-likely-than-not that no portion of the deferred tax assets would be realized. In future periods, we may determine that it is more-likely-than-not that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will be realized, and in such period all or a portion of this valuation allowance may be reversed as the evidence warrants.
In certain jurisdictions, we may deem the likelihood of realizing deferred tax assets as remote where we expect that, due to the structure of operations and applicable law, the operations in such jurisdictions will not give rise to future tax consequences. Should our expectations change regarding the expected future tax consequences, we may be required to record additional deferred taxes that could have a material effect on our consolidated financial position and results of operations. For further discussion, see Note 8 to the Financial Statements.
Oil and Gas Accounting Reserves Determination
The successful efforts method of accounting depends on the estimated reserves we believe are recoverable from our crude oil and natural gas reserves. The process of estimating reserves is complex. It requires significant judgments and decisions based on available geological, geophysical, engineering and economic data.
To estimate the economically recoverable crude oil and natural gas reserves and related future net cash flows, we incorporate many factors and assumptions including:
expected reservoir characteristics based on geological, geophysical and engineering assessments;
future production rates based on historical performance and expected future operating and investment activities;
future crude oil and natural gas quality differentials;
assumed effects of regulation by governmental agencies; and
future development and operating costs.
We believe our assumptions are reasonable based on the information available to us at the time we prepare our estimates. However, these estimates may change substantially going forward as additional data from development activities and production performance becomes available and as economic conditions impacting crude oil and natural gas prices and costs change.
Management is responsible for estimating the quantities of proved crude oil and natural gas reserves and for preparing related disclosures. Estimates and related disclosures are prepared in accordance with SEC requirements and generally accepted industry practices in the U.S. as prescribed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers. Reserve estimates are independently evaluated at least annually by our independent qualified reserves engineers, NSAI.
Our senior executives and reserve engineers oversee the review of our crude oil and natural gas reserves and related disclosures by our appointed independent reserve engineers. The senior executives meet with the reserve engineers periodically to review the reserves process and results, and to confirm that the independent reserve engineers have had access to sufficient information, including the nature and satisfactory resolution of any material differences of opinion between us and the independent reserve engineers.
Reserves estimates are critical to many of our accounting estimates, including:
determining whether or not an exploratory well has found economically producible reserves;
calculating our unit-of-production depletion rates. Proved developed reserves estimates are used to determine rates that are applied to each unit-of-production in calculating our depletion expense; and
assessing, when necessary, our crude oil and natural gas assets for impairment using undiscounted future cash flows based on management’s estimates. If impairment is indicated, discounted values will be used to determine the fair value of the assets. The critical estimates used to assess impairment, including the impact of changes in reserves estimates, are discussed below.
See “Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules - Supplemental Information on Crude Oil and Natural Gas Producing Activities (unaudited).”
Successful Efforts Method of Accounting for Crude Oil and Natural Gas Activities
We use the successful efforts method to account for our crude oil and natural gas activities. Management believes that this method is preferable, as we have focused on exploration activities wherein there is risk associated with future success and as such earnings are best represented by drilling results. Costs of successful wells, development dry holes and leases containing productive reserves are capitalized and amortized on a unit-of-production basis over the life of the related reserves. Other exploration costs, including dry exploration well costs, geological and geophysical expenses applicable to undeveloped leaseholds, leasehold expiration costs and delay rentals, are expensed as incurred.
The costs of exploratory wells are initially capitalized pending a determination of whether proved reserves have been found. At the completion of drilling activities, the costs of exploratory wells remain capitalized if a determination is made that proved reserves have been found. If no proved reserves have been found, the costs of exploratory wells are charged to expense. In some cases, a determination of proved reserves cannot be made at the completion of drilling, requiring additional testing and evaluation of the wells. Cost incurred for exploratory wells that find reserves that cannot yet be classified as proved are capitalized if (a) the well has found a sufficient quantity of reserves to justify its completion as a producing well and (b) sufficient progress in assessing the reserves and the economic and operating viability of the project has been made. The status of suspended well costs is monitored continuously and reviewed quarterly. Due to the capital-intensive nature and the geographical characteristics of certain projects, it may take an extended period of time to evaluate the future potential of an exploration project and the economics associated with making a determination of its commercial viability.
Geological and geophysical costs are expensed as incurred. Costs of seismic studies that are utilized in development drilling within an area of proved reserves are capitalized as development costs. Amounts of seismic costs capitalized are based on only those blocks of data used in determining development well locations. To the extent that a seismic project covers areas of both developmental and exploratory drilling, those seismic costs are proportionately allocated between development costs and exploration expense.
We capitalize interest, if debt is outstanding, during drilling operations in our exploration and development activities.
We review the crude oil and natural gas producing properties for impairment quarterly or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such properties may not be recoverable. When a crude oil and natural gas property’s undiscounted estimated future net cash flows are not sufficient to recover its carrying amount, an impairment charge is recorded to reduce the carrying amount of the asset to its fair value. Our assessment involves a high degree of estimation uncertainty as it requires us to make assumptions and apply judgment to estimate undiscounted future net cash flows related to proved reserves. Such assumptions include commodity prices, capital spending, production and abandonment costs and reservoir data. The fair value of the asset is measured using a discounted cash flow model relying primarily on Level 3 inputs to estimate the undiscounted future net cash flows. The undiscounted estimated future net cash flows used in the impairment evaluations at each quarter end are based upon the most recently prepared independent reserve engineers’ report adjusted to use forecasted prices from the forward strip price curves near each quarter end and adjusted as necessary for drilling and production results. For further discussion, see Note 9 to the Financial Statements.
Impairment of Unproved Property
We evaluate our undeveloped crude oil and natural gas leases for impairment on at least a quarterly basis by considering numerous factors that could include nearby drilling results, seismic interpretations, market values of similar assets, existing contracts and future plans for exploration or development. When undeveloped crude oil and natural gas leases are deemed to be impaired, exploration expense is charged. Unproved property costs consist mainly of acquisition costs related to undeveloped acreage in the Etame Marin block in Gabon and to Block P in Equatorial Guinea.
Future Dismantlement, Restoration, and Abandonment Costs
We have significant obligations to remove tangible equipment and restore land and seabed at the end of crude oil and natural gas production operations. Our removal and restoration obligations are primarily associated with plugging and abandoning wells, removing and disposing of all or a portion of offshore crude oil and natural gas platforms, and capping pipelines. Estimating the future
restoration and removal costs is difficult and requires management to make estimates and judgments. Asset removal technologies and costs are constantly changing, as are regulatory, political, environmental, safety, and public relations considerations.
A liability for an asset retirement obligation (“ARO”) is recognized in the period in which the legal obligations are incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. The ARO liability reflects the estimated present value of the amount of dismantlement, removal, site reclamation, and similar activities associated with our crude oil and natural gas properties. We use current retirement costs to estimate the expected cash outflows for asset retirement obligations. Inherent in the present value calculation are numerous assumptions and judgments including the ultimate settlement amounts, inflation factors, credit-adjusted discount rates, timing of settlement, and changes in the legal, regulatory, environmental, and political environments. Initial recording of the ARO liability is offset by the corresponding capitalization of asset retirement cost recorded to crude oil and natural gas properties. To the extent these or other assumptions change after initial recognition of the liability, the fair value estimate is revised and the recognized liability adjusted, with a corresponding adjustment made to the related asset balance or income statement, as appropriate. Depreciation of capitalized asset retirement costs and accretion of asset retirement obligations are recorded over time. Depreciation is generally determined on a units-of-production basis for crude oil and natural gas production facilities, while accretion escalates over the lives of the assets to reach the expected settlement value. See Note 11 to the Financial Statements for disclosures regarding the asset retirement obligations.
Derivative instruments and hedging activities
The Company uses derivative financial instruments to achieve a more predictable cash flow from crude oil sales by reducing the exposure to price fluctuations. While we had derivative instruments which settled during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, as of December 31, 2020, we did not have unexpired derivative instruments. On January 22, 2021, we entered into commodity swaps at a Dated Brent weighted average of $53.10 per barrel for the period from and including February 2021 through January 2022 for an approximate quantity of 709,262 barrels.
The Company records balances resulting from commodity risk management activities in the consolidated balance sheets as either assets or liabilities measured at fair value. The significant inputs used to estimate fair value are crude oil prices, volatility, discount rate and the contract terms of the derivative instruments. Gains and losses from the change in fair value of derivative instruments and cash settlements on commodity derivatives are presented in the “Derivative instruments gain (loss), net” line item located within the “Other income (expense)” section of the consolidated statements of operations. Gains and losses from the change in fair value of derivative instruments and cash settlements on commodity derivatives are presented in the “Derivative instruments gain (loss), net” and “Cash settlements received on matured derivative contracts, net” lines items located as adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities on the statements of consolidated cash flows. For further discussion, see Note 10 to the Financial Statements.
NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
See Note 3 to the Financial Statements.