Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Consolidated Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements, the accompanying notes thereto, and the financial statement schedules included in Item 8 and Item 15 of this report. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties and other factors described in Item 1A of this report. Our actual results in future periods may differ from those referred to herein due to a number of factors, including the risks described in the sections entitled "Risk Factors" and "Forward-Looking Statements" elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a Nevada holding company. Through our insurance subsidiaries, we provide workers' compensation insurance coverage to select, small businesses in low to medium hazard industries. Workers' compensation insurance is provided under a statutory system wherein most employers are required to provide coverage for their employees' medical, disability, vocational rehabilitation, and/or death benefit costs for work-related injuries or illnesses. We provide workers' compensation insurance throughout the United States, with a concentration in California, where 45% of our in-force premiums are generated. Our revenues are primarily comprised of net premiums earned, net investment income, and net realized and unrealized gains on investments.
We target small businesses, as we believe that this market is traditionally characterized by fewer competitors, more attractive pricing, and stronger persistency when compared to the U.S. workers' compensation insurance industry in general. We believe we are able to price our policies at levels that are competitive and profitable over the long-term given our expertise in underwriting and claims handling in this market segment. Our underwriting approach is to consistently underwrite small business accounts at appropriate and competitive prices without sacrificing long-term profitability and stability for short-term top-line revenue growth.
Our 2020 underwriting results were significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, our underwriting results were improving, which reflected our superior claims handling and the increased pricing flexibility afforded to us through the use of multiple writing companies within states and territorial pricing in California. In addition, our ongoing underwriting initiatives, which are described below, have allowed us to expand our operations while also focusing on under-performing classes of business, as needed.
The insurance industry is highly competitive, and there is significant competition in the national workers' compensation industry that is based on price and quality of services. We compete with other specialty workers' compensation carriers, state agencies, multi-line insurance companies, professional employer organizations, self-insurance funds, and state insurance pools. As a result of these competitive conditions, pricing on our renewals showed an overall price decrease of 5.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus the rate level in effect on such business a year earlier.
On July 31, 2019, we acquired (the Acquisition) PartnerRe Insurance Company of New York (PRNY) from Partner Reinsurance Company of the U.S. (PRUS). We funded the Acquisition with cash on hand. The purchase price was equal to the sum of: (i) $47.6 million, the amount of statutory capital and surplus of PRNY at closing; and (ii) $5.8 million. We did not acquire any employees or ongoing business operations pursuant to the Acquisition.
Pursuant to the purchase agreement, all liabilities and obligations of PRNY existing as of the closing date, whether known or unknown, will be indemnified by PRUS. In addition, PartnerRe Ltd., the parent company of PRUS, has provided us with a guaranty that unconditionally, absolutely and irrevocably guarantees the full and prompt payment and performance by PRUS of all of its obligations, liabilities and indemnities under the purchase agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby. If PRUS and PartnerRe Ltd. were to fail to honor their obligations to us under the purchase agreement, all or a portion of the remaining gross loss and LAE reserves acquired by us pursuant to the Acquisition would become our responsibility.
Subsequent to completing the Acquisition, PRNY was renamed CIC.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Impacts
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic we experienced strong new business opportunities, as evidenced by record levels of submissions, quotes, and binds. As a result of the abrupt and severe economic impacts attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic, the number of new insurance submissions, quotes, and binds we received decreased significantly in the latter half of March 2020 and that trend largely continued through May 2020. Since then, as many businesses began to reopen, we have experienced year-over-year increases in new business submissions and new policies bound in nearly all of the states in which we operate, with the notable exception of California. Despite the increases in new non-California business policies that we experienced in 2020, our new business premium has fallen, driven primarily by significant declines in policy size and declines in policies with annual premiums greater than $25,000.
We currently expect that our in-force premiums will remain suppressed, as compared to that experienced in recent years, until such time as our insureds and businesses can resume their operations at a more normalized rate, and increase staffing and
payrolls accordingly. Although our new business growth, as defined by number of policies added, has been strong, it has been insufficient to offset the decline in premiums that we experienced in 2020.
Our renewal business remained strong throughout 2020.
We continually review and adjust to changes in our policyholders' payrolls, economic conditions, and seasonality, as experience develops or new information becomes known. Any such adjustments are included in our current operations. Approximately 25% of our current payroll exposure, including that associated with policies generated by our largest payroll partners, is considered to be “pay as you go,” where the associated premium collected from policyholder is adjusted in real-time based on changes in the underlying payroll. For all other policyholders, payroll adjustments are made periodically through mid-term endorsements and/or premium audits. We reduced our final audit premium accruals by approximately $35.0 million, to zero, for the year ended December 31, 2020 to reflect our estimate of the exposure adjustments on our in-force policies that we expect have resulted, and will result from the impact of economic contraction.
We have been fully functional since we closed our buildings to employees and the general public in March 2020, and it is expected that our business can remain fully functional while our employees work-from-home for an indefinite period of time. As a result of the effectiveness of our work-from-home transition, we have begun to reduce our real estate footprint by terminating or non-renewing certain operating leases.
We are taking precautions to protect the safety and well-being of our employees while providing uninterrupted service to our policyholders and claimants. However, no assurance can be given that these actions will be sufficient, nor can we predict the level of disruption that will occur should the COVID-19 pandemic and its related macro-economic risks continue for an extended period of time. Additional information regarding risks and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic to our business, financial condition, and results of operations are set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
We formally analyze the goodwill that we carry on our Consolidated Balance Sheets for impairment in the fourth quarter of each year and, as of December 31, 2020, our formal analysis determined that no impairment was necessary in accordance with ASC 350-20-35-23.
During 2020, our fair value, as measured by our market capitalization, decreased significantly as a result of investor concerns about potential adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. A further decline in our fair value, as measured by our market capitalization or otherwise, and/or any other relevant developments, could constitute a triggering event that could lead us to impair the valuation of all or a portion of our goodwill. As of December 31, 2020, the carrying value of our goodwill was $36.2 million.
Results of Operations
Our results of operations for the three year period ending December 31, 2020 are as follows:
Overview
Our net income was $119.8 million, $157.1 million, and $141.3 million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The key areas that affected our financial performance during those years included:
•Net premiums earned decreased 11.6% in 2020 and 4.8% in 2019, each compared to the previous year;
•Losses and LAE decreased 17.4% in 2020 and 2.9% in 2019, each compared to the previous year;
•Underwriting and general and administrative expenses decreased 3.3% in 2020 and increased 18.3% in 2019, each compared to the previous year;
•Net investment income decreased 13.4% in 2020 and increased 8.5% in 2019, each compared to the previous year; and
•Net realized and unrealized gains (losses) on investments were $19.0 million, $51.1 million, and $(13.1) million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Summary of Consolidated Financial Results
Gross Premiums Written
Gross premiums written were $580.1 million, $696.9 million, and $748.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Period over period changes in gross premiums earned during 2020, 2019 and 2018 were primarily related to our Employers segment. See -Summary of Financial Results by Segment -Employers.
Net Premiums Written
Net premiums written are gross premiums written less reinsurance premiums ceded.
Net Premiums Earned
Net premiums earned are primarily a function of the amount and timing of net premiums previously written.
Net Investment Income and Net Realized and Unrealized Gains (Losses) on Investments
We invest in fixed maturity securities, equity securities, other invested assets, short-term investments, and cash equivalents. Net investment income includes interest and dividends earned on our invested assets and amortization of premiums and discounts on our fixed maturity securities, less bank service charges and custodial and portfolio management fees. We have established a high quality/short duration bias in our investment portfolio.
Net investment income was $76.3 million, $88.1 million, and $81.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due to lower bond yields and a sharp increase in the amortization of bond premiums associated with our residential mortgage-backed securities, which was caused by an acceleration of near-term mortgage loan prepayment speed assumptions during the year. The increase in 2019 was primarily due to an increase in the allocation and yield of bank loans and other invested assets. The average pre-tax ending book yield on our invested assets was 3.0%, 3.3%, and 3.4% at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The average ending tax-equivalent yield on our invested assets (which adjusts the book yield of our investments in tax-advantaged securities to an equivalent pre-tax book yield) was 3.1% at December 31, 2020 and 3.5% at both December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Realized and certain unrealized gains and losses on our investments are reported separately from our net investment income. Realized gains and losses on investments include the gain or loss on a security at the time of sale compared to its original or adjusted cost (equity securities) or amortized cost (fixed maturity securities). Realized losses are also recognized for changes in our expected credit loss allowance or when securities are written down as a result of an other-than-temporary impairment. Changes in fair value of equity securities and other invested assets are also included in Net realized and unrealized gains (losses) on investments on our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income.
Net realized and unrealized gains (losses) on investments were $19.0 million, $51.1 million, and $(13.1) million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Net realized and unrealized gains on investments in 2020 included $15.8 million of net realized and unrealized gains on equity securities, $4.5 million of net realized gains on fixed maturity securities and short-term investments, and $1.3 million of unrealized losses on other invested assets. The net investment gains on our equity securities were largely consistent with the performance of U.S. equity markets. The net investment gains on our fixed maturity securities were primarily the result of decreases in market interest rates. The net investment gains on our fixed maturity securities were reduced by a $0.7 million allowance for expected credit losses. Net realized and unrealized gains on investments in 2019 included $46.5 million of net realized and unrealized gains on equity securities, $3.9 million of net realized gains on fixed maturity securities, and $0.7 million of unrealized gains on other invested assets. The net investments gains on our equity securities were largely consistent with the performance of U.S. equity markets. The net investment gains on our fixed maturity securities were primarily related to sales associated with a reallocation of our investment portfolio. Net realized and unrealized losses on investments in 2018
included $11.3 million of net realized and unrealized losses on equity securities and $1.8 million of net realized losses on fixed maturity securities. The net investment losses on our equity securities were primarily the result of volatility in equity markets. The net investment losses on our fixed maturity securities were primarily related to the sales associated with a reallocation of our investment portfolio, offset by $3.3 million in other-than-temporary impairments of certain fixed maturity securities due to our intent to sell the securities. Additional information regarding our Investments is set forth under "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Investments" and Note 5 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other Income
Other income consists of net gains and losses on fixed assets, non-investment interest, installment fee revenue, and other miscellaneous income.
Losses and LAE
Losses and LAE represents our largest expense item and includes claim payments made, amortization of the Deferred Gain, LPT Reserve Adjustments, LPT Contingent Commission Adjustments, estimates for future claim payments and changes in those estimates for current and prior periods, and costs associated with investigating, defending, and adjusting claims. The quality of our financial reporting depends in large part on accurately predicting our losses and LAE, which are inherently uncertain as they are estimates of the ultimate cost of individual claims based on actuarial estimation techniques.
Our indemnity claims frequency (the number of claims expressed as a percentage of payroll) decreased year-over-year in 2020 and 2019, while medical and indemnity costs per claim increased over the same period. However, we recognized the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the potential for further expansions or permanent extensions of presumed compensability of COVID-19 in certain jurisdictions. These trends and considerations are reflected in our current accident year loss estimate. Total claims costs have also been reduced by cost savings associated with increased claims settlement activity that continued through 2020. We believe our current accident year loss estimate is adequate; however, ultimate losses will not be known with any certainty for many years. We assume that increasing medical and indemnity cost trends will continue to impact our long-term claims costs, which may be offset by rate increases. Additional information regarding our reserves for losses and LAE is set forth under "-Critical Accounting Policies -Reserves for Losses and LAE." See also, "-Summary of Financial Results by Segment -Employers."
Commission Expenses
Commission expenses include direct commissions to our agents and brokers, including our partnerships and alliances, for the premiums that they produce for us, as well as incentive payments, other marketing costs, and fees. See "-Summary of Financial Results by Segment -Employers."
Underwriting and General and Administrative Expenses
Underwriting expenses represent those costs that we incur to underwrite and maintain the insurance policies we issue, excluding commissions. Direct underwriting expenses, such as premium taxes, policyholder dividends, and those expenses that vary directly with the production of new or renewal business, are recognized as the associated premiums are earned. Indirect underwriting expenses, such as the operating expenses of each of the Company's subsidiaries, do not vary directly with the production of new or renewal business and are recognized as incurred.
General and administrative expenses of the holding company are excluded in determining the underwriting expense ratios of our reportable segments.
Interest and Financing Expenses
Interest and financing expenses include credit facility fees, surplus notes interest, letter of credit fees, finance lease interest, and other financing fees.
Other Expenses
As a result of the effectiveness of our work-from-home transition, in 2020 we began to reduce our real estate footprint and closed and vacated various office locations. Accordingly, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded charges of $0.8 million related to the abandonment of certain operating leases.
Income Tax Expense
On January 1, 2000, EICN assumed the assets, liabilities, and operations of the Fund pursuant to legislation passed in the 1999 Nevada Legislature (the Privatization). Prior to the Privatization, the Fund was part of the State of Nevada and therefore was not subject to federal income tax. Accordingly, our pre-Privatization loss and LAE reserve adjustments, LPT Reserve Adjustments and Deferred Gain amortization impact our net income but do not change our taxable income.
Income tax expense was $27.9 million, $36.7 million, and $28.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, representing effective tax rates of 18.9%, 18.9%, and 16.6% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Tax-advantaged investment income, LPT Reserve Adjustments, LPT Contingent Commission Adjustments, Deferred Gain amortization and certain other adjustments reduced our income tax expense computed at a statutory rate of 21% by $3.1 million, $4.0 million, and $7.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
For additional information regarding our income tax expense see Note 8 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Summary of Financial Results by Segment
EMPLOYERS
The components of Employers' net income before income taxes are set forth in the following table:
Underwriting Results
Gross Premiums Written
Gross premiums written were $579.8 million, $696.8 million, and $748.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The decrease in 2020 was primarily driven by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including higher levels of unemployment and declines in payrolls for many of our insureds, upon which our premiums are based, particularly in our restaurant and hospitality classes. We reduced our final audit accruals by approximately $35.0 million during the year, to zero, to reflect our estimate of the exposure adjustments on our in-force policies that we expect have resulted and will result from the impact of economic contraction. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic we experienced strong new business opportunities, as evidenced by record levels of submissions, quotes, and binds. As a result of the abrupt and severe economic impacts attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic, the number of new insurance submissions, quotes, and binds we received decreased significantly in the latter half of March 2020 and that trend largely continued through May 2020. Since then, as many businesses began to reopen, we have experienced year-over-year increases in new business submissions and new policies bound in nearly all of the states in which we operate, with the notable exception of California. Despite the increases in new non-California business policies that we experienced in 2020, our new business premium has fallen, driven primarily by significant declines in policy size and declines in policies with annual premiums greater than $25,000. Additionally, year-over-year decreases in average rates in many of the states in which we do business further impacted our gross premiums written during the year. The decrease in 2019 was primarily due to decreases in final audit premiums and average rates, as well as declines in
new business premiums written in California, partially offset by increases in renewal premiums written across all of our markets.
Net Premiums Written
Net premiums written were $574.6 million, $691.4 million, and $742.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, which included $5.2 million, $5.4 million, and $6.1 million of reinsurance premiums ceded, respectively.
Net Premiums Earned
Net premiums earned were $615.1 million, $695.8 million, and $731.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
The following table shows the percentage change in Employers' in-force premiums, policy count, average policy size, and payroll exposure upon which our premiums are based as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, overall, for California, where 45% of our premiums were generated, and for all other states, excluding California:
Losses and LAE, Commission Expenses, and Underwriting Expenses
The following table presents calendar year combined ratios for our Employers segment.
Loss and LAE Ratio. We analyze our loss and LAE ratios on both a calendar year and accident year basis.
The calendar year loss and LAE ratio is calculated by dividing the losses and LAE recorded during the calendar year, regardless of when the underlying insured event occurred, by the net premiums earned during that calendar year. The calendar year loss and LAE ratio includes changes made during the calendar year in reserves for losses and LAE established for insured events occurring in the current and prior years. The calendar year loss and LAE ratio for a particular year will not change in future periods.
The accident year loss and LAE ratio is calculated by dividing cumulative losses and LAE for reported events that occurred during a particular year by the net premiums earned for that year. The accident year loss and LAE ratio for a particular year can decrease or increase when recalculated in subsequent periods as the reserves established for insured events occurring during that year develop favorably or unfavorably. The accident year loss and LAE ratio is based on our statutory financial statements and is not derived from our GAAP financial information.
We analyze our calendar year loss and LAE ratio to measure our profitability in a particular year and to evaluate the adequacy of our premium rates charged in a particular year to cover expected losses and LAE from all periods, including development (whether favorable or unfavorable) of reserves established in prior periods. In contrast, we analyze our accident year loss and LAE ratios to evaluate our underwriting performance and the adequacy of the premium rates we charged in a particular year in relation to ultimate losses and LAE from insured events occurring during that year. The loss and LAE ratios provided in this report are on a calendar year basis, except where they are expressly identified as accident year loss and LAE ratios.
The table below reflects prior accident year loss and LAE reserve adjustments and the impact to loss ratio.
The decrease in our losses and LAE from 2019 to 2020 was primarily attributable to increased favorable prior accident year loss development of $81.6 million. Favorable prior accident year loss development in 2020 was primarily the result of our determination that adjustments were necessary to reflect observed favorable paid loss trends for accident years 2018 and prior due to decreasing medical costs, partially offset by $13.3 million of adverse development on accident year 2019 due, in part, to an inability to fully execute our claims initiatives to reduce loss costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease in our losses and LAE from 2018 to 2019 was primarily attributable to increased favorable prior accident year loss development of $77.5 million, partially offset by an increase in our current accident year loss estimate. Favorable prior accident year loss development in 2019 was the result of our determination that adjustments were necessary to reflect observed favorable paid loss trends, primarily for the 2014 through 2017 accident years, which had been impacted by our internal initiatives to reduce loss costs, including the accelerated claims settlement activity that began in 2014 and that continued through 2019.
The decrease in our current accident year loss and LAE estimate in 2020 was primarily due to a reduction in payroll exposure and a decline in indemnity claim frequency. The increase in our current accident year loss estimate in 2019 was primarily due to the impact of increased competitive pressures and resulting price decreases across most of our markets. Our current accident year loss and LAE ratio continues to reflect the impact of key business initiatives, including: an emphasis on the accelerated settlement of open claims, despite the delay in 2020; diversifying our risk exposure across geographic markets; and leveraging data-driven strategies to target, underwrite, and price profitable classes of business across all of our markets.
Commission Expense Ratio. The commission expense ratio was 12.8%, 12.7%, and 12.9%, and our commission expenses were $78.8 million, $88.1 million, and $94.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The increase in the commission expense ratio for 2020 was primarily the result of a higher concentration of alternative distribution channels, which is subject to a higher commission rate, and increased commission expense on new business writings. The decrease in the commission expense ratio for 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily the result of decreases in 2019 agency incentive commissions, which were directly impacted by decreases in premiums written.
Underwriting Expense Ratio. The underwriting expense ratio was 24.6%, 22.0%, and 18.5%, and our underwriting expenses were $151.1 million, $153.2 million, and $135.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, professional fees decreased $3.6 million and travel expenses decreased $2.0 million, partially offset by an increase in depreciation and amortization of $3.2 million, each compared to 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our information technology related expense increased $4.9 million, our professional fees increased $6.0 million, and our compensation-related expenses increased $4.3 million, each as compared to 2018. These increases were largely the result of our continued development and implementation of new digital technologies and capabilities. Additionally, our bad debt expense increased $3.5 million compared to 2018, mainly as a result of an increase in the amount of premiums receivable relating to 2018 policy year final audits that were deemed uncollectible in 2019.
Underwriting Income
Underwriting income for our Employers segment was $71.0 million, $75.9 million, and $110.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Underwriting income or loss is determined by deducting losses and LAE, commission expense, and underwriting expenses from net premiums earned.
Non-Underwriting Income and Expenses
For a further discussion of non-underwriting related income and expenses, including Net Investment Income and Net Realized and Unrealized Gains on Investments, Other Income, Interest and Financing Expenses, and Other Expenses, see "-Results of Operations -Summary of Consolidated Financial Results."
CERITY
The components of Cerity's net loss before income taxes are set forth in the following table:
Underwriting Results
Gross Premiums Written and Net Premiums Written
Gross premiums written and net premiums written were $0.3 million and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cerity had no premium writings prior to 2019.
Net Premiums Earned
Net premiums earned were $0.2 million and less than $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Underwriting Expenses
Underwriting expenses for our Cerity segment were $16.6 million, $16.0 million, and $5.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, professional fees increased $2.4 million, partially offset by a decrease in depreciation and amortization of $0.8 million and a decrease in compensation-related expenses of $0.7 million, each as compared to 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, compensation-related expenses increased $3.7 million, information technology related expenses increased $3.6 million, and advertising expenses increased $1.5 million, each as compared to 2018. These year-over-year increases were related to the launch of Cerity and the development of its direct-to-customer platform.
Underwriting Loss
Underwriting losses for our Cerity segment were $16.5 million, $16.0 million, and $5.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Underwriting income or loss is determined by deducting losses and LAE, commission expense, and underwriting expenses from net premiums earned.
Non-Underwriting Income and Expenses
For a further discussion of non-underwriting related income and expenses, including Net Investment Income and Net Realized and Unrealized Gains on Investments, Other Income, and Other Expenses, see "-Results of Operations -Summary of Consolidated Financial Results Consolidated."
CORPORATE AND OTHER
The components of Corporate and Other's net income (loss) before income taxes are set forth in the following table:
Losses and LAE - LPT
The table below reflects the impact of the LPT on Losses and LAE, which are recorded as a reduction to Losses and LAE incurred on our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income.
(1)LPT Reserve Adjustments result in a cumulative adjustment to the Deferred Gain, which is recognized in losses and LAE incurred on our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income, such that the Deferred Gain reflects the balance that would have existed had the revised reserves been recognized at the inception of the LPT Agreement. (See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.)
(2)LPT Contingent Commission Adjustments result in a cumulative adjustment to the Deferred Gain, which is recognized in losses and LAE incurred on our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income, such that the Deferred Gain reflects the balance that would have existed had the revised contingent profit commission been recognized at the inception of the LPT Agreement. (See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.)
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of compensation related expenses, professional fees, and other corporate expenses at the holding company level. General and administrative expenses were $13.6 million, $18.3 million, and $17.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our compensation-related expenses decreased $3.2 million, due primarily to lower incentive compensation accruals, and our professional fees decreased $0.9 million, each as compared to 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our professional fees increased $0.5 million, and our compensation-related expenses increased $0.2 million, each as compared to 2018.
Non-Underwriting Income and Expenses
For a further discussion of non-underwriting related income and expenses, including Net Investment Income, Net Realized and Unrealized Gains and Losses on Investments, and Interest and Financing Expenses, see "-Results of Operations -Summary of Consolidated Financial Results."
Liquidity and Capital Resources
COVID-19 Considerations
The impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the U.S. economy, our current operations and our investment portfolio have been significant. Nonetheless we believe that the liquidity available to our holding company and its operating subsidiaries remains
adequate and we do not currently foresee a need to: (i) suspend ordinary dividends, or forgo repurchases of our common stock; (ii) seek a capital infusion; or (iii) seek any material non-investment asset sales. Furthermore, the holding company has no outstanding debt obligations and its operating subsidiaries have no interest-bearing debt obligations.
Holding Company Liquidity
We are a holding company and our ability to fund our operations is contingent upon existing capital and the ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends up to the holding company. Payment of dividends by our insurance subsidiaries is restricted by state insurance laws and regulations, including laws establishing minimum solvency and liquidity thresholds. We require cash to pay stockholder dividends, repurchase common stock, provide additional surplus to our insurance subsidiaries, and fund our operating expenses.
Our insurance subsidiaries' ability to pay dividends to their parent is based on reported capital, surplus, and dividends paid within the prior 12 months. For 2021, EICN cannot pay any dividends through March 20, 2021 without prior regulatory approval, and $12.5 million thereafter; ECIC cannot pay any dividends through September 24, 2021 without prior regulatory approval, and $32.1 million thereafter; EPIC can pay $1.3 million through May 11, 2021, and $23.0 million thereafter, without prior regulatory approval; EAC can pay $0.3 million of dividends through June 30, 2021, and $21.1 million thereafter, without prior regulatory approval; and CIC cannot pay dividends without prior regulatory approval until July 31, 2021, and $3.0 million thereafter.
Total cash and investments at the holding company were $22.4 million at December 31, 2020, consisting of $11.0 million of cash and cash equivalents, $11.0 million of fixed maturity securities, and $0.4 million of equity securities.
On December 15, 2020, EHI entered into a Credit Agreement (the Credit Agreement) with a syndicate of financial institutions. The Credit Agreement provides EHI with a $75.0 million three-year revolving credit facility. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement may be used for working capital and general corporate purposes. Pursuant to the Credit Agreement, EHI has the option to request an increase of the credit available under the facility, up to a maximum facility amount of $125.0 million, subject to the consent of lenders and the satisfaction of certain conditions. There were no borrowings under the Credit Agreement at December 31, 2020.
The interest rates applicable to loans under the Credit Agreement are generally based on a base rate plus a specified margin, ranging from 0.25% to 1.25%, or the Eurodollar rate (which will convert to an alternative reference rate once LIBOR is discontinued) plus a specified margin, ranging from 1.25% to 2.25%. No interest was paid during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Credit Agreement contains covenants that require us to maintain: (i) a minimum consolidated net worth of no less than 70% of our stockholders’ equity as of September 30, 2020, plus 50% of our aggregate net income thereafter; and (ii) a debt to total capitalization ratio of no more than 35%, in each case as determined in accordance with the Credit Agreement.
Operating Subsidiaries' Liquidity
The primary sources of cash for our operating subsidiaries, which include our insurance and other operating subsidiaries, are premium collections, investment income, sales and maturities of investments, proceeds from FHLB advances, and reinsurance recoveries. The primary uses of cash for our operating subsidiaries are payments of losses and LAE, commission expenses, underwriting and general and administrative expenses, ceded reinsurance, repayments of FHLB advances, investment purchases and dividends paid to their parent.
Total cash and investments held by our operating subsidiaries was $2,895.4 million at December 31, 2020, consisting of $149.6 million of cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash, $2,468.2 million of fixed maturity securities, $214.8 million of equity securities, $26.6 million of short-term investments, and $36.2 million of other invested assets. Sources of immediate and unencumbered liquidity at our operating subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020 consisted of $149.5 million of cash and cash equivalents, $208.1 million of publicly-traded equity securities whose proceeds are available within three business days, $975.8 million of highly liquid fixed maturity securities whose proceeds are available within three business days, and $26.6 million of short-term investments whose proceeds are available within three business days. We believe that our subsidiaries' liquidity needs over the next 24 months will be met with cash from operations, investment income, and maturing investments.
EICN, ECIC, EPIC, and EAC are members of the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco (FHLB). Membership allows our subsidiaries access to collateralized advances, which may be used to support and enhance liquidity management. The amount of advances that may be taken is dependent on statutory admitted assets on a per company basis.
During the second quarter of 2020, the FHLB announced its Zero Interest Recovery Advance Program (the FHLB Advance Program). The FHLB Advance Program is a zero percent interest, six-month or one-year credit product that members can use to provide immediate relief to property owners, businesses, and other customers struggling with the financial impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Each member was allocated up to $10.0 million in advances under the FHLB Advance Program.
On May 11, 2020, our insurance subsidiaries received a total of $35.0 million of advances under the FHLB Advance Program. The advances were secured by collateral previously pledged to the FHLB by our insurance subsidiaries in support of our existing collateralized advance facility, which has been reduced by the amount of these outstanding advances. Our insurance subsidiaries repaid $15.0 million on November 4, 2020. The remaining advances are required to be repaid to the FHLB by May 11, 2021 in the amount of $20.0 million.
FHLB membership also allows our insurance subsidiaries access to Letter of Credit Agreements and on March 9, 2018, ECIC, EPIC, and EAC entered into Letter of Credit Agreements with the FHLB. On March 1, 2019, FHLB and ECIC amended its Letter of Credit Agreement to increase its credit amount and on March 2, 2020, the FHLB and EAC and EPIC each amended their Letter of Credit Agreements to increase their respective credit amounts. On May 5, 2020, the FHLB and ECIC amended its Letter of Credit Agreement to decrease its credit amount. The amended Letter of Credit Agreements are between the FHLB and each of EAC, in the amount of $80.0 million, ECIC, in the amount of $70.0 million, and EPIC, in the amount of $125.0 million. The amended Letter of Credit Agreements will expire March 31, 2021. The Letter of Credit Agreements may only be used to satisfy, in whole or in part, insurance deposit requirements with the State of California and are fully secured with eligible collateral at all times (See Note 11 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements).
We purchase reinsurance to protect us against the costs of severe claims and catastrophic events, including pandemics. On July 1, 2020, we entered into a new reinsurance program that is effective through June 30, 2021. The reinsurance program consists of one treaty covering excess of loss and catastrophic loss events in four layers of coverage. Our reinsurance coverage is $190.0 million in excess of our $10.0 million retention on a per occurrence basis, subject to certain exclusions. We believe that our reinsurance program meets our needs and that we are sufficiently capitalized. We further believe that we will not trigger a recovery under our current excess of loss reinsurance program in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our insurance subsidiaries are required by law to maintain a certain minimum level of surplus on a statutory basis. Surplus is calculated by subtracting total liabilities from total admitted assets. The amount of capital in our insurance subsidiaries is maintained relative to standardized capital adequacy measures such as risk-based capital (RBC), as established by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. The RBC standard was designed to provide a measure by which regulators can assess the adequacy of an insurance company's capital and surplus relative to its operations. An insurance company must maintain capital and surplus of at least 200% of RBC. Each of our insurance subsidiaries had total adjusted capital in excess of the minimum RBC requirements that correspond to any level of regulatory action at December 31, 2020.
Various state laws and regulations require us to hold investment securities or letters of credit on deposit with certain states in which we do business. Securities having a fair value of $768.7 million and $844.9 million were on deposit at each of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These laws and regulations govern both the amount and types of investment securities that are eligible for deposit. Additionally, standby letters of credit from the FHLB have been issued in lieu of $275.0 million and $260.0 million of securities on deposit at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Certain reinsurance contracts require company funds to be held in trust for the benefit of the ceding reinsurer to secure the outstanding liabilities we assumed. The fair value of fixed maturity securities held in trust for the benefit of our ceding reinsurers was $3.2 million and $2.9 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Sources of Liquidity
We monitor the cash flows of each of our subsidiaries individually, as well as collectively as a consolidated group. We use trend and variance analyses to project future cash needs, making adjustments to our forecasts as appropriate.
The table below shows our net cash flows. For additional information regarding our cash flows, see Item 8, Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 included net premiums received of $624.6 million and investment income received of $87.2 million. These operating cash inflows were partially offset by net claims payments of $402.6 million, underwriting and general and administrative expenses paid of $171.3 million, commissions paid of $85.7 million, and federal income taxes paid of $18.5 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2019 included net premiums received of $746.2 million, investment income received of $98.5 million, and cash received of $19.1 million for the LPT Contingent Commission. These operating cash inflows were partially offset by net claims payments of $403.3 million, underwriting and general and administrative expenses paid of $184.8 million, commissions paid of $95.1 million, and federal income taxes paid of $37.8 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2018 included net premiums received of $745.9 million and investment income received of $91.1 million. These operating cash inflows were partially offset by net claims payments of $416.4 million, underwriting and general and administrative expenses paid of $142.1 million, and commissions paid of $92.6 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities in 2020 was primarily related to sales, maturities, and redemptions of investments whose proceeds were used to fund claims payments, underwriting and general and administrative expenses, stockholder dividend payments, and common stock repurchases, partially offset by the investment of premiums received and reinvestment of funds from investment sales, maturities, redemptions, and interest income.
Net cash provided by investing activities in 2019 was primarily related to sales, maturities, and redemptions of investments whose proceeds were used to fund the acquisition of CIC, claims payments, underwriting and general and administrative expenses, stockholder dividend payments, debt repayment, and common stock repurchases, partially offset by the investment of premiums received and reinvestment of funds from investment sales, maturities, redemptions, and interest income.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2018 was primarily related to the investment of premiums received and the reinvestment of funds from maturities, redemptions, and interest income. These investing cash outflows were partially offset by investment sales whose proceeds were used to fund claims payments, underwriting and general and administrative expenses, stockholder dividend payments, and for common stock repurchases.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 included common stock repurchases and stockholder dividend payments, partially offset by net cash received from the FHLB Advance Program.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2019 included common stock repurchases, the redemption of notes payable, and stockholder dividend payments.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2018 included common stock repurchases and stockholder dividend payments.
Dividends. We paid $30.8 million, $28.9 million, and $26.7 million in dividends to our stockholders in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The declaration and payment of future dividends to common stockholders will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend upon many factors, including our financial position, capital requirements of our operating subsidiaries, legal and regulatory requirements, and any other factors our Board of Directors deems relevant. On February 17, 2021, the Board of Directors declared a $0.25 dividend per share, payable March 17, 2021, to stockholders of record on March 3, 2021.
Repurchases of Common Stock. We repurchased $99.8 million, $67.1 million and $4.6 million of our common stock in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Future repurchases of our common stock will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend upon many factors, including our financial position, capital requirements of our operating subsidiaries, general business and social economic conditions, legal, tax, regulatory, and/or contractual restrictions, and any other factors our Board of Directors deems relevant. As of December 31, 2020, we had a remaining common stock repurchase authorization of $28.5 million. See Item 5, Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.
Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, the capital resources available to us consisted of $1,212.8 million of stockholders' equity and the $125.4 million Deferred Gain.
Stockholders' Equity. The following table summarizes our beginning and ending stockholders' equity balance and the changes thereto for each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Deferred Gain. The Deferred Gain, which totaled $125.4 million and $137.1 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, reflects the unamortized gain from the LPT Agreement. See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table identifies our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020.
(1)Estimated losses and LAE reserve payment patterns have been computed based on historical information. Our calculation of loss and LAE reserve payments by period is subject to the same uncertainties associated with determining the level of reserves and to the additional uncertainties arising from the difficulty of predicting when claims (including claims that have not yet been reported to us) will be paid. For a discussion of our reserving process, see ''-Critical Accounting Policies-Reserves for Losses and LAE.'' Actual payments of losses and LAE by period will vary, perhaps materially, from the above table to the extent that current estimates of losses and LAE reserves vary from actual ultimate claims amounts due to variations between expected and actual payout patterns.
(2)The unpaid losses and LAE reserves are presented gross of reinsurance recoverables for unpaid losses, which were as follows for each of the periods presented above:
Investments
Our investment portfolio is structured to support our need for: (i) optimizing our risk-adjusted total return; (ii) providing adequate liquidity; (iii) facilitating financial strength and stability; and (iv) ensuring regulatory and legal compliance.
As of December 31, 2020, the total cost and amortized cost of our investments recorded at fair value was $2,472.5 million and its fair value was $2,714.3 million. These investments provide a steady source of income, which may fluctuate with changes in interest rates and our current investment strategies.
Our Investment Managers follow our written investment guidelines, which are approved by the Finance Committee of the
Board of Directors. Our asset allocation is reevaluated by management and reviewed by the Finance Committee of the Board of Directors on a quarterly basis. We also utilize our Investment Managers' investment advisory services to assist us in developing a tailored set of portfolio targets and objectives.
As of December 31, 2020, our investment portfolio consisted of 90% fixed maturity securities. We strive to limit the interest rate risk associated with fixed maturity investments by managing the duration of these securities. Our fixed maturity securities (excluding cash and cash equivalents) had a duration of 3.2 at December 31, 2020. To minimize interest rate risk, our portfolio is weighted toward short-term and intermediate-term bonds; however, our investment strategy balances consideration of duration, yield, and credit risk. Our investment guidelines require that the minimum weighted average quality of our fixed maturity securities portfolio be "A+," using ratings assigned by S&P or an equivalent rating assigned by another nationally recognized statistical rating agency. Our fixed maturity securities portfolio had a weighted average quality of "A+" as of December 31, 2020, with 50.2% of the portfolio rated "AA" or better, based on market value. Other securities within fixed maturity securities consist of bank loans, which are classified as AFS and are reported at fair value.
Our investment portfolio also contains equity securities. We strive to limit the exposure to equity price risk associated with publicly traded equity securities by diversifying our holdings across several industry sectors. These equity securities had a fair value of $208.5 million at December 31, 2020, which represented 8% of our investment portfolio at that time. We also have a $6.7 million investment in FHLB stock which we record at cost. We receive periodic dividends from the FHLB for this investment, when declared, which can vary from period to period.
Our Other invested assets made up 1% of our investment portfolio at December 31, 2020 and include private equity limited partnerships and convertible preferred shares of real estate investment trusts. Our investments in private equity limited partnerships totaled $16.2 million at December 31, 2020 and are generally not redeemable by the investees and cannot be sold without prior approval of the general partner. These investments have a fund term of 10 to 12 years, subject to two or three one-year extensions at the general partner's discretion. We expect to receive distributions of proceeds from dividends and interest from fund investments, as well as from the disposition of a fund investment or portion thereof, from time-to-time during the full course of the fund term. As of December 31, 2020, we had unfunded commitments to these private equity limited partnerships totaling $63.8 million. Our investments in convertible preferred shares of real estate investment trusts totaled $20.0 million at December 31, 2020 and are non-redeemable until conversion and are periodically evaluated for impairment based on the ultimate recovery of the investment.
We believe that our current asset allocation meets our strategy to preserve capital for claims and policy liabilities and to provide sufficient capital resources to support and grow our ongoing insurance operations.
The following table shows the estimated fair value, the percentage of the fair value to total invested assets, the average ending book yield, and the average ending tax equivalent yield (each based on the book value of each category of invested assets) as of December 31, 2020.
(1)Computed using a statutory income tax rate of 21%.
The following table shows the percentage of total estimated fair value of our fixed maturity securities as of December 31, 2020 by credit rating category, using the lower of the ratings assigned by Moody's Investors Service or S&P.
Investments that we currently own could be subject to default by the issuer. We regularly assess individual securities as part of our ongoing portfolio management, including the identification of credit related losses. Our assessment includes reviewing the extent of declines in fair value of investments below amortized cost, historical and projected financial performance and near-term prospects of the issuer, the outlook for industry sectors, credit rating, and macro-economic changes, including those caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. We also make a determination as to whether it is not more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before its fair value recovers to above cost, or maturity.
In addition to recognizing realized gains and losses upon the disposition of an investment security, we also recognize: (i) in 2020, realized gains or losses on AFS debt securities for changes in expected credit losses; or (ii) prior to 2020, realized losses when securities are written down as a result of other-than-temporary impairment. We recognized $0.7 million of expected credit losses on AFS debt securities during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was due to COVID-19 impacts. We recognized no other-than-temporary impairments on fixed maturity securities during the year ended December 31, 2019. We recognized impairments on fixed maturity securities of $3.3 million (consisting of sixty-six securities) during the year ended December 31, 2018. The other-than-temporary impairments recognized during this year was the result of our intent to sell these securities and/or the severity of the change in fair values of these securities. The remaining fixed maturity securities whose total fair value was less than amortized cost at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, were those in which we had no intent, need or requirement to sell at an amount less than their amortized cost.
For additional information regarding our investments, including the cost or amortized cost, gross unrealized gains, gross unrealized losses, and estimated fair value of our investments, the amortized cost and estimated fair value of fixed maturity securities by contractual maturity, and net realized and unrealized gains (losses) on investments, see Note 5 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires both the use of estimates and judgment, relative to the application of appropriate accounting policies. Our accounting policies are described in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements, but we believe that the following matters are particularly important to understand our financial statements because changes in these estimates or changes in the assumptions used to make them could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows.
Reserves for Losses and LAE
Accounting for workers' compensation insurance requires us to estimate the liability for the expected ultimate cost of unpaid losses and LAE (loss reserves) as of a balance sheet date. Loss reserve estimates are inherently uncertain because the ultimate amount we pay for many of the claims we have incurred as of the balance sheet date will not be known for many years. Our estimate of loss reserves is intended to equal the difference between the expected ultimate losses and LAE of all claims that have occurred as of a balance sheet date and amounts already paid. We establish loss reserves based on our own analysis of emerging claims experience and environmental conditions in our markets and review of the results of various actuarial projections. Our aggregate carried loss reserves is the sum of our reserves for each accident year and represents our best estimate of outstanding loss reserves.
The amount by which estimated losses in the aggregate differ from those previously estimated for a specific time period is known as reserve "development." Reserve development is unfavorable when losses ultimately settle for more than the amount estimated or subsequent estimates indicate a basis for reserve increases, causing the previously estimated loss reserves to be ''deficient.'' Reserve development is favorable when estimates of ultimate losses indicate a decrease in established reserves,
causing the previously estimated loss reserves to be ''redundant.'' Development is reflected in our operating results through an adjustment to incurred losses and LAE during the period in which it is recognized.
Although claims for which reserves are established may not be paid for several years or more, we do not discount loss reserves in our financial statements for the time value of money, in accordance with GAAP.
The three main components of our loss reserves are case reserves, incurred but not reported (IBNR) loss reserves, and LAE reserves.
When claims are reported to us, we establish individual estimates of the ultimate cost of each claim (case reserves). These case reserves are continually monitored and revised in response to new information and for amounts paid.
In addition to case reserves, we establish a provision for IBNR. IBNR is an actuarial estimate comprised of the following: (a) future payments on claims that are incurred but have not yet been reported to us; (b) a reserve for the additional development on claims that have been reported to us; and (c) a provision for additional payments on closed claims that might reopen. IBNR reserves apply to the entire body of claims arising from a specific time period, rather than a specific claim. Most of our IBNR reserves relate to estimated future claim payments on recorded open claims.
LAE reserves are our estimate of future expense payments to manage, investigate, administer, and settle claims that have occurred, and include legal expenses. LAE reserves are established in the aggregate, rather than on a claim-by-claim basis. LAE reserves are categorized between defense and cost containment, and adjusting and other.
We cede a portion of our obligations for losses and LAE to unaffiliated reinsurers. The amount of reinsurance that will be recoverable on our losses and LAE includes both the reinsurance recoverable from our excess of loss reinsurance contracts, as well as reinsurance recoverable under the terms of the LPT Agreement.
Our loss reserves (gross and net of reinsurance), including the main components of such reserves, were as follows:
We use actuarial methods to analyze and estimate the aggregate amount of loss reserves. Management considers the results of various actuarial methods and their underlying assumptions, among other factors, in establishing loss reserves.
Judgment is required in the actuarial estimation of loss reserves, including the selection of various actuarial methodologies to project the ultimate cost of claims. Specifically, judgment is required in the following areas: the selection of parameters utilized in the various methodologies; the use of industry data and other benchmarks; and the weighting of differing reserve indications resulting from alternative methods and assumptions. The adequacy of our ultimate loss reserves is inherently uncertain and represents a significant risk to our business. We attempt to mitigate this risk through our claims management processes and by monitoring and reacting to statistics relating to the cost and duration of claims.
We compile and aggregate our claims data by grouping the claims according to the year in which the claim occurred ("accident year") when analyzing claim payment and emergence patterns and trends over time. Additionally, we aggregate and analyze claims data by claim type, benefits type, and by state, territory within state, or groups of states in which we do business.
Our Internal Actuary prepared reserve estimates for all accident years using our own historical claims data, industry data and many of the generally accepted actuarial methodologies for estimating loss reserves, such as paid loss development methods, incurred loss development methods, and Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods. These methods vary in their responsiveness to different information, characteristics, and dynamics in the data, and the results assist the actuary in considering these characteristics and dynamics in the historical data. The methods employed for each segment of claims data, and the relative weight accorded to each method, vary depending on the nature of the claims segment and on the age of the claims.
Each actuarial methodology requires the selection and application of various parameters and assumptions. The key parameters and assumptions include: the future payment and emergence patterns of our aggregate claims data; the magnitude and changes in claim settlement activity; claims cost inflation rates; the effects of legislative benefit changes and/or judicial decisions; and trends in the frequency and severity of claims. We believe the pattern with which our aggregate claims data will be paid or emerge over time, claim settlement activity, and claims cost inflation rates are the most important parameters and assumptions.
Management, along with our Internal Actuary, separately analyzed LAE and estimate unpaid LAE. These analyses rely primarily on examining the relationship between historical aggregate paid LAE and the volume of claims activity for the corresponding periods. The portion of unpaid LAE that will be recoverable from reinsurers is estimated based on the contractual reinsurance terms.
The ranges of estimates of loss reserves produced by our Internal Actuary are intended to represent the range in which it is most likely that the ultimate losses will fall. These ranges are narrower than the range of indications produced by the individual methods applied because it is not likely that the high or low result will emerge for every claim segment and accident year. Each actuary's point estimate of loss reserves for each claim segment is based on a judgmental selection from within the range of results indicated by the different actuarial methods.
Management formally establishes loss reserves for financial statement purposes on a quarterly basis. In doing so, we make reference to the most current analyses of our Internal Actuary, including a review of the assumptions and the results of the various actuarial methods used. Our Internal Actuary conducted comprehensive studies in the second and fourth quarters. On the alternate quarters, our Internal Actuary updates the results of the preceding quarter's studies for actual claim payment and case reserve activity.
The aggregate carried reserve calculated by management represents our best estimate of our outstanding unpaid losses and LAE. In establishing management's best estimate of unpaid losses and LAE at December 31 for the last three years, management and our Internal Actuary reviewed and considered the following: (a) our Internal Actuary's assumptions, point estimates, and ranges; and (b) the inherent uncertainty of workers' compensation loss reserves. Management did not quantify a specific loss reserve increment for each uncertainty, but rather established an overall provision that represented management's best estimate of loss reserves in light of the historical data, actuarial assumptions, point estimate and range, and current facts and circumstances.
The table below provides the actuarial range of loss reserves, net of reinsurance, that management considered when selecting its best estimate and our carried reserves.
As of December 31, 2020, California and Nevada loss reserves represented approximately 70% of our total loss reserves on our Consolidated Balance Sheet.
In California, our recent loss experience from 2012 through 2019, indicates a slight downward trend in medical severity and a slight upward trend in indemnity severity. The reduction in medical severity can be attributed to a number of factors including California Senate Bill 863 (SB 863), which was enacted in 2012 and largely became effective in 2013/2014. Among the more significant changes, SB 863 introduced independent medical review (IMR) into the dispute resolution process and filing fees for medical liens. On the indemnity side, various provisions of SB 863 resulted in an overall increase in certain benefits. Our indemnity claims frequency (the number of claims expressed as a percentage of payroll) has decreased year-over-year for the past four years. Aside from the impact of recent regulatory changes, we believe our increased emphasis on claims settlements, as well as our various underwriting initiatives, have contributed to more favorable trends in our California results.
In Nevada, we have compiled a lengthy history of workers' compensation claims payment patterns based on the business of the Fund and EICN, but the emergence and payment of claims in recent years has been more favorable than in the long-term history in Nevada with the Fund. The expected patterns of claim payments and emergence used in the projection of our ultimate claim payments are based on both long and short-term historical data. In recent evaluations, claim patterns have continued to emerge in a manner consistent with short-term historical data. Consequently, our selection of claim projection patterns has relied more heavily on patterns observed in recent years.
Our insurance subsidiaries have been operating in a period characterized by changing environmental conditions in our major markets, entry into new markets, and operational changes. During periods characterized by such changes, at each evaluation, the actuaries and management must make judgments as to the relative weight to accord to long-term historical company data, more recent company data, and external data. We also consider the impact of environmental and operational changes and other factors when selecting the methods used to project ultimate losses and LAE, the parameters to incorporate in those methods, and the relative weights applied to those methods.
An internal initiative that began in 2014 and continued through 2020 emphasizes the settlement of open claims. This initiative has actively driven a significant increase in claims settlement activity and has primarily affected accident years 2009 and
forward. This settlement activity has been recognized in the actuarial analysis using a methodology that adjusts the data and loss development patterns to account for an increase in settlements arising from this initiative.
Approximately 57% of our claims payments during the three years ended December 31, 2020 related to medical care for injured workers. The utilization and cost of medical services in the future is a significant source of uncertainty in the establishment of loss reserves for workers' compensation. Our loss reserves are established based on reviewing the results of actuarial methods, most of which do not contain explicit medical claim cost inflation rates; however, because medical care may be provided to an injured worker over many years, and in some cases decades, the pace of medical claim cost inflation can have a significant impact on our ultimate claim payments. For example, if the rate of medical claim cost inflation increases by 1% above the inflation rate that is implicitly included in the loss reserves at December 31, 2020, we estimate that future medical costs over the lifetime of current claims would increase by approximately $78.3 million on a net-of-reinsurance basis.
Our reserve estimates reflect expected increases in the costs of contested claims, but do not assume any losses resulting from significant new legal liability theories. Our reserve estimates also assume that there will not be significant future changes in the regulatory and legislative environment. In the event of significant new legal liability theories or new regulation or legislation, we will attempt to quantify its impact on our business.
If the actual loss reserves were at the high or the low end of the actuarial range, the impact on our financial results would have been as follows:
Actual losses are affected by a more complex combination of forces and dynamics than any one model or actuarial methodology can represent, and each methodology is an approximation of these complex forces and dynamics. None of the methods are designed or intended to produce an indication that is systematically higher or lower than the other methods. At any given evaluation date, some of the actuarial projection methods produce indications outside the actuary's selected range. Accordingly, we believe that the range of potential outcomes is considerably wider than the actuarially estimated range of the most likely outcomes. We have no basis for anticipating whether actual future payments of losses and LAE may be either greater than or less than the loss reserves currently on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Additionally, any adjustment to the estimated ceded reserves under the LPT Agreement results in a cumulative adjustment to the Deferred Gain, which is also included in losses and LAE incurred in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income, so that the Deferred Gain reflects the balance that would have existed had the revised reserves been recognized at the inception of the LPT Agreement. The table below provides the actuarial range of estimated liabilities for gross loss reserves under the LPT Agreement and our carried reserves.
Reinsurance Recoverables
Reinsurance recoverables represent: (a) amounts currently due from reinsurers on paid losses and LAE; (b) amounts recoverable from reinsurers on estimates of reported losses; and (c) amounts recoverable from reinsurers on actuarial estimates of IBNR for losses and LAE. These recoverables are based on our current estimates of the underlying loss reserves, and are reported on our Consolidated Balance Sheets separately as assets, as reinsurance does not relieve us of our legal liability to policyholders. We bear credit risk with respect to the reinsurers, which could be significant in the future, considering that some of the loss reserves remain outstanding for an extended period of time. Reinsurers may refuse or fail to pay losses that we cede to them, or they might delay payment. We are required to pay losses even if a reinsurer refuses or fails to meet its obligations under the applicable reinsurance agreement. We continually monitor the financial condition and financial strength ratings of our reinsurers. No material amounts due from reinsurers have been written-off as uncollectible since our inception in 2000, and in
assessing future default, we evaluate the current expected credit loss allowance (CECL) under the ratings based method using the A.M. Best Average Cumulative Net Impairment Rates. Reinsurer ratings are also assessed through this process.
Under the LPT Agreement, the Fund initially ceded $1.5 billion in liabilities for the incurred but unpaid losses and LAE related to claims incurred prior to July 1, 1995 for consideration of $775.0 million in cash. The estimated remaining liabilities subject to the LPT Agreement were $353.5 million as of December 31, 2020. Losses and LAE paid with respect to the LPT Agreement totaled $818.9 million at December 31, 2020. We account for the LPT Agreement as retroactive reinsurance. Entry into the LPT Agreement resulted in a deferred reinsurance gain that was recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets as a liability. The Deferred Gain is being amortized using the recovery method, whereby the amortization is determined by the proportion of actual reinsurance recoveries to total estimated recoveries through the life of the LPT Agreement, and the amortization is reflected in losses and LAE. Changes in estimates of the reserves ceded under the LPT Agreement may significantly impact the Deferred Gain on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and losses and LAE on our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income.
Additionally, we are entitled to receive a contingent profit commission under the LPT Agreement. The contingent profit commission is an amount based on the favorable difference between actual paid losses and LAE and expected paid losses and LAE as established in the LPT Agreement. The calculation of actual amounts paid versus expected amounts is determined every five years beginning June 30, 2004 for the first twenty-five years of the agreement. We are paid 30% of the favorable difference between the actual and expected losses and LAE paid at each calculation point. Each quarter, management records its best estimate of the estimated ultimate contingent profit commission through June 30, 2024, which is impacted by estimates for ceded losses and LAE. The related Deferred Gain is amortized using the recovery method, whereby the amortization is determined by the proportion of actual reinsurance recoveries to total estimated recoveries over the life of the contingent profit commission, or through June 30, 2024, and is recorded in losses and LAE incurred in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income. Changes in estimates of the reserves ceded under the LPT Agreement may significantly impact the Contingent commission receivable-LPT Agreement and the Deferred Gain on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and losses and LAE on our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income.
Recognition of Premium Revenue
Premium revenue is recognized as earned over the period of the contract in proportion to the amount of insurance protection provided. At the end of the policy term, payroll-based premium audits are performed on substantially all policyholder accounts to determine net premiums earned for the policy year. Earned but unbilled premiums include estimated future audit premiums based on our historical experience, adjusted for current market conditions. These estimates are subject to changes in policyholders' payrolls, economic conditions, and seasonality, and are continually reviewed and adjusted as experience develops or new information becomes known. Any such adjustments are included in current operations; however, they are partially offset by the resulting changes in losses and LAE, commission expenses, and premium taxes. Although considerable variability is inherent in such estimates, we believe that the net effect of any estimates currently reflected on our consolidated financial statements will similarly not require any material prospective adjustment.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements. Under this method, we determine deferred tax assets and liabilities on the basis of the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities by using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the timing differences are expected to reverse. The effect of the recent change in tax rates on our deferred tax assets and liabilities was recognized in income as of the date of Enactment.
We record uncertain tax positions in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 740, Income Taxes, on the basis of a two-step process. Recognition (Step 1) occurs when we conclude that a tax position, based solely on its technical merits, is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination. Measurement (Step 2) is addressed only if Step 1 has been satisfied. Under Step 2, the tax benefit is measured as the largest amount of benefit, determined on a cumulative probability basis, that is more likely than not to be realized upon ultimate settlement.
We recognize deferred tax assets when it is determined that such assets are more likely than not to be realized in future periods. In making such a determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, projected future tax rates, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations.
Valuation of Investments
Our investments in fixed maturity securities, equity securities at fair value, and short-term investments are classified as AFS and are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses excluded from earnings and reported as a separate component of stockholders' equity, net of deferred taxes, in accumulated other comprehensive income.
Beginning in 2018, with the adoption of ASU 2016-01, our investments in equity securities at fair value are no longer classified as AFS and changes in fair value are included in Net realized and unrealized gains (losses) on investments on our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income.
Realized gains and losses resulting from sales of investments are recognized in operations on a specific-identification basis.
We use third party pricing services to assist us with our investment accounting function. The fair values of our AFS fixed maturity and equity securities are based on quoted market prices, when available. These fair values are obtained primarily from third party pricing services, which generally use Level 1 or Level 2 inputs in accordance with GAAP guidance. We obtain a quoted price for each security from third party pricing services, which is derived through recently reported trades for identical or similar securities. For securities not actively traded, the third party pricing services may use quoted market prices of similar instruments or discounted cash flow analyses, incorporating inputs that are currently observable in the markets for similar securities. Inputs that are often used in the valuation methodologies include, but are not limited to, broker quotes, benchmark yields, credit spreads, default rates, and prepayment speeds. We also perform quarterly analysis on the prices received from third parties to determine whether the prices are reasonable estimates of fair value, including confirming the fair values of these securities through observable market prices using an alternative pricing source. If differences are noted in this review, we may obtain additional information from other pricing services to validate the quoted price (See Note 4 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements).
Impairment of Investment Securities. Additionally, ASU 2016-01 removed the impairment assessment for equity securities at fair value. Prior to adoption of this standard, when, in the opinion of management, a decline in the fair value of an equity security below its cost was considered to be "other-than-temporary," the equity security's cost was written down to its fair value at the time the other-than-temporary decline was identified.
Beginning in 2020, with the adoption of ASU 2016-13, our investments in fixed maturity securities are presented net of an allowance for expected credit losses. The changes in our allowance for expected credit losses on investments are included in Net realized and unrealized gains (losses) on investments on our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (see Note 6 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements). Prior to 2020, if management had the intent to sell the debt security or more likely than not would be required to sell the debt security before its anticipated recovery, the investment was written down to its fair value and the entire impairment was recorded as a realized loss due to credit in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income. If management did not have the intent to sell or would not be required to sell the debt security but did not expect to recover the amortized cost basis of the debt security, the amount of the other-than-temporary impairment was bifurcated between credit loss and other loss and recorded as a component of realized gains and losses and in other comprehensive income, respectively, in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income. The amount of any write-down was determined by the difference between the cost or amortized cost of the debt security and its fair value at the time the other-than-temporary decline was identified.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
We prepare an impairment analysis for our goodwill and other intangible assets, whereby we identify whether events or circumstances have occurred that may impact the carrying value of these assets and make assumptions regarding future events, such as cash flows and profitability. Differences between the assumptions regarding recoverability of carrying value and actual results could materially impact the carrying amount of these assets and our operating results.
New Accounting Standards
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In October 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2020-10, Codification Improvements. This update ensures all disclosure guidance that requires or provides an option for an entity to provide notes to the financial statements is included in the Disclosure Section (Section 50) of the Codification. This update also provided various codification improvements in which the original guidance was unclear. This update becomes effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020 and early adoption is permitted for any annual or interim period for which financial statements have not been issued. We have determined that the impact of this new standard will not be material to our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
In October 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-08, Codification Improvements to Subtopic 310-20, Receivable-Nonrefundable fees and other costs. The amendments in that Update shortened the amortization period for certain purchased callable debt securities held at a premium by requiring that entities amortize the premium associated with those callable debt securities within the scope of paragraph 310-20-25-33 to the earliest call date. The amendments affect the guidance in Accounting Standards Update No. 2017-08, receivables-Nonrefundable Fees and Other Costs (Subtopic 310-20): Premium Amortization on Purchased Callable Debt Securities. The amendments is this update become effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. Early adoption is not permitted. We do not expect that the adoption of this update will have a material impact on our consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848). This update provides optional transition guidance to ease the potential accounting burden associated with transitioning away from the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), with optional expedients and exceptions related to the application of US GAAP to contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions affected by reference rate reform. Companies can apply this ASU immediately, but early adoption is only available through December 31, 2022 when the ASU becomes effective. We are evaluating the impact of LIBOR on its existing contracts and investments, but do not expect that this update will have a material impact on our consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740). This update simplifies the accounting for income taxes within Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) topic 740 by removing certain exceptions and clarifies existing guidance. We have determined that the impact of this new standard will not be material to our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
In April 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-04, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses, Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, and Topic 825, Financial Instruments. The amendments in this update represent changes to clarify, correct errors in, or improve the codification within various (ASC) topics. We adopted the updates related to Topic 815 when we adopted ASU 2016-13. We determined that the impact of these improvements was not material to our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement. This update removes the disclosure requirements for the amounts of and the reasons for transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 and disclosure of the policy for timing of transfers between levels. This update also removes disclosure requirements for the valuation processes for Level 3 fair value measurements. Additionally, this update adds disclosure requirements for the changes in unrealized gains and losses for recurring Level 3 fair value measurements and quantitative information for certain unobservable inputs in Level 3 fair value measurements. Additionally, in March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-03, Codification Improvements to Financial Instruments. This update provided clarification and eliminated inconsistencies on a variety of topics within the codification. We adopted the applicable standards and there was no impact on our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350). This update simplifies the measurement of goodwill by eliminating the performance of Step 2 in the goodwill impairment testing. This update allows the testing to be performed by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount and recognizing an impairment charge when the carrying amount exceeds fair value. Additionally, this update eliminates the requirements of any reporting unit with a zero or negative carrying value to perform Step 2, but requires disclosure of the amount of goodwill allocated to a reporting unit with zero or negative carrying amount of net assets. We adopted this standard and there was no impact on our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326). This update replaces the incurred loss impairment methodology for recognizing credit losses on financial instruments with a methodology that reflects an entity's current estimate of all expected credit losses. This update requires financial assets (including receivables and reinsurance recoverables) measured at amortized cost to be presented net of an allowance for credit losses. Additionally, this
update requires credit losses on available-for-sale fixed maturity securities to be presented as an allowance rather than as a write-down, allowing an entity to also record reversals of credit losses in current period net income. This update is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Additionally, in December 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-19, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses. This update provides clarification on the effective and transition dates and the exclusion of operating lease receivables from Topic 326. In May 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-05, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Targeted Transition Relief. This update adds optional transition relief for entities to elect the fair value option for certain financial assets previously measured at amortized cost basis to increase comparability of similar financial assets. In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-11, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses which provides clarification on certain aspects of the guidance in ASC 326 including purchased credit-deteriorated financial assets, transition relief for troubled debt restructurings, disclosure relief for accrued interest receivables and allows a practical expedient for financial assets secured by collateral maintenance provisions. We adopted these standards on January 1, 2020 and did not make any opening balance sheet adjustments due to the immaterial amounts. See Note 6 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements regarding the impact of this adoption on our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.