ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied in any forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the caption “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Unless otherwise indicated, references to the terms the “combined company,” “Eiger,” the “Company,” “we,” “our” and “us” refer to Eiger BioPharmaceuticals, Inc. (formerly known as Celladon Corporation) and its subsidiaries after the merger described herein. The term “Private Eiger” refers to privately-held Eiger BioPharmaceuticals, Inc. prior to its merger with Celladon Merger Sub, Inc. a wholly-owned subsidiary of Celladon Corporation. The term “Celladon” refers to Celladon Corporation and its subsidiaries prior to the Merger.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of foundational therapies for Hepatitis Delta Virus (HDV), the most severe form of human viral hepatitis, for which there is currently no FDA-approved therapy. We have reported positive proof-of-concept clinical results across all our programs, and have received Breakthrough Therapy designation for three programs in clinical development.
Our programs have several aspects in common: the disease targets represent conditions of high unmet medical need; the therapeutic approaches are supported by an understanding of disease biology and mechanism as elucidated by our academic research relationships; prior clinical experience with the product candidates guides an understanding of safety; and the development paths leverage the experience and capabilities of our experienced, commercially-focused management team.
We are developing two complementary treatments for HDV. Lonafarnib is a first-in-class oral farnesylation inhibitor in a global Phase 3 trial, and the only oral therapy in development for HDV. Peginterferon lambda (lambda) is a first-in-class, well characterized, well-tolerated type III interferon entering Phase 3.
The pivotal Phase 3 D-LIVR study (N=400) of lonafarnib boosted with ritonavir in HDV is ongoing and enrolling patients. The study spans twenty-two countries and over one hundred sites and has potential to generate data for two lonafarnib-based ritonavir-boosted regimens for approval. An all-oral arm of lonafarnib boosted with ritonavir and a combination arm of lonafarnib boosted with ritonavir combined with pegylated interferon-alfa-2a will each be compared to placebo.
Lambda is our second program treating HDV and is entering Phase 3. We have agreement with the FDA and European Medicines Agency (EMA) on a single pivotal Phase 3 study design and endpoints. Lambda is a well-characterized, late-stage, first in class, type III interferon. We previously reported Phase 2 LIMT (lambda monotherapy) study results (n=33) that demonstrated a 36% durable virologic response (DVR), or below the limit of quantification (BLQ), at 24 weeks post-treatment. In the Phase 2 LIFT study, HDV patients were treated with a combination of our two proprietary products, lambda and lonafarnib boosted by ritonavir. The end-of-study results based on a per-protocol analysis reported in November 2020 showed that 77% of patients achieved the primary end-point of >2 log decline in HDV RNA at Week 24 and 50% of patients were HDV RNA BLQ or undetectable. Adverse events were mostly mild to moderate.
The FDA approved our first commercial product, Zokinvy (lonafarnib) to reduce risk of mortality of Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS or Progeria) and to treat processing-deficient progeroid laminopathies, ultra-rare and rapidly fatal genetic conditions of accelerated aging in children, on November 20, 2020. Our Marketing Authorization Application (MAA) is under review with the EMA, and we expect a decision in the second half of 2021.
We are also developing avexitide, a well-characterized peptide, as a treatment for post-bariatric hypoglycemia (PBH), a debilitating and potentially life-threatening condition for which there is currently no approved therapy. We have completed four clinical studies demonstrating proof of concept in 54 patients suffering from severe, refractory PBH, and have agreement with FDA and EMA on a single pivotal Phase 3 trial.
Avexitide has also demonstrated proof of concept for treatment of congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI), an ultra-rare pediatric metabolic genetic disorder.
We have not generated any revenue from product sales through 2020. We have never been profitable and have incurred operating losses in each year since inception, and we do not anticipate that we will achieve profitability in the near term. Our net losses were $65.1 million, $70.3 million and $52.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $306.5 million. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
We expect to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years as we initiate and continue the clinical development of, and seek regulatory approval for, and potentially commercialize our product candidates and add personnel necessary to operate as a public company with an advanced clinical candidate pipeline of products. In addition, we will incur costs for additional personnel and upgrades to our information technology systems as we transition from an emerging growth company. We expect that our operating losses will fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year due to timing of clinical development programs and efforts to achieve additional regulatory approvals.
Recent Developments
Publication of Phase 2 PREVENT Study Results of Avexitide in Post-Bariatric Hypoglycemia (PBH) in Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism
On February 23, 2021, we announced that positive results from the Phase 2 PREVENT study of Avexitide in patients with PBH were published in Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. The study met its primary endpoints and we previously reported topline data from this study in March 2019.
Publication of ILIAD Study Results of Peginterferon Lambda (Lambda) in COVID-19 in Lancet Respiratory Medicine 2021
On February 8, 2021, we announced that final results from the Phase 2 ILIAD (Interferon Lambda for Immediate Antiviral Therapy at Diagnosis in COVID-19) study published in Lancet Respiratory Medicine. ILIAD, an investigator sponsored randomized trial of lambda in outpatients with mild to moderate COVID-19 conducted at Toronto General Hospital, University Health Network in Toronto, Canada, demonstrated a single dose of lambda accelerated clearance of SARS-CoV2 in newly diagnosed, non-hospitalized patients. We previously reported topline data from this study on October 15, 2020.
Completion of Sale of Priority Review Voucher
On November 23, 2020, we announced that we had entered into a definitive agreement to sell our Priority Review Voucher (PRV) for a lump sum payment of $95.0 million to AbbVie Inc. (AbbVie). The transaction was subject to customary closing conditions including anti-trust review. The PRV was granted to us in conjunction with the November 20, 2020 approval by the FDA of our new drug application for Zokinvy. On January 7, 2021, we announced that we had completed the sale to AbbVie following the early termination of the applicable waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended. Eiger retained 50%, or approximately $47.4 million, of the PRV proceeds under the terms of the Collaboration and Supply Agreement with the Progeria Research Foundation.
Update on Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Clinical Development Activities and Business Operations
We have taken proactive steps to ensure the safety of patients and the integrity of our HDV Phase 3 D-LIVR trial, which is expected to complete enrollment in 2021. We have adequate clinical drug product supply for the D-LIVR study and do not anticipate any interruption in availability of study drug to patients.
We do not anticipate any impact to our planned U.S. commercial launch of Zokinvy, including availability of commercial drug supply. We previously announced that the EMA review of our MAA will follow a standard review timeline.
We have put into place remote operations and new policies, which are in-line with local, state and federal guidelines, to maintain the safety and well-being of our employees, while working to maintain business continuity as this unprecedented global situation continues to evolve. We continue to monitor the situation closely, including its potential effect on our clinical development plans and timelines.
Financial Operations Overview
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred to conduct research and development, such as the development of our product candidates. We recognize all research and development costs as they are incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of the following:
•
expenses incurred under agreements with consultants, contract research organizations and clinical trial sites that conduct research and development activities on our behalf;
•
laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of clinical trials;
•
contract manufacturing expenses, primarily for the production of clinical trial supplies;
•
license fees associated with our license agreements; and
•
internal costs that are associated with activities performed by our research and development organization and generally benefit multiple programs. These costs are not separately allocated by product candidate. Unallocated internal research and development costs consist primarily of:
o
personnel costs, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
o
allocated facilities and other expenses, which include expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and depreciation expense; and
o
regulatory expenses and technology license fees related to development activities.
The largest component of our operating expenses has historically been the investment in clinical trials, including contract manufacturing arrangements, clinical trial material related costs and other research and development activities. However, we do not allocate internal research and development costs, such as salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation expense and indirect costs to product candidates on a program-specific basis. The following table shows our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
We expect research and development expenses will continue to be significant and may increase in the future as we advance our product candidates into and through later stage clinical trials and pursue regulatory approvals, which will require a significant investment in regulatory support and contract manufacturing and clinical trial material related costs. In addition, we continue to evaluate opportunities to acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies, which may result in higher research and development expenses due to license fees and/or milestone payments.
The process of conducting clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. We may never succeed in timely developing and achieving regulatory approval for our product candidates. The probability of success of our product candidates may be affected by numerous factors, including clinical data, competition, intellectual property rights, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates. The COVID-19 pandemic presents additional risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including:
•
delays in trial activities and patient enrollment or diversion of healthcare resources as a result of the evolving effects of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise;
•
production shortages or other supply interruptions in clinical trial materials resulting from the evolving effects of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise;
•
our ability to hire and retain key research and development personnel;
•
the scope, rate of progress, results and expense of our ongoing, as well as any additional, clinical trials and other research and development activities; and
•
the timing and receipt of any regulatory approvals.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs, allocated expenses and expenses for outside professional services, including legal, audit, accounting services, insurance costs and costs associated with being a public company. Personnel costs consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. Allocated expenses consist of facilities and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation expense and other supplies. Our expenses include costs related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and Nasdaq, insurance, investor relations, banking fees and other administrative expenses and professional services. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in the future due to sales and marketing activities from the commercialization of Zokinvy.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest and amortization of the debt discount related to the Oxford Loan.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our investments in debt securities and cash equivalents.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of expenses that are not
readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Accrued Research and Development Costs
We record accrued expenses for estimated costs of research and development activities conducted by external service providers, which include the conduct of clinical research and contract formulation and manufacturing activities. We record the estimated costs of development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced and include these costs in accrued liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets and within research and development expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. We record accrued expenses for these costs based on the estimated amount of work completed and in accordance with agreements established with these external service providers.
We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued estimates.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation costs related to stock options and restricted stock units based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. We estimate the grant date fair value of stock options, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of the stock-based awards is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards. We record forfeitures when they occur.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model includes the following assumptions:
Expected Term. Our expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term).
Expected Volatility. Since we have only been publicly traded for a short period and do not have adequate trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded biopharmaceutical companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle, or area of specialty. Beginning in the third quarter of 2019, as we had been publicly traded for four and a half years, we began to layer in our historical volatility in the calculation of expected volatility.
Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
Expected Dividend. We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
We use the contractual term to determine the non-employee awards’ fair value at the grant date. The contractual term of options granted under the Plan is 10 years. Our Board of Directors determined the fair value of each share of underlying common stock based on the closing price of our common stock as reported by the Nasdaq Global Market on the date of grant.
We estimate the fair value of restricted stock units based on the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant and the resulting stock-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the awards.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $10.2 million to $41.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $51.8 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $11.7 million decrease in contract manufacturing and clinical expenditures due to decrease in clinical program activities. The decrease was partially offset by an increase of $0.7 million in regulatory expenses, an increase of $0.6 million in headcount related expenses and $0.3 million in other operating expenses.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.5 million to $20.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $17.1 million for the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $1.7 million increase in compensation and personnel related expenses, including stock-based compensation, due to an increase in headcount and a $1.7 million increase in outside services, including consulting, advisory and accounting services.
Interest expense
Interest expense increased by $0.2 million to $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $3.4 million for the same period in 2019. Interest expense primarily increased due to the additional funds borrowed under the Oxford Loan in 2019.
Interest income
Interest income decreased by $1.4 million to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $2.1 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in interest rates on money market funds and available-for-sale securities.
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, we had $128.9 million of cash, cash equivalents and investments, comprised of $28.9 million of cash and cash equivalents and $100.0 million of debt securities available-for-sale, and an accumulated deficit of $306.5 million.
In December 2019, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-235655) with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which permits the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $150.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities and warrants. Up to a maximum of $50.0 million of the maximum aggregate offering price of $150.0 million may be issued and sold
pursuant to an at-the-market (ATM) financing facility (2019 ATM Facility) under a sales agreement with Jefferies LLC (Jefferies). In August 2020, we entered into a new sales agreement with Jefferies for up to $50.0 million of the remaining amount on the shelf registration statement which may be sold pursuant to an ATM financing facility (2020 ATM Facility).
As of December 31, 2020, we completed both the 2019 ATM Facility and the 2020 ATM Facility for a total of 9,267,760 shares resulting in $97.3 million in net proceeds, after deducting commissions.
On December 18, 2020, we filed a new shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-251497) with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which permits the offering, issuance and sale by us up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $200.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities and warrants. Up to a maximum of $50.0 million of the maximum aggregate offering price of $200.0 million may be issued and sold pursuant to a new ATM financing facility under a sales agreement with Jefferies. We have not issued any shares under this facility.
We believe that the currently available resources will be sufficient to fund our planned operations for at least the next 12 months following the issuance date of these consolidated financial statements. However, if our anticipated operating results are not achieved in future periods, we believe that planned expenditures may need to be reduced or we would be required to raise funding in order to fund our operations. Additionally, our ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Our primary uses of cash are to fund operating expenses, including research and development expenditures and general and administrative expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Future Funding Requirements
We have not generated any revenue from product sales. We expect to generate revenues from product sales of Zokinvy beginning in 2021. At the same time, we expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development and manufacturing activities, particularly as we continue the research, development, manufacture and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for our product candidates.
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, funding research efforts and the development of our product candidates, sales and marketing costs for commercialization of Zokinvy and other product candidates, compensation and related expenses, hiring additional staff, including clinical, scientific, operational, financial, and management personnel, and costs associated with operating as a public company. We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future for the development and potential commercialization of our product candidates.
We plan to continue to fund losses from operations and capital funding needs through future equity and/or debt financings, as well as potential additional collaborations or strategic partnerships with other companies. As a result of economic conditions, general global economic uncertainty, political change and other factors, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we do not know whether additional capital will be available when needed, or that, if available, we will be able to obtain additional capital on reasonable terms. If we are unable to raise additional capital due to the volatile global financial markets, general economic uncertainty or other factors, we may need to curtail planned development or commercialization activities. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt could result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in debt service obligations and could result in operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. We can provide no assurance that financing will be available in the amounts we need or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding we may be forced to delay, make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible, and/or suspend or curtail planned programs. Any of these actions could materially harm our business.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $63.2 million, which primarily consisted of a net loss of $65.1 million, partially offset by stock-based compensation expense of $6.0 million, non-cash interest expense of $0.8 million, amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets of $0.5 million and common stock issued under Product Development Agreement of $0.2 million. Additionally, cash used in operating activities reflected changes in net operating assets of $5.9 million due to an increase of $3.6 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily due to the timing of payments, an increase of $1.4 million in other assets primarily related to long term deposits with clinical research organizations, a decrease of $0.4 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to timing of payments and a decrease of $0.5 million in operating lease liabilities.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $63.6 million and primarily consisted of a net loss of $70.3 million and amortization of debt securities discounts of $0.5 million, which was partially offset by $5.7 million of stock-based compensation expense, $0.7 million of non-cash interest related to amortization of debt discount and $0.4 million of amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets. Additionally, cash used in operating activities reflected changes in net operating assets due to an increase of $3.7 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily due to the timing of payments and an increase of $2.1 million in other assets primarily due to an increase in long-term deposits to IQVIA, which was partially offset by an increase of $6.2 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities primarily associated with increase in business activity.
Cash flows from investing activities
Cash used in investing activities was $44.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of $128.3 million of purchases of debt securities, partially offset by $83.8 million of proceeds from maturities of debt securities.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $16.5 million. The net cash decrease was primarily due to $96.3 million purchases of debt securities and $0.5 million purchases of property and equipment, which was partially offset by $80.3 million proceeds from maturities of debt securities.
Cash flows from financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $97.5 million and primarily consisted of $96.8 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our ATM Facilities and $0.7 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon stock option exercises and ESPP purchase.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $58.2 million and primarily consisted of $53.2 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon public offering, $4.0 million of proceeds from borrowings, net of repayments, in connection with the Oxford Loan, and $0.8 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon stock option exercises.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
Leases and Term Loan
Refer to Notes 7 and 12 to our consolidated financial statements included within Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020.
Asset and License Agreements
We are obligated to make future payments to third parties under asset purchase and license agreements, including royalties and payments that become due and payable on the achievement of certain development and commercialization milestones. We have not included these potential payment obligations in our contractual obligations table as the amount and timing of such payments are not known.
Oxford Finance Term Loan
On December 30, 2016, we entered into an aggregate $25.0 million loan with Oxford Finance LLC (the Oxford Loan). We borrowed $15.0 million in December 2016 (Tranche A), $5.0 million in May 2018 (Tranche B), and $5.0 million in August 2018 (Tranche C). The Oxford Loan bears interest at a floating rate per annum equal to the greater of either the 30-day U.S. Dollar LIBOR reported in the Wall Street Journal plus 6.41% or 6.95%, with interest only payments through July 1, 2018 followed by 36 equal monthly payments of principal and interest until maturity at July 1, 2021. Upon the receipt of Tranche B in May 2018, the interest only period for borrowed funds was extended by six months until February 1, 2019, followed by 30 equal monthly payments of principal plus accrued interest. In addition, at the time of final payment of Tranche B, we were required to pay an additional exit fee of $0.1 million. On March 5, 2019, we entered into the third amendment to the Oxford Loan (the Amended Oxford Loan) to refinance the Oxford Loan. The Amended Oxford Loan increased the aggregate amount available to be borrowed to $35.0 million and extended the maturity date to March 1, 2024. On March 5, 2019, prior to entering into the Amended Oxford Loan, the outstanding balance of the Oxford Loan was $23.3 million. At the time of entering into the Amended Oxford Loan, we borrowed an additional $6.7 million in principal under the Amended Oxford Loan, which increased the total amount borrowed to $30.0 million (Amended Tranche A). The remaining $5.0 million (Amended Tranche B) will be available to us upon the latest to occur of (i) achievement of positive lonafarnib Phase 3 HDV topline data sufficient to file new drug application (Clinical Milestone) and (ii) January 1, 2021.
The Amended Oxford Loan bears interest at a floating rate per annum equal to the greater of either the 30-day U.S. Dollar LIBOR reported in the Wall Street Journal plus 6.64% or 9.15%. The Amended Oxford Loan has an interest only period until April 1, 2021, followed by 36 equal monthly payments of principal and interest. Upon the receipt of Amended Tranche B, the interest only period for borrowed funds will be extended by one year until April 1, 2022, followed by 24 equal monthly payments of principal plus accrued interest. At the time of final payment, we are required to pay an exit fee of 7.5% of the original principal balance of borrowed funds, or $2.3 million. In addition, we are required to pay an additional exit fee of $1.0 million.
On February 23, 2021, we entered into the fifth amendment to the Oxford Loan. The amendment extended the interest only period by 17 months until September 1, 2022, followed by 19 equal monthly payments of principal and interest. Upon the receipt of Amended Tranche B, the interest only period for borrowed funds will be extended by six months until March 1, 2023, followed by 13 equal monthly payments of principal plus accrued interest. In addition, we paid the amendment fees of $0.2 million to the lenders on the effective date of the fifth amendment.
The loan is secured by perfected first priority liens on our assets, including our commitment to not allow any liens to be placed upon our intellectual property. The Oxford Loan includes customary events of default, including failure to pay amounts due, breaches of covenants and warranties, material adverse effect events, certain cross defaults and judgments, and insolvency. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all loan terms.
Manufacturing Service Agreement
In the first quarter of 2020, we entered into a Master Manufacturing Services Agreement (MMSA) and Product Agreement with Patheon, Inc. (Patheon) for the manufacturing of lonafarnib capsules and packaging of bottles for commercial sale. Under the terms of the agreements, we are required to provide Patheon with annual volume forecasts of capsules and Patheon will manufacture 80% of such annual forecasts. If we order less than 80% of such annual forecasts, we are required to pay 70% of purchase price for the shortfall. The initial terms of the MMSA and Product Agreement end on December 31, 2025 with automatic renewal for successive two-year terms, unless earlier terminated pursuant to the terms of each agreement, or upon either party’s notice of termination to the other.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under the rules of the SEC and do not have any holdings in variable interest entities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included within Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements adopted and not yet adopted for the year ended December 31, 2020.