Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Actual results may differ significantly from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause future results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those discussed in "Risk Factors" and elsewhere in this Annual Report. See also "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements."
On March 24, 2020, we effected a one-for-fifteen reverse stock split, or the Reverse Stock Split, reducing the number of our common shares outstanding on that date from 87.4 million shares to approximately 5.8 million shares. Additionally, the exercise price and number of all outstanding options and warrants, and the number of shares reserved for future issuance pursuant to our equity compensation plan were all adjusted proportionately. All such amounts presented herein have been adjusted retroactively to reflect these changes. The number of the Company’s authorized shares were not proportionately reduced in the Reverse Stock Split and remain at 141,428,571 shares.
Overview
The following discussion highlights the results of our operations and the principal factors that have affected our financial condition as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the periods described, and provides information that management believes is relevant for an assessment and understanding of our financial condition and results of operations presented herein. The following discussion and analysis is based on our audited consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. You should read the discussion and analysis together with such financial statements and the related notes thereto.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak to be a global pandemic. In response to this pandemic, public health officials and governments across the world have recommended and mandated actions to curb the spread of the SARS-COV-2 virus, the pathogen that causes COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic and the related responses to the pandemic have caused a significant adverse impact on the global economy, including disruptions to supply chains, sharp increases in unemployment and overall economic uncertainty.
This pandemic has negatively impacted our business, including our employees, suppliers, customers and other business partners, resulting in our terminating 23 employees in 2020. We have seen demand for our exoskeleton products decrease in the current business environment, as many inpatient rehabilitation facilities temporarily shift priorities and delay capital expenditures, resulting in 61 units booked (non-cancellable customer orders) in 2020 compared to 98 in 2019, a decrease of 38%. We have seen that the clinical need has not diminished as more data is coming out about the increase prevalence of strokes during this pandemic. As such, we continue to engage with our current and prospective customers through video conferencing, virtual training events and online education demos to offer our support and showcase the value of our Ekso devices. Although market uncertainties related to the pandemic make it difficult for us to project the full impact on our business and customers, we believe that we are well-positioned to serve our customers when business conditions begin to normalize.
We continue to instruct the majority of our employees to work from home, restrict non-critical business travel and have enhanced the use of personal protective equipment in our facilities.
We are hopeful that COVID cases and hospitalizations will continue to decrease, and now that our clinical team is fully vaccinated and are active onsite at rehab centers, we expect to see an uptick in live in-person interactions going forward. In fact, we are now close to the number of onsite demos in the first quarter of 2021 compared to the previous three quarters combined. While we are cautiously optimistic about the current COVID outlook, the successful completion of our first virtual training sessions leave us well-positioned to address existing pipeline opportunities, mitigating the effects of future COVID-related lock downs or travel restrictions.
Management continues to actively monitor the global situation and its effects on our financial position and operations.
Business
We design, develop, sell, and rent exoskeleton products that augment human strength, endurance and mobility. Our exoskeleton technology serves multiple markets and can be utilized both by able-bodied persons and persons with physical disabilities. We have sold or leased devices that (i) enable individuals with neurological conditions affecting gait (acquired brain injury and spinal cord injury) to rehabilitate, and in some cases, to walk again, (ii) assist individuals with a broad range of upper extremity impairments, and (iii) allow industrial workers to perform difficult repetitive work for extended periods.
We believe that the commercial opportunity for exoskeleton technology adoption is accelerating as a result of recent advancements in material technologies, electronic and electrical engineering, control technologies, and sensor and software development. Taken individually, many of these advancements have become ubiquitous in peoples’ everyday lives. We believe that we have learned how to integrate these existing technologies and wrap the result around a human being efficiently, elegantly and safely, supported by an industry leading intellectual property portfolio. We further believe that we can do so across a broad spectrum of applications, from persons with lower limb paralysis to able-bodied users.
EksoHealth
EksoHealth is our business unit focused on developing, marketing, and selling exoskeletons for medical applications. Our leading product in EksoHealth, the EksoNR, is a robotic exoskeleton used to provide physical therapy for patients with lower extremity impairment. EksoNR, which in 2019 superseded our EksoGT product in this segment, includes unique features designed specifically to assist physical therapists and other clinicians to teach patients to walk again after suffering a neurological impairment. Typical conditions that can be treated with the assistance of EksoNR include acquired brain injuries, such as stroke and traumatic brain injuries, as well as spinal cord injuries and others. The benefits of using EksoNR for rehabilitation can include earlier mobilization of patients, longer and more intense rehab sessions, and better quality of sessions compared to alternative therapies. The product is most typically used in a clinical setting, with the most common among those being inpatient rehab facilities and stroke centers.
EksoUE is a wearable upper body exoskeleton that is also used as a tool during rehabilitation. EksoUE is designed to assists patients with a broad range of upper extremity impairments and aims to provide them with a wider active range of motion and increased endurance for rehabilitation sessions of higher intensity.
EksoWorks
EksoWorks is our business unit focused on developing, marketing, and selling exoskeletons and other assistive tools for industrial applications. The target users for these devices are generally able-bodied, and as such the goal of these products is to reduce fatigue for workers. The benefits of fatigue reduction can include reduced rates of injuries, higher productivity, higher worker morale, and lower turnover. Currently, we sell these products primarily directly to companies that deploy them for use in their operations.
Within EksoWorks we have two main categories of products. Our wearable exoskeleton products include EksoVest and the new EVO, both of which support the weight of a worker’s arms and tools, reducing the fatigue associated with working at or above shoulder height for extended periods. These products are currently targeted at end markets in Manufacturing, Aerospace, Construction, and Food Processing.
EksoZeroG is a tool holder that can mount on aerial lift platform or scaffolding. This effectively reduces the weight of heavy tools as felt by the operator. EksoZeroG has been sold primarily through rental companies into the construction market.
Operational Highlights
•In 2020, we booked a total of 61 EksoGT and EksoNR units, 19 of which were subscription units and 9 of which were previously rented units that were converted to sales.
•We recorded annual gross margins of approximately 57% in 2020, compared to 49% in 2019.
•In February 2020, we announced the worldwide launch of our upgraded EksoPulse platform, an innovative cloud-based information technology platform that measures and analyzes progress using the EksoNR robotic exoskeleton. The improved analytics system provides an easy-to-use dashboard to chart activity in rehabilitation sessions, enhancing the clinician, institutional, and patient experience of the most clinically used exoskeleton.
•In June 2020, we received FDA clearance to market our EksoNR robotic exoskeleton for use with acquired brain injury patients
•Also in June 2020, we were named “Best Healthcare Robotics Company” in 2020 MedTech Breakthrough Awards Program
•In August 2020, we launched EVO, an endurance-boosting assistive upper body exoskeleton designed for industrial use.
2020 Financing Activities
•In April 2020, we received proceeds of a $1.1 million unsecured loan under the Paycheck Protection Program, or the PPP.
•In June 2020, we sold 1,747,704 shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase up to 873,852 shares of our common stock, or June 2020 Investor Warrants, at a combined public offering price of $4.51 per share for proceeds, net of expenses and underwriting discount and commission, of $7.1 million.
•In August 2020, we paid off the entire amount of $1.5 million of the Company's indebtedness to Western Alliance Bank with proceeds from a new loan of $2.0 million from Pacific Western Bank. The terms of the new loan agreement include monthly interest-only payments over the next three years.
•During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $3.3 million in proceeds from the exercise of 723,426 warrants.
•Subsequent to year end, we received estimated net proceeds of $36.4 million from an underwritten public offering, $1.4 million from warrant exercises, and $0.7 million from sales under our "at the market offering" program. Refer to Note. 18 in the notes to our consolidated financial statements under the caption Subsequent Events.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates, and Judgments
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We continually evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Materially different results can occur as circumstances change and additional information becomes known. Besides the estimates identified below that are considered critical, we make many other accounting estimates in preparing our financial statements and related disclosures. All estimates, whether or not deemed critical, affect reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as disclosures of contingent liabilities. These estimates and judgments are also based on historical experience and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Materially different results can occur as circumstances change and additional information becomes known, even for estimates and judgments that are not deemed critical.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of products and services, which when capable of being distinct, are accounted for as separate performance obligations.
Our EksoHealth segment revenue is primarily generated through the sale and rental of our EksoNR and associated software (SmartAssist and VariableAssist), EksoUE, sale of accessories, and support and maintenance contracts (Ekso Care). Revenue from EksoHealth sales is recognized at the point in time when control of the product transfers to the customer. Transfer of control generally occurs upon shipment from our facility for sales of our EksoNR, software, and accessories. Ekso Care support and maintenance contracts extend coverage beyond our standard warranty agreements. The separately priced Ekso Care contracts range from 12 to 48 months. We receive payment at the inception of the contract and recognize revenue over the term of the agreement. Revenue from medical device rentals is recognized over the lease term, typically over 12 months.
Our EksoWorks segment revenue is generated by the sales of our EksoVest, EksoZeroG and EVO. Revenue from EksoWorks device sales is recognized at the point in time when control of the product transfers to the customer. Transfer of control generally occurs upon shipment from our facility.
Inventory valuation
Inventories are recorded at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is computed using standard cost, which approximates actual cost on a first-in, first-out basis. Materials from vendors are received and recorded as raw material. Once the raw materials are incorporated in the fabrication of the product, the related value of the component is recorded as work in progress, or WIP. Direct and indirect labor and applicable overhead costs are also allocated and recorded to WIP inventory. Finished goods are comprised of completed products that are ready for customer shipment. We periodically evaluate the carrying value of inventory on hand for potential excess amounts over sales and forecasted demand. Excess and obsolete inventories identified, if any, are recorded as an inventory impairment charge to the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Our estimate of write-downs for excess and obsolete inventory is based on a detailed analysis of on-hand inventory and purchase commitments in excess of forecasted demand. Subsequent disposals of inventories are recorded as a reduction of an inventory reserve.
Stock-based Compensation
We measure stock-based compensation expense for certain stock-based awards made to employees and directors based on the estimated fair value of the award on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, or the Black-Scholes Model, and recognize the fair value on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the awards.
Our determination of the fair value of stock options on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes Model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of highly complex and subjective variables. These variables include, but are not limited to, our expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors. We adopted the simplified method of estimating the expected term pursuant to SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 14. On this basis, we estimate the expected term of options granted by taking the average of the vesting term and the contractual term of the option.
We have, from time to time, modified the terms of stock options granted to our employees. We account for the incremental increase in the fair value over the original award on the date of the modification as an expense for vested awards or over the remaining service (vesting) period for unvested awards. The incremental compensation cost is the excess of the fair value based measure of the modified award on the date of modification over the fair value of the original award immediately before the modification.
Warrant Valuation
We generally account for warrants issued in connection with debt and equity financings as a component of equity, unless the warrants include a conditional obligation to issue a variable number of shares or there is a deemed possibility that we may need to settle the warrants in cash.
Where there is a possibility that we may have to settle warrants in cash, we estimate the fair value of the issued warrants as a liability at each reporting date and record changes in the estimated fair value as a non-cash gain or loss in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The fair values of these warrants have been determined using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model (the “Black-Scholes Model”) and the Binomial Lattice model (the “Lattice Model”). The Black-Scholes Model requires inputs, such as the expected volatility, expected term, exercise price, risk-free interest rate, and the value of the underlying security. The Lattice Model provides for assumptions regarding expected volatility, expected term, exercise price, risk-free interest rates, the value of the underlying security, and the probability of and likely timing of a specific event within the period to maturity. These values are subject to a significant degree of judgment on our part. Our common stock price represents a significant input that affects the valuation of our warrants.
Going Concern
We assess our ability to continue as a going concern at every interim and annual period in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Not meaningful
Revenue
Revenue decreased $5.0 million, or 36%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period of 2019. This decrease was comprised of a $3.9 million decrease in EksoHealth and a $1.1 million decrease in EksoWorks primarily due to a decrease in volume of medical device sales driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as our customers shifted their priorities to prepare for and manage their business during the pandemic.
Gross Profit
Gross profit decreased $1.7 million, or 25%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period of 2019, primarily attributable to a decreased volume of device sales. Gross margin was approximately 57% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a gross margin of 49% for the same period in 2019. Gross margins increased primarily due to higher average selling prices for EksoNR, an increased proportion of medical device sales in overall revenue composition, lower unit production costs, the introduction of EVO, and higher service margins.
Operating Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $3.6 million, or 32%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period of 2019, primarily due to a decrease in employee compensation expenses as a result of a furlough and a reduction in force in March and May 2020, respectively, lower selling expense as we shifted to video conferencing, virtual training events and online education demonstrations, lower general marketing and trade show activities, and the absence of clinical trials expense due to the completion of our main clinical trial in the first quarter of 2019.
Research and development expenses decreased $2.1 million, or 46%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period of 2019, primarily due to a decrease in employee compensation expenses as a result of a furlough and a reduction in force in March and May 2020, respectively, and a decrease in patent and licensing costs.
General and administrative expenses increased $0.3 million, or 4%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period of 2019, primarily due to an increase in legal expense.
Goodwill impairment charge of $0.2 million was recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020, reducing the goodwill balance to zero. No goodwill impairment charge was recorded in 2019.
Restructuring expense of $0.2 million was recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020, and related to the completion of a restructuring plan in May of 2020. We streamlined our operations and reduced our workforce by approximately 35% to lower operating expenses and reduce cash burn. The restructuring expense consisted of employee severance payments.
The reduction in operating expenses reflects the continuation of the company-wide initiatives we implemented last year, the restructuring completed in May 2020, as well as improving overall operational efficiencies. Our focus remains on optimizing the cost structure of our organization.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Interest expense decreased $0.2 million, or 64% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period of 2019, primarily due to lower effective interest rates on our term loans.
Loss on revaluation of warrant liabilities of $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, was associated with the revaluation of warrants issued in 2015, 2019 and 2020. Gain on revaluation of warrant liabilities of $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, related to warrants issued in 2015 and 2019. Gains and losses on revaluation of warrants are primarily driven by changes in our stock price.
Loss on modification of warrants of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, was due to the reduction of the exercise price of the 2015 Warrants from $56.10 per share to $41.25 per share, in connection with an amendment of the 2015 Warrant Agreement, which retroactively removed a provision from such securities purchase agreement that prohibited the Company from effecting or entering into an agreement to effect any issuance by the Company of its common stock at a price determined based on the trading price of the Company’s common stock or otherwise at a future determined price. There was no comparable amount during the same period in 2020.
Warrant issuance expense of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was recorded in connection with our private placement offerings of warrants to purchase common stock concurrently with a registered direct offering of our common stock in June 2020. We incurred $1.1 million in direct financing costs, which were allocated on a relative fair value basis between the common stock and warrant issuances, of which $0.3 million was allocated to warrants and expensed immediately. Warrant issuance expense of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was recorded in connection with our May 2019 and December 2019 financings. We incurred $1.7 million in direct financing costs, which were allocated on a relative fair value basis between the common stock and warrant issuances, of which $1.1 million was allocated to warrants and expensed immediately.
Other income, net was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to other expense, net of $0.1 million the same period of 2019, due to unrealized gains and losses on foreign currency revaluations of our inter-company monetary assets and liabilities.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts toward the development of exoskeletons for the medical and industrial markets, toward the commercialization of medical exoskeletons to rehabilitation centers and toward raising capital. We have financed our operations primarily through the issuance and sale of equity securities for cash consideration and through bank debt.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $13.4 million, compared to working capital of $11.0 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in working capital is primarily due to higher cash balance from equity financings, warrants exercises, and
the reduction of notes payable, current as a result of retiring our WAB Term Loan. Our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 consisted of bank deposits with third party financial institutions. As of December 31, 2020, of our $12.9 million of cash, $12.3 million was held domestically while $0.6 million was held by foreign subsidiaries.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $199.1 million and cash on hand of $12.9 million. Largely as a result of significant research and development activities related to our advanced technology and commercialization of such technology into our medical device business, we have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception. We have incurred net losses of $15.8 million and $12.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds of $7.1 million from a registered direct offering and $3.3 million from warrant exercises, and used $8.8 million of cash in our operations.
Subsequent to year-end through February 25, 2021, we received estimated net proceeds of $36.4 million from an underwritten public offering, $1.4 million from warrant exercises, and $0.7 million from sales under our "at the market offering" program. Refer to Note. 18 in the notes to our consolidated financial statements under the caption Subsequent Events.
In 2020, management took several actions to alleviate the substantial doubt about the our ability to continue as a going concern that existed as of the date of issuance of the December 31, 2019 consolidated financial statements, including, but not limited to, the following:
•streamlined our operations and reduced our workforce by approximately 35% to lower operating expenses and reduce cash burn;
•conducted a registered direct offering of 1,747,704 shares of our common stock for net proceeds of $7.1 million;
•paid off the entire amount of $1.5 million of our indebtedness to Western Alliance Bank with proceeds from a new loan of $2.0 million from Pacific Western Bank. The terms of the new loan agreement include monthly interest-only payments over the next three years.
•invested in the development and reliability of our products;
•restructured our commercial organization and strategy which has been gaining traction;
•received FDA clearance for ABI to market our product to a larger patient population increasing the value proposition to our customers.
As described in Note 9 in the notes to our consolidated financial statements under the caption Notes Payable, net, borrowings under our new secured term loan agreement with Pacific Western Bank have a requirement of minimum cash on hand equivalent to the current outstanding principal balance. As of December 31, 2020, $2.0 million of cash must remain as restricted. After considering cash restrictions, effective unrestricted cash as of December 31, 2020 is estimated to be $10.9 million. With this unrestricted cash balance and the impact of management's actions described above, and additional cash received after year-end, we believe that we currently have sufficient cash to fund our operations beyond the look forward period of one year from the issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
Our actual capital requirements may vary significantly and will depend on many factors. We plan to continue our investments in our (i) sales initiatives to accelerate adoption of the Ekso robotic exoskeleton in the rehabilitation market, (ii) research, development and commercialization activities with respect to exoskeletons for rehabilitation, and (iii) development and commercialization of able-bodied exoskeletons for industrial use. Consequently, we may require significant additional financing in the future, which we intend to raise through corporate collaborations, public or private equity offerings, debt financings, or warrant solicitations. Sales of additional equity securities by us could result in the dilution of the interests of existing stockholders. There can be no assurance that financing will be available when required in sufficient amounts, on acceptable terms or at all. In the event that the necessary additional financing is not obtained, we may be required to further reduce our discretionary overhead costs substantially, including research and development, general and administrative, and sales and marketing expenses or otherwise curtail operations.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The following table summarizes the sources and uses of cash for the periods stated (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operations decreased $7.0 million, or 44%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period of 2019, primarily due to the reduction in operating expenses by improving overall operational efficiencies, including but not limited to, the reduction of employee headcount. In addition, increased collection efforts resulted in higher ratio of accounts receivable collections to sales.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $0.1 million, or 100%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period of 2019, primarily due to lower hardware and software purchases due to lower headcount.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was from the sale of our common stock for net proceeds of $7.1 million in connection with the equity financing in June 2020, proceeds of $1.1 million from our PPP loan, and proceeds of $3.3 million from the exercise of June 2020 Warrants and May 2019 Warrants, partially offset by aggregate principal payments of $1.3 million against our term loan and the $1.5 million payoff of our loan with Western Alliance Bank.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $19.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was from the sale of common stock and warrants for net proceeds of $9.0 million in connection with the equity financing in May 2019, net proceeds of $4.2 million with the equity financing in December 2019, net proceeds of $2.8 million from our “at the market offering” program, net proceeds of $5.0 million from equity investors associated with the JV Agreement, and proceeds of $0.2 million from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by aggregate principal payments of $2.4 million against our term loan.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Our liquidity is not dependent on the use of off-balance sheet financing arrangements (as that term is defined in Item 303(a) (4) (ii) of Regulation S-K) and as of December 31, 2020, we had no such arrangements. There has been no material change in our contractual obligations other than in the ordinary course of business since our fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our outstanding contractual obligations, including interest payments, as of December 31, 2020 and the effect those obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods (in thousands):
In addition to the table above, which reflects only fixed payment obligations, we have two license agreements to maintain exclusive rights to certain patents. Under these license agreements, we are required to pay 1% of net sales of products sold to entities other than the U.S. government. In the event of a sublicense, we will owe 21% of license fees and must pass through 1% of the sub-licensee’s net sales of products sold to entities other than the U.S. government. The license agreements also stipulate minimum annual royalties of $50,000 per year.
In connection with our acquisition of Equipois in December 2015, we assumed the rights and obligations of Equipois under a license agreement with the developer of certain intellectual property related to mechanical balance and support arm technologies, which grants us an exclusive license with respect to the technology and patent rights for certain fields of use. Pursuant to the terms of the license agreement, we will be required to pay a single-digit royalty on net receipts, subject to a $50,000 annual minimum royalty requirement.
We purchase components from a variety of suppliers and use contract manufacturers to provide manufacturing services for our products. Purchase obligations are defined as agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. We had purchase obligations primarily for purchases of inventory and manufacturing related service contracts totaling $0.4 million as of December 31, 2020, which is expected to be paid within a year. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different depending on the time of receipt of goods or services or changes to agreed-upon amounts for some obligations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 in the notes to our consolidated financial statements under the caption Recent Accounting Pronouncements for a discussion of new accounting pronouncements.