Item 7. Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with “Selected financial data” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview and Business Trends
The Company is a multi-brand beauty company that offers inclusive, accessible, cruelty-free cosmetics and skin-care products. Our mission is to make the best of beauty accessible to every eye, lip and face.
We believe our ability to deliver 100% cruelty-free, premium-quality products at accessible prices with broad appeal differentiates us in the beauty industry. We believe the combination of our fundamental value equation, digitally-led strategy, as well as our world-class team’s ability to execute with speed, has positioned us well to navigate a rapidly changing landscape in beauty.
Our family of brands includes e.l.f. Cosmetics, W3LL PEOPLE and Keys Soulcare. Our brands are available online and across leading beauty, mass-market, and clean-beauty specialty retailers. We have strong relationships with our retail partners such as Walmart, Target, Ulta Beauty and other leading retailers that have enabled us to expand distribution both domestically and internationally.
For additional information regarding our business, see Part I, Item 1, “Business.”
COVID-19 Pandemic
The color cosmetics and skin care categories and our business were impacted in the year ended March 31, 2021 by the COVID-19 pandemic. There could be continued impact on these categories and our business results until consumers return to normal shopping patterns. In addition, a current vessel and container shortage globally could delay future inventory receipts and, in turn, could delay deliveries to our retailers and availability of products in our direct-to-consumer e-commerce channel or could increase our shipping costs. Such potential delays and shipping disruptions could negatively impact our results of operations through higher inventory costs and reduced sales. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic we have focused on the following areas to address the impact on our business: i) supporting the health and safety of our employees and community; ii) minimizing disruption to the supply chain; and iii) keeping adequate levels of liquidity and flexibility within the our credit facilities.
Tariffs
Tariffs have impacted the majority of products that we import from China. Despite the signing of a Phase One trade agreement between the United States and China, the majority of our products remain impacted by increased tariffs. To mitigate the financial impact of these tariffs on our results of operations, we selectively increased prices on certain of our products in July 2019. We also implemented various other tariff mitigation initiatives including, but not limited to, negotiating lower prices with our suppliers in China and exploring potential new suppliers outside of China. In addition, favorable movements in foreign exchange rates and shifting product mix toward margin accretive innovation helped to partially offset to the impact of the tariffs on our gross margin.
Components of our results of operations and trends affecting our business
Net sales
We develop, market and sell beauty products under the e.l.f. Cosmetics, W3LL PEOPLE and Keys Soulcare brands. Our net sales are derived from sales of these beauty products, net of provisions for sales discounts and allowances, product returns, markdowns and price adjustments.
Year over year changes in net sales is driven by a number of factors, including color cosmetics and skin care category performance, levels of consumer spending, and our ability to drive awareness of and demand for our products. Within our existing retailer accounts, we are able to drive growth by expanding space and door penetration and increasing sales per linear foot, supported by our continued innovation, including our ability to introduce new first-to-mass products in both existing and adjacent categories. While we have distribution with a number of key retail accounts, we expect to continue
to grow through improved sales per linear foot in our existing space, expanded space allocation with our current retail accounts, as well as adding new retail customers.
Our business faces challenges and uncertainties, including our ability to introduce new products that will appeal to a broad consumer base, our ability to service demand, the ability of our major retail customers to drive traffic and keep products in stock, our ability to continue to grow our customer base and competitive threats from other beauty companies.
Our largest two customers accounted for 26% and 22%, respectively, of our net sales in the year ended March 31, 2021. No other individual customer accounted for 10% or more of our net sales in the year ended March 31, 2021. National and international retailers comprised 86% of our net sales in the year ended March 31, 2021. The remaining 14% came from our direct-to-consumer e-commerce channels.
The primary market for our products is the United States, which accounted for 89% of our net sales in the year ended March 31, 2021. The remaining 11% was attributable to international markets, primarily Canada and the United Kingdom.
Gross profit
Gross profit is our net sales less cost of sales. Cost of sales includes the aggregate costs to procure our products, including the amounts invoiced by our third-party contract manufacturers for finished goods as well as costs related to transportation to our distribution center, customs and duties. Cost of sales also includes the effect of changes in the balance of reserves for excess and obsolete inventory. Gross margin measures our gross profit as a percentage of net sales.
We have an extensive network of third-party manufacturers (primarily in China) from whom we purchase substantially all of our finished goods. We have worked to evolve our supply chain to increase capacity and technical capabilities while maintaining or reducing overall costs as a percentage of sales.
Historically, we have improved our gross margin largely through changes in our product mix, pricing, purchasing efficiencies and cost reductions in our supply chain, and expect to continue leveraging our innovation and sourcing capabilities in future periods. Other drivers of changes in gross margin include fluctuations in exchange rates, changes in customer mix, and changes in the balance of reserves for excess and obsolete inventory, among other things, which may offset the benefit of changes in product mix, pricing, purchasing efficiencies and cost reductions.
Selling, general and administrative
Our selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, fringe benefits and stock-based compensation, marketing and digital expenses, warehousing and distribution costs, costs related to merchandising, depreciation of property and equipment, amortization of retail product displays and amortization of intangible assets. See “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Stock-based Compensation” below for more detail regarding stock-based compensation.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense primarily consists of cash interest and fees on our outstanding indebtedness. See “Financial condition, liquidity and capital resources” below and a description of our indebtedness in Note 10 to the Notes to consolidated financial statements in Part IV, Item 15 “Exhibits, financial statement schedules”.
Other income (expense), net
Our purchases are largely in Chinese Renminbi (RMB), and, as such, we are exposed to periodic fluctuations in that currency. Other income (expense), net is primarily related to foreign exchange rate movements.
Income tax (provision) benefit
The provision for income taxes represents federal, foreign, state and local income taxes. The effective rate differs from statutory rates due to the effect of state and local income taxes and certain permanent tax adjustments. Our effective tax rate will change from quarter to quarter based on recurring and nonrecurring factors including, but not limited to, the geographical mix of earnings, enacted tax legislation, state and local income taxes, tax audit settlements, the interaction of various tax strategies and the impact of permanent tax adjustments, such as those related to stock based compensation.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law making several changes to the Internal Revenue Code. The changes include, but are not limited to, increasing the limitation on the amount of deductible interest expense, allowing companies to carryback certain net operating losses and increasing the amount of net operating loss carryforwards that corporations can use to offset taxable income. The tax law changes in the CARES Act did not have a material impact on our income tax provision.
Net income (loss)
Our net income (loss) for future periods will be affected by the various factors described above.
Results of operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data in dollars and as a percentage of net sales for the periods presented. Results for the twelve months ended March 31, 2019 were derived from our quarterly consolidated statements of operations as previously reported.
Comparison of the year ended March 31, 2021 to the year ended March 31, 2020
Net sales
Net sales increased $35.3 million, or 12%, to $318.1 million in the year ended March 31, 2021, from $282.9 million in the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was driven by strength in e-commerce, international, and our
national retailers. Net sales increased $18.1 million, or 7% in our retailer channels and $17.0 million, or 64% in our e-commerce channels.
Gross profit
Gross profit increased $25.1 million, or 14%, to $206.2 million in the year ended March 31, 2021, compared to $181.1 million in the year ended March 31, 2020. Increased volume accounted for approximately $22.6 million of the increase in gross profit, with the remaining $2.5 million driven by an increase in gross margin rate. The increase in gross margin rate was driven by benefits from margin accretive innovation, cost savings, a mix shift to elfcosmetics.com, and price increases partially offset by certain costs related to retailer activity and space expansion, an increase in inventory adjustments, and the impact of tariffs on goods imported from China in the year ended March 31, 2021. The net of these drivers resulted in an 80 basis point increase in gross margin, which increased from 64% in the year ended March 31, 2020 to 65% in the year ended March 31, 2021.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
SG&A expenses were $194.2 million in the year ended March 31, 2021, an increase of $37.0 million, or 24%, from $157.2 million in the year ended March 31, 2020. SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales increased to 61% for the year ended March 31, 2021 from 56% in the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to marketing and digital, including costs related to advertising, digital, and organizational costs related to building out our marketing, digital and innovation capabilities of $22.0 million. Additionally, we experienced increased operational costs mainly driven by the increase in e-commerce sales of $6.9 million.
Restructuring expense (income)
Restructuring expenses were $2.6 million in the year ended March 31, 2021, consisting of charges related to the closure of our manufacturing facility in California. See Note 15 Restructuring and other related costs to consolidated financial statements in Part IV, Item 15 “Exhibits, financial statement schedules” for further details.
Restructuring income in the year ended March 31, 2020 related to the exit of our stand-alone e.l.f. retail stores business in February 2019 and included a $7.7 million gain related to operating leases that were settled for less than their aggregate lease liabilities.
We settled all outstanding lease liabilities related to our e.l.f. retail store closures as of March 31, 2020 and we do not expect to incur additional material costs associated with our e.l.f retail store closures.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net was $1.6 million of expense in the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to $0.4 million of income in the year ended March 31, 2020. The change was primarily related to foreign exchange rate movements.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense decreased $2.2 million, or 35%, to $4.1 million in the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to $6.3 million in the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was due to a reduction in our long-term debt as well as a decline in interest rates.
Income tax benefit (provision)
The provision for income taxes decreased from an expense of $6.2 million, or an effective tax rate of 26%, for the year ended March 31, 2020, to a benefit of $2.5 million, or an effective tax rate of (69)%, for the year ended March 31, 2021. The change in the provision for income taxes was primarily driven by a decrease in income before taxes of $20.4 million and an increase in one-time tax benefits of $3.7 million, primarily related to stock-based compensation.
Comparison of the year ended March 31, 2020 to twelve months ended March 31, 2019
Net sales
Net sales increased $15.2 million, or 6%, to $282.9 million in the year ended March 31, 2020, from $267.7 million in the twelve months ended March 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increased productivity across our retail and
e-commerce channels. The increased productivity in our retail channel was largely seen through improved sales growth within Nielsen-tracked channel customers, and via e-commerce through sales growth on elfcosmetics.com. Net sales increased $25.9 million, or 11%, and $1.4 million, or 7% in our retail and e-commerce channels, respectively. These increases were partially offset by the closing of all 22 e.l.f. retail stores in February 2019, which generated net sales of approximately $12.1 million during the twelve months ended March 31, 2019.
Gross profit
Gross profit increased $18.1 million, or 11%, to $181.1 million in the year ended March 31, 2020, compared to $163.0 million in the twelve months ended March 31, 2019. Increased volume accounted for approximately $9.3 million of the increase in gross profit, with the remaining $8.8 million driven by an increase in gross margin rate. The increase in gross margin rate was driven by a combination of margin accretive innovation, cost savings, price increases, favorable movements in foreign exchange rates and an increase in inventory adjustments in the twelve months ended March 31, 2019. These factors were partially offset by higher sales adjustments and the impact of tariffs on goods imported from China. These drivers resulted in a 300 basis point increase in gross margin, which increased from 61% in the twelve months ended March 31, 2019 to 64% in the year ended March 31, 2020.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
SG&A expenses were $157.2 million in the year ended March 31, 2020, an increase of $19.5 million, or 14%, from $137.7 million in the twelve months ended March 31, 2019. SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales increased to 56% for the year ended March 31, 2020 from 51% in the twelve months ended March 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to investments in marketing and digital expenses of $17.0 million. Increased bonus expense, investment in merchandising programs, and increased depreciation expenses driven by customer fixture programs added an additional $8.1 million of expense. These increases were partially offset by the closure of e.l.f. retail stores, which totaled $5.8 million for the twelve months ended March 31, 2019.
Restructuring income
Activities related to the exit of our stand-alone e.l.f. retail stores business in February 2019 generated income of $6.0 million for the year ended March 31, 2020 and included a $7.7 million gain related to operating leases that were settled for less than their aggregate lease liabilities. The remainder of restructuring expense consisted of $1.8 million in other costs, which were primarily legal fees related to these extinguishments.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net was $0.4 million in the year ended March 31, 2020, an increase of $0.2 million versus the twelve months ended March 31, 2019. The change was primarily related to foreign exchange rate movements.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense decreased $1.4 million, or 18%, to $6.3 million in the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to $7.7 million in the twelve months ended March 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to an increase in interest income generated on our cash and cash equivalents, in addition to a reduction in our long-term debt.
Income tax benefit (provision)
The provision for income taxes increased from a benefit of $1.3 million, or an effective tax rate of 29%, for the twelve months ended March 31, 2019 to expense of $6.2 million, or an effective tax rate of 26%, for the year ended March 31, 2020. The change in the provision for income taxes was primarily driven by an increase in income before taxes of $28.4 million and a decrease in one-time tax benefits of $1.0 million, primarily related to the Company's provision-to-return adjustment for the period ending December 31, 2017, which was recorded during fiscal 2019.
Comparison of the year ended March 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2018
A comparison of the year ended March 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2018 may be found in Part II, Item 7, of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended March 31, 2020, as amended.
Financial condition, liquidity and capital resources
Overview
As of March 31, 2021, we held $57.8 million of cash and cash equivalents. In addition, as of March 31, 2021, we had borrowing capacity of $49.8 million under the Prior Revolving Credit Facility (as defined under the heading “Description of indebtedness”).
Our primary cash needs are for capital expenditures, retail product displays and working capital. Capital expenditures typically vary depending on strategic initiatives selected for the fiscal year, including investments in infrastructure, digital capabilities, and expansion within or to additional retailer store locations. We expect to fund ongoing capital expenditures from existing cash on hand, cash generated from operations and, if necessary, draws on the Amended Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below in Part II, Item 7 "Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations" under the heading "Description of indebtedness").
Our primary working capital requirements are for product and product-related costs, payroll, rent, distribution costs and advertising and marketing. Fluctuations in working capital are primarily driven by the timing of when a retailer rearranges or restocks its products, expansion of space within our existing retailer base and the general seasonality of our business. As of March 31, 2021, we had working capital, excluding cash, of $39.0 million, compared to $35.1 million as of March 31, 2020. Working capital, excluding cash and debt, was $55.3 million and $47.6 million as of March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020, respectively.
We believe that our operating cash flow, cash on hand and available financing under the Amended Revolving Credit Facility will be adequate to meet our planned operating, investing and financing needs for the next twelve months. If necessary, we can borrow funds under the Amended Revolving Credit Facility to finance our liquidity requirements, subject to customary borrowing conditions. To the extent additional funds are necessary to meet our long-term liquidity needs as we continue to execute our business strategy, we anticipate that they will be obtained through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of funds; however, such financing may not be available on favorable terms, or at all. Our ability to meet our operating, investing and financing needs depends to a significant extent on our future financial performance, which will be subject in part to general economic, competitive, financial, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control, including those described elsewhere in Part II, Item 1A “Risk factors”. In addition to these general economic and industry factors, the principal factors in determining whether our cash flows will be sufficient to meet our liquidity requirements will be our ability to provide innovative products to our consumers and manage production and our supply chain.
Cash flows
Cash provided by operating activities
For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $29.5 million. This included net income, before deducting depreciation, amortization and other non-cash items, of $46.4 million and an increase in net working capital of $16.9 million. The increase in net working capital was driven by a $10.5 million increase in accounts receivable, a $10.9 million increase in inventory and a $9.7 million increase in prepaid and other assets, partially offset by a $17.5 million increase of accounts payable and accrued expenses.
For the year ended March 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $44.3 million. This included net income, before deducting depreciation, amortization and other non-cash items, of $54.3 million and an increase in net working capital of $10.0 million. The increase in net working capital was driven by an $11.5 million decrease in other liabilities
primarily related to termination payments on store leases, partially offset by the timing of cash payments related to accounts payable and accrued expenses.
For the three months ended March 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $8.2 million. This included a net loss, before adding depreciation, amortization and other non-cash items of $12.5 million and increases in net working capital of $4.3 million. The increase in net working capital was driven by a $3.3 million decrease in other liabilities, primarily related to store closures, partially offset by a $4.2 million decrease in accounts receivable.
Cash used in investing activities
For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $6.5 million, which was primarily driven by capital expenditures related to new customer fixture programs.
For the year ended March 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $35.3 million. This includes $25.9 million paid for the acquisition of W3LL People, Inc. and capital expenditures of $9.4 million.
For the three months ended March 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $3.4 million, which was primarily driven by capital expenditures related to new customer fixture programs.
Cash used in financing activities
For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $11.4 million, driven by $11.8 million in mandatory principal payments under the Prior Term Loan Facility (as defined under the heading “Description of indebtedness”). This was partially offset by $1.5 million of proceeds from the exercise of options to purchase common stock.
For the year ended March 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $16.7 million, driven by $9.5 million in mandatory principal payments under the Prior Term Loan Facility and repurchase of common stock of $7.9 million. This was partially offset by $1.5 million of proceeds from the exercise of options to purchase common stock.
For the three months ended March 31, 2019, net cash used in financing activities was $2.1 million and was primarily related to mandatory principal payments under the Prior Term Loan Facility.
Description of indebtedness
Prior credit agreement
On December 23, 2016, we entered into a five-year, $200.0 million Senior Secured Credit Agreement (as amended, the "Prior Credit Agreement") with a syndicate consisting of several large financial institutions. The Prior Credit Agreement was first amended on August 25, 2017, increasing the aggregate commitments to $215.0 million. The Prior Credit Agreement, as amended, consists of a $50.0 million revolving line of credit (the “Prior Revolving Credit Facility”) and a $165.0 million term loan (the “Prior Term Loan Facility”). The Prior Credit Agreement was amended again on December 7, 2018 to reflect the change in our fiscal year-end from December 31 to March 31. The Prior Credit Agreement was further amended on April 8, 2020 to (i) increase the maximum permitted total net leverage ratio for the fiscal quarters ending June 30, 2020, September 30, 2020, December 31, 2020, March 31, 2021 and June 30, 2021, (ii) reduce the minimum fixed charge coverage ratio for the fiscal quarters ending December 31, 2020 and March 31, 2021, (iii) add additional interest rates to correspond to the increased maximum permitted total net leverage ratios, (iv) increase the amount of cash netted in the calculation of the consolidated total net leverage ratio, and (v) amend the language around the level of add backs to the adjusted consolidated EBITDA definition. We amended and restated the Prior Credit Agreement in April 2021 as described under the heading “Amended credit agreement” below.
All amounts under the Prior Revolving Credit Facility were available for draw until the maturity date on August 25, 2022. The Prior Revolving Credit Facility was collateralized by substantially all of our assets and required payment of an unused fee ranging from 0.35% to 0.25% (based on our consolidated total net leverage ratio (as defined in the Prior Credit Agreement)) times the average daily amount of unutilized commitments under the Prior Revolving Credit Facility. The Prior Revolving Credit Facility also provided for sub-facilities in the form of a $7.0 million letter of credit and a $5.0 million swing line loan; however, all amounts under the Prior Revolving Credit Facility could exceed $50.0 million. The unused balance of the Prior Revolving Credit Facility as of March 31, 2021 was $49.8 million.
The Prior Term Loan Facility maturity date was August 25, 2022 and was collateralized by substantially all of our assets. Amortization installment payments on the Prior Term Loan Facility were required to be made in quarterly installments of (i) $2,062,500 for fiscal quarters ended September 30, 2017 through June 30, 2019, (ii) $2,475,000 for fiscal quarters ended September 30, 2019 through June 30, 2020, (iii) $3,093,750 for fiscal quarters ending September 30, 2020 through June 30, 2021 and (iv) $4,125,000 for fiscal quarters ending September 30, 2021 through June 30, 2022. The remaining Prior Term Loan Facility balance was due upon the maturity date. The Prior Term Loan Facility could be prepaid at any time without penalty and was subject to mandatory prepayments when there was (i) excess cash flow, which is defined as EBITDA less certain customary deductions, (ii) non-ordinary course asset dispositions that result in net proceeds in excess of $2.5 million during a year, unless reinvested within twelve months or (iii) issuance of additional debt.
Both the Prior Revolving Credit Facility and the Prior Term Loan Facility bore interest, at our option, at either a rate per annum equal to (i) an adjusted LIBOR rate determined by reference to the cost of funds for U.S. dollar deposits for the applicable interest period (subject to a minimum floor of 0%) plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.50% to 3.25% based on our consolidated total net leverage ratio or (ii) a floating base rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 0.50% to 2.25% based on our consolidated total net leverage ratio. The interest rate as of March 31, 2021 for the Prior Term Loan Facility was approximately 2.0%.
The Prior Credit Agreement contained a number of covenants that, among other things, restricted our ability to (subject to certain exceptions) pay dividends and distributions or repurchase our capital stock, incur additional indebtedness, create liens on assets, engage in mergers or consolidations and sell or otherwise dispose of assets. The Prior Credit Agreement also included reporting, financial and maintenance covenants that require us to, among other things, comply with certain consolidated total net leverage ratios and consolidated fixed charge coverage ratios. As of March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under the Prior Credit Agreement.
Amended credit agreement
On April 30, 2021, we amended and restated the Prior Credit Agreement (the “Amended Credit Agreement”), amended and restated the Prior Term Loan Facility and the Prior Revolving Credit Facility, and refinanced all loans under the Prior Credit Agreement.
The Amended Credit Agreement has a five year term and consists of (i) a $100 million revolving credit facility (the “Amended Revolving Credit Facility”) and (ii) a $100 million term loan facility (the “Amended Term Loan Facility”).
All amounts under the Amended Revolving Credit Facility are available for draw until the maturity date on April 30, 2026. The Amended Revolving Credit Facility is collateralized by substantially all of our assets and requires payment of an unused fee ranging from 0.10% to 0.30% (based on our consolidated total net leverage ratio (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement)) times the average daily amount of unutilized commitments under the Amended Revolving Credit Facility. The Amended Revolving Credit Facility also provides for sub-facilities in the form of a $7 million letter of credit and a $5 million swing line loan; however, all amounts under the Amended Revolving Credit Facility cannot exceed $100 million. The unused balance of the Amended Revolving Credit Facility as of May 14, 2021 was $73.3 million.
Both the Amended Revolving Credit Facility and the Amended Term Loan Facility bear interest, at borrowers’ option, at either (i) a rate per annum equal to an adjusted LIBOR rate determined by reference to the cost of funds for the U.S. dollar deposits for the applicable interest period (subject to a minimum floor of 0%) plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.25% to 2.125% based on our consolidated total net leverage ratio or (ii) a floating base rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 0.25% to 1.125% based on our consolidated total net leverage ratio.
The Amended Credit Agreement contains a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict our ability to (subject to certain exceptions) pay dividends and distributions or repurchase our capital stock, incur additional indebtedness, create liens on assets, engage in mergers or consolidations and sell or otherwise dispose of assets. The Amended Credit Agreement also includes reporting, financial and maintenance covenants that require us to, among other things, comply with certain consolidated total net leverage ratios and consolidated fixed charge coverage ratios.
Contractual obligations and commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of March 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)Long-term debt payments include scheduled principal payments only.
(2)Assumes an annual interest rate of 2.0% on the Prior Term Loan Facility over the term of the loan.
(3)Includes a $0.3 million residual value guarantee.
(4)We have excluded our liability for uncertain tax positions from the table above because we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We are not party to any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
Our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the Note 2 to consolidated financial statements in Part IV, Item 15 “Exhibits, financial statement schedules”, we believe that the following accounting policies and estimates are critical to our business operations and understanding of our financial results.
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue when control of promised goods or services is transferred to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Control of the substantial majority of the products that we sell will be transferred at a point in time. Factors that determine the specific point in time a customer obtains control and a performance obligation is satisfied are when we have a present right to payment for the goods, whether the customer has physical possession and title to the goods, and whether significant risks and rewards of ownership have transferred. Delivery is typically considered to have occurred at the time the title and risk of loss passes to the customer.
In the normal course of business, we offer various incentives to customers such as sales discounts, markdown support and other incentives and allowances, which give rise to variable consideration. The amount of variable consideration is estimated at the time of sale based on either the expected value method or the most likely amount, depending on the nature of the variability. We regularly review and revise, when deemed necessary, our estimates of variable consideration based on both customer-specific expectations as well as historical rates of realization. A provision for unclaimed customer incentives and allowances is included on the consolidated balance sheet, net against accounts receivable.
Business Combinations
We allocate the purchase price of a business acquisition to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based upon their estimated fair values at the business combination date. The excess of purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Determining fair value of identifiable assets, particularly intangibles, and liabilities acquired also requires us to make estimates, which are based on all available information and in some cases assumptions with respect to the timing and amount of future revenues and expenses associated with an asset. Unanticipated
events or circumstances may occur that could affect the accuracy of our fair value estimates, and under different assumptions, the resulting valuations could be materially different, which could impact the operating results we report.
Impairment of long-lived assets, including goodwill and intangible assets
We assess potential impairments to our long-lived assets, which include property and equipment, retail product displays, and amortizable intangible assets, whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of an asset is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset group to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. There were no impairment charges recorded on long-lived assets during the years ended March 31, 2021 or March 31, 2020.
We evaluate our indefinite-lived intangible asset to determine whether current events and circumstances continue to support an indefinite useful life. In addition, our indefinite-lived intangible asset is tested for impairment annually. The indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment test consists of a comparison of the fair value of each asset with its carrying value, with any excess of carrying value over fair value being recognized as an impairment loss. We are also permitted to make a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset’s fair value is less than its carrying value prior to applying the quantitative assessment. If based on our qualitative assessment it is more likely than not that the carrying value of the asset is less than its fair value, then a quantitative assessment may be required.
The goodwill impairment test consists of a comparison of each reporting unit’s fair value to its carrying value. The fair value of a reporting unit is an estimate of the amount for which the unit as a whole could be sold in a current transaction between willing parties. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, goodwill is written down to its implied fair value. We are also permitted to make a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value prior to applying the quantitative assessment. If based on our qualitative assessment it is more likely than not that the carrying value of the reporting unit is less than its fair value, then a quantitative assessment may be required. We have identified a single reporting unit for purposes of impairment testing.
We have selected October 1 as the date on which to perform our annual impairment tests. We also test for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the fair value of goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets has been impaired. No impairment of goodwill or our indefinite-lived intangible asset was recorded during the years ended March 31, 2021 or March 31, 2020.
Stock-based compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for all awards that vest. We estimate the fair value of employee stock-based payment awards subject to only a service condition on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. The Black-Scholes model requires the use of highly subjective and complex assumptions, including the option’s expected term and the price volatility of the underlying stock. We estimate the fair value of employee stock-based payment awards subject to market conditions on the date of grant using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
We recognize compensation expense for awards with only a service condition on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the award’s vesting period. Compensation expense for employee stock-based awards whose vesting is subject to the fulfillment of both a market condition and the occurrence of a performance condition is recognized on a graded-vesting basis at the time the achievement of the performance condition becomes probable. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
The expected stock price volatility for common stock was estimated by taking the average historic price volatility for industry peers based on daily price observations over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock option grants. Industry peers consist of several public companies in our industry which are of similar size, complexity and stage of development. The risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the option is based on the U.S. Treasury implied yield at the date of grant. The weighted-average expected term is determined with reference to historical exercise and post-vesting cancellation experience and the vesting period and contractual term of the awards.
We have no current plans to pay a regular dividend.
New accounting pronouncements
See Note 2 Summary of significant accounting policies to the Notes to consolidated financial statements in Part IV, Item 15, “Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules” for information regarding new accounting pronouncements.
We comply with any new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies.