ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S Discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationS
The following information should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “Report”).
Except for the historical information contained in this Report, the matters discussed herein may be deemed to be forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. We make such forward-looking statements pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and other federal securities laws. In this Report, words such as “may,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “intend,” and similar expressions (as well as other words or expressions referencing future events, conditions or circumstances) are intended to identify forward-looking statements.
Our actual results and the timing of certain events may differ materially from the results discussed, projected, anticipated, or indicated in any forward-looking statements. We caution you that forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and that our actual results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and the development of the industry in which we operate may differ materially from the forward-looking statements contained in this Report. In addition, even if our results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and the development of the industry in which we operate are consistent with the forward-looking statements contained in this Report, they may not be predictive of results or developments in future periods.
The following information and any forward-looking statements should be considered in light of factors discussed elsewhere in this Report, including those risks identified under Item 1A., Risk Factors. In many instances, dollar amounts contained in the narrative descriptions in the following section of this Report are stated in approximate values, pursuant to generally accepted rounding conventions. We caution readers not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements made by us, which speak only as of the date they are made. We disclaim any obligation, except as specifically required by law and the rules of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), to publicly update or revise any such statements to reflect any change in our expectations or in events, conditions or circumstances on which any such statements may be based, or that may affect the likelihood that actual results will differ from those set forth in the forward-looking statements.
Company Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company developing novel ribonucleic acid (RNA)-modulating drug candidates, each designed to be a eukaryotic ribosomal selective glycoside (ERSG), formulated to treat rare and ultra-rare premature stop codon diseases. Premature stop codons are point mutations that disrupt the stability of the impacted messenger RNA (mRNA) and the protein synthesis from that mRNA. As a consequence, patients with premature stop codon diseases have reduced levels of, or no, protein from a gene whose product performs an essential function. This type of mutation accounts for some of the most severe phenotypes across genetic diseases. Nonsense mutations have been identified in over 1,800 rare and ultra-rare diseases. Read-through therapeutic development is focused on increasing functional protein synthesis by enabling the cytoplasmic ribosome to read through premature stop codons to produce full-length proteins. As opposed to a typical gene therapy approach of targeting a single, unique mutation in a target disease, this small molecule strategy enables targeting an entire class of mutations across the rare disease landscape. Our small molecule approach has the potential to address a range of different premature stop codons in a single gene since our ERSG compounds are targeted to the ribosomes. ELX-02, our lead investigational drug product candidate, is a small molecule designed to restore production of full-length functional proteins. ELX-02 is in clinical development for systemic administration for cystic fibrosis. ELX-02 is an investigational drug that has not been approved by any global regulatory body. We are also conducting IND-enabling preclinical studies of ERSG compounds for autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) and in rare inherited retinal disorders (IRDs) by intravitreal administration with an initial focus on Usher Syndrome. Our preclinical candidate pool consists of a library of novel ERSG drug candidates identified based on read-through potential and cytoplasmic ribosomal selectivity. We hold worldwide development and commercialization rights to ELX-02 and other novel compounds in our read-through library, for all indications, in all territories, under a license from the Technion Research and Development Foundation Ltd. (“TRDF”).
In 2019, we advanced our clinical program for ELX-02 into Phase 2 studies in cystic fibrosis and nephropathic cystinosis following completion of our MAD (multiple ascending dose) study in healthy volunteers and renal impairment study in healthy volunteers as well as volunteers with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment. The results from the MAD study were presented in 2019 at both the European Cystic Fibrosis Society clinical meeting and the North American Cystic Fibrosis Conference (NACFC). The results have also been published in the Journal of Clinical Pharmacology in Drug Development in January of 2021. The results from the renal impairment study were presented at the 2019 American Society of Nephrology (ASN) Kidney Week and published in December 2020 in the Journal of Clinical Pharmacology. The results from the renal impairment study provided support for both continuing our clinical development programs and evaluating the suitability of our ERSG library for development in additional renal diseases, including ADPKD.
Our research and development strategy targets rare or ultra-rare diseases where a high unmet medical need exists, a nonsense mutation-bearing patient population is established, preclinical read-through can be established in predictive personalized medicine models, and a defined path through Orphan Drug development, regulatory approval, patient access and commercialization is identified. We believe patient advocacy is an important element of patient focused drug development, and we seek opportunities to collaborate with patient advocacy groups throughout the discovery and development process. Our current clinical program for our lead investigational drug product candidate, ELX-02, consists of Phase 2 studies in cystic fibrosis.
We intend to be the global leader in the application of the science of translational read-through and the associated pathway of nonsense mediated decay (NMD). We believe that expanding our expertise across these basic science areas of mRNA regulation, ribosomal function, and protein translation forms a solid foundation to support our discovery and development activities. Our ERSG compounds modulate the activity of the ribosome, a ribonucleoprotein complex of RNAs and proteins responsible for protein production (a process also known as translation). These novel small molecule ERSG compounds are designed to allow the ribosome to read-through a nonsense mutation in mRNA (which is transcribed from the DNA sequence), to restore the translation process to produce full-length, functional proteins and increase the amount of mRNA that would otherwise be degraded as part of a phenomenon called nonsense mediated mRNA decay. As our ERSG compounds target the general mechanism for protein production in the cell, we believe they have the potential to treat numerous genetic diseases where nonsense mutations have impaired gene function. Since nonsense mutations may occur at different positions within a given gene, a potential advantage of the small molecule ERSG approach is being able to use one molecule to address a range of mutations within a given disease state. Our subcutaneously injected ERSG molecules have the potential to be self-administered for systemic disease and to be active across many of the body’s tissues.
We believe that our library of related novel small molecules holds the potential to be disease-modifying therapies that may change the course of numerous genetic diseases and improve the lives of patients. Our early preclinical data in animal models of nonsense mutations suggests that drug product candidates from our read-through compound ERSG library may have potential beneficial effects for each of the following diseases: cystic fibrosis, nephropathic cystinosis, ADPKD, a variety of IRDs (including Usher Syndrome), primary ciliary dyskinesia, mucopolysaccharidosis type 1, Duchenne muscular dystrophy and Rett syndrome, and have demonstrated the potential for beneficial effects in multiple organs such as the brain, eye, kidney, lungs, muscles and others. Of the novel compounds in our ERSG library, approximately 30 compounds have been selected, based on read-through activity, for continued preclinical research and we anticipate additional compounds advancing toward Investigational New Drug (IND) filings.
Our scientific manuscript titled “ELX-02 generates protein via premature stop codon read-through without inducing native stop codon read-through protein” was published in the August 2020 issue of the Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (JPET). This manuscript demonstrates that while ELX-02 mediates read-through of premature stop codons, the fidelity of native stop codons found at the end of healthy transcripts is maintained. This indicates that translation integrity is preserved with target-therapeutic exposure of ELX-02, consistent with the favorable tolerability profile across our preclinical and clinical data sets.
Currently, the clinical program for our lead investigational drug candidate, ELX-02, is focused on development for cystic fibrosis patients with diagnosed nonsense mutations. We have completed a Phase 1 single ascending dose (SAD) trial, a multiple ascending dose (MAD) trial, and a renal impairment study with healthy volunteers as well as volunteers having mild, moderate and severe renal impairment. The results of the SAD study were published in Clinical Pharmacology in Drug Development in January 2019. The results from the MAD study were presented in 2019 at both the European Cystic Fibrosis Society clinical meeting and the North American Cystic Fibrosis Conference (NACFC). The results have also been published in the Journal of Clinical Pharmacology in Drug Development in January of 2021. The results from the renal impairment study were presented at the 2019 American Society of Nephrology (ASN) Kidney Week and published in December 2020 in the Journal of Clinical Pharmacology.
Our scientific review written by Professor Eitan Kerem, M.D., Senior Attending Physician at the Hadassah CF Center in Jerusalem, Israel and Senior Medical Consultant to Eloxx, titled “ELX-02: an investigational read-through agent for the treatment of nonsense mutation-related genetic disease” was published in October 2020 by the Journal Expert Opinion on Investigational Drugs. This manuscript details the development of ELX-02 for the restoration of functional protein in nonsense-mediated disease in support of our ongoing Phase 2 trials.
Our scientific manuscript titled “Targeting G542X CFTR Nonsense Alleles With ELX-02 Restores CFTR Function in Human-Derived Intestinal Organoids” was published in the Journal of Cystic Fibrosis in February 2021. This manuscript reviews the results of our evaluation of ELX-02 mediated read-though, using the CFTR-dependent Forskolin-induced swelling (FIS) assay across a selection of G542X homozygous and heterozygous patient-derived organoids, ELX-02 increased CFTR activity in a dose-dependent fashion across a variety of forskolin induction concentrations. The functional increases are similar to those obtained with tezacaftor/ivacaftor in andel homozygous organoid. Additionally, ELX-02 treatment of these patient-derived organoids results in a 5-fold increase in CFTR mRNA when compared with vehicle treated, resulting in normalization of CFTR mRNA as measured using Nanostring.
Our Phase 2 cystinosis trial involved two sequential cohorts with three escalating doses in three patients per cohort. The first cohort enrolled three homozygous W138X patients ages 23 to 38, with prior kidney transplants and varying degrees of renal insufficiency. In January 2020, we announced positive data from the first cohort of the Phase 2 study of ELX-02 in the treatment of patients with nonsense mutation-mediated nephropathic cystinosis. The results of the first cohort met the primary safety endpoint and the reductions in white blood cell (WBC) cystine provided a clear indication of biologic activity in these patients at nominal doses > 0.5 mg/kg/day. Following review of the safety and pharmacokinetic data by an independent Safety Review Committee (SRC), the SRC approved progressing to the second cohort that would enable enrolling patients ages 12 and older. Due to study design limitations, patients across all dose groups had elevated and uncontrolled pretreatment WBC cystine levels which made it difficult to fully evaluate ELX-02-mediated WBC cystine reductions. Therefore, we have discontinued this study and will not proceed with the second cohort as contemplated in the original protocol. We plan to continue to review these data with a panel of scientific and clinical experts to determine appropriate modifications for a possible new study design.
The clear indications of biologic activity in this study provide human clinical proof of concept for ELX-02 and de-risk other clinical applications of our ERSG library using this dosage range. These encouraging results also provide a basis for expansion to studies of additional kidney diseases caused by nonsense mutations, such as ADPKD.
Our Phase 2 cystic fibrosis clinical trial program for ELX-02 is being conducted at leading global investigator sites in Europe, Israel and the United States. On March 25, 2020, we announced that enrollment in these trials had been paused temporarily in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic in order to avoid unnecessary exposure in at-risk populations, to maintain the integrity of our study data and to support global healthcare providers in their commitment to ensure patient safety. On June 17, 2020, we announced that enrollment had been resumed in Israel and Europe, and on August 12, 2020, we announced that enrollment had been resumed in the U.S. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, and we continue to work closely with our clinical sites and investigators. We are also evaluating additional clinical sites in other countries where patient enrollment may be feasible. We remain committed to completing enrollment in these Phase 2 proof of concept clinical trials and reporting top line data in the first half of 2021, which is contingent on no further disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Several planned Safety Review Committee meetings have occurred and allowed dose escalation up to the top dose level with no drug-related serious adverse events reported to date. Multiple patients have progressed through the four-dose escalation range. The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (“CF Foundation”) is providing funding for a portion of the U.S. program and in December of 2020, expanded its support to include our global clinical trial program. We have since formed a joint program advisory group with the CF Foundation focused on the development of ELX-02 for cystic fibrosis. The Cystic Fibrosis Therapeutics Development Network (“TDN”) has sanctioned the Phase 2 study protocol, which is being conducted at TDN member sites. Additional information about our clinical trials can be found at www.ClinicalTrials.gov (Identifiers: NCT04126473 and NCT04135495).
Professor Eitan Kerem, M.D., former Head of the Division of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital, Hadassah Medical Center in Israel, has joined Eloxx as a Senior Medical Consultant. For the U.S. trial, Dr. Ahmet Uluer, Director of the Adult Cystic Fibrosis Program at the Boston Children’s Hospital/Brigham and Women’s Hospital CF Center, is the lead study investigator. The protocols have been sanctioned by the TDN in the U.S. and the European Cystic Fibrosis Society Clinical Trial Network (which has given our Europe/Israel trial a “high priority” ranking). During October 2019, we completed an interim CMC review meeting with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”) and we have gained alignment with the agency on our manufacturing formulation and process, which we believe will be suitable for our expected drug supply needs through completion of our pivotal trials. The in-person ECFS conference in Lyon, France scheduled for June 2020 was cancelled, and we withdrew our abstract. We presented data from two scientific abstracts at the North American Cystic Fibrosis Virtual Conference (NACFC). The two abstracts were also showcased in the NACFC virtual poster gallery and electronically published as a supplement to Pediatric Pulmonology. The live sessions and discussions took place through October 23, 2020. These virtual posters are available to registered attendees on the NACFC online conference platform. The preclinical study results demonstrate ELX-02’s selectivity for read-through of premature stop codons versus native stop codons and its ability to restore production of functional CFTR in patient-derived organoids.
We believe there is a significant unmet medical need in the treatment of cystic fibrosis patients carrying nonsense mutations on one or both alleles of the CFTR gene. Cystic fibrosis is the most prevalent genetic disease in the western world and there are no currently approved therapies that target the impairment associated with Class 1 CFTR mutations. We believe that nonsense mutations may impact a similar proportion of patients diagnosed with cystinosis. Given the high proportion of pediatric patients in many rare orphan diseases, we intend to apply for relevant Orphan Drug incentives in the U.S. and Europe, including the Rare Pediatric Disease Priority Review Voucher in the U.S. Currently, the European Medicines Agency (the “EMA”) has designated ELX-02 as an orphan medicine for the treatment of cystic fibrosis and mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I). The FDA had previously granted orphan drug designation to ELX-02 for the treatment of nephropathic cystinosis, MPS I, and Rett syndrome, and on August 4, 2020, we announced that the FDA had granted orphan drug designation for ELX-02 for the treatment of cystic fibrosis. The FDA’s Office of Orphan Drug Products grants orphan status to support the development of medicines for underserved patient populations, or rare disorders, that affect fewer than 200,000 people in the U.S. Orphan drug designation provides certain benefits, including seven years of market exclusivity upon regulatory approval (if received), exemption from FDA application fees, tax credits on qualified U.S. clinical trials and eligibility for grant funding opportunities that can be used for clinical trial costs.
We are also evaluating the suitability of our ERSG library for development in renal diseases associated with nonsense mutations, such as ADPKD. ADPKD is a relatively common inherited genetic kidney disease occurring in between one in 400 and one in 1,000 patients and is the fourth leading cause of end-stage renal disease in the U.S. Over 25% of the primary genetic changes that cause ADPKD are nonsense mutations, where a premature stop codon in the gene leads to a truncated, often unstable, protein. We have evaluated the three most relevant ADPKD nonsense mutations in an in vitro read-through assay and have demonstrated significant levels of read-through for ELX-02 and several library compounds, which is the first step in our preclinical development toward an IND.
We continue to progress our ERSG pipeline in IRDs, another area of high unmet medical need, that are associated with vision loss and blindness. There are over 300 IRDs associated with nonsense mutations. In 2020, we reported on a critical milestone demonstrating that several of our library compounds successfully reach retinal disorder-relevant tissue layers and can restore protein production in an animal model. These data support the suitability of our ERSG compounds for reaching and promoting read-through in target cells within the retina. We presented data at the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology (ARVO) Annual Meeting in May 2020, which was held virtually. Our IRD research also includes exploring multiple sustained release formulation technologies, and in vitro release rates achieved to date have been consistent with our target release profile of one to three months. Our scientific manuscript titled “Intravitreal administration of small molecule read-through agents demonstrate functional activity in a nonsense mutation mouse model” was published in October 2020 by the Journal of Experimental Eye Research. This manuscript demonstrates that multiple small molecules in our ERSG library mediate dose-dependent read-through at the back of the eye after a single intravitreal injection. Collectively, our manuscripts demonstrate the wide-ranging potential of our small molecule read-through approach to rare genetic disorders mediated by nonsense mutations; from targeted delivery for inherited retinal disorders to systemic delivery for multi-system disorders like cystic fibrosis.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Report, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these annual consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this Report, we believe that the following accounting policies related to accrued expenses and accrued clinical trial costs and contract research liabilities are the most critical accounting policies for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued Expenses and Accrued Clinical Trial Costs and Contract Research Liabilities
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate accrued expenses. This process involves identifying services which have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for such service as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements. Given our current business, the primary area of uncertainty concerning accruals which could have a material effect on our operating results is with respect to service fees paid to contract manufacturers in conjunction with the production of clinical drug supplies, and to contract research organizations in connection with our pre-clinical research and clinical trials. In connection with all of the foregoing service fees, our estimates are most affected by our understanding of the status and timing of services provided. The majority of our service providers, including contract research organizations, invoice us in arrears for services performed. In the event that we do not identify some costs which have begun to be incurred, or we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of such services in a given period, our reported expenses for such period would be understated or overstated. We currently reflect the effects of any changes in estimates based on changes in facts and circumstances directly in our statement of operations in the period such change becomes known.
Our arrangements with contract research organizations in connection with clinical trials often provide for payment prior to commencing the project or based upon predetermined milestones throughout the period during which services are expected to be performed. We recognize expense relating to these arrangements based on the various services provided over the estimated time to completion. The date on which services commence, the level of services performed on or before a given date, and the cost of such services are often determined based on subjective judgments. We make these judgments based upon the facts and circumstances known to us based on the terms of the contract and our ongoing monitoring of service performance. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had arrangements with multiple contract research organizations whereby these organizations commit to performing services for us over multiple reporting periods. We recognize the expenses associated with these arrangements based on our expectation of the timing of the performance of components under these arrangements by these organizations. Generally, these components consist of the costs of setting up the trial, monitoring the trial, closing the trial and preparing the resulting data. Costs related to patient enrollment in clinical trials are accrued as patients are enrolled in the trial.
With respect to financial reporting periods presented in this Report, the timing of our actual costs incurred have not differed materially from our estimated timing of such costs. In light of the foregoing, we do not believe our practices for estimating future expenses and making judgments concerning the accrual of expenses are reasonably likely to change in the future.
Results of Operations
For discussion of 2019 results and comparison with 2018 results, refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Dollar amounts in the following table are in thousands:
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $26.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $11.8 million. The decrease was primarily related to a decrease in salaries and other personnel related costs of $1.2 million, a $1.5 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense, and a $9.1 million decrease in expenses related to subcontractors, consultants and advisors in connection with continued development of ELX-02 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. These decreases were all primarily related to the realignment actions taken by our Board of Directors in February 2020, including reductions in research and development headcount and in external spending.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $24.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $9.4 million. The decrease was primarily related to a $3.3 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense, a $4.1 million decrease in expenses attributable principally to infrastructure related costs including legal, accounting and other professional fees and a $1.9 million decrease in salaries and other personnel related costs. These decreases were all primarily related to the realignment actions taken by our Board of Directors in February 2020, including reductions in general and administrative headcount and in external spending.
Restructuring charges
Restructuring charges of $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from the leadership and organizational realignment during the first quarter of 2020. The total included $1.9 million related to contract termination and employee separation costs (primarily severance and benefits) and $2.1 million of non-cash stock compensation, relating to accelerated vesting of executive stock awards. There were no similar charges during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other expense (income), net
We recorded $1.1 million in other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $0.8 million. The increase was primarily due a decrease in interest income of $0.7 million and investment income of $0.3 million, offset by a $0.2 million decrease in debt issuance costs and interest expense related to the commencement of principal repayments on the term loan in February 2020.
Provision for income taxes and net operating loss carryforwards
There were no provisions for or benefits from income taxes recorded in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had U.S. federal and state net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards of $108.9 million and $13.7 million, respectively, and federal research tax credit carryforwards of $3.6 million. Certain U.S. net operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire, if not utilized, beginning in 2021 through 2037, and the research tax credits will expire beginning in 2027 through 2037. These NOL carryforwards could expire unused and be unavailable to offset future income tax liabilities. Included in these U.S. federal NOL carryforwards are $34.9 million of NOLs generated after the effective date of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Tax Act”), which are not subject to expiration, but may not be carried back and are only eligible to offset up to a maximum of 80% of taxable income generated in a given year. Under the Tax Act, federal net operating losses incurred beginning in 2018 and in future years may be carried forward indefinitely, but the deductibility of such federal net operating losses is limited. It is uncertain if and to what extent various U.S. states will conform to the newly enacted federal tax law. Also, as of December 31, 2020, we had Israeli NOL carryforwards of $86.9 million, which carry forward indefinitely.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations, and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. Significant factors in the management of liquidity are funds generated by operations, levels of accounts receivable and accounts payable and capital expenditures. To date, we have not generated revenue from sales of any product or service.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses were $(34.6) million and $(50.9) million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $(171.6) million. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through equity capital investments, and to a lesser extent, from loans and grants. We have devoted substantially all of our financial resources and efforts to research and development. We expect that it may be several years, if ever, before we receive regulatory approval and have a product candidate ready for commercialization. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. A successful transition to profitable operations is dependent upon achieving a level of revenue adequate to support our cost structure. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. We anticipate that our expenses may increase if, and as, we:
•
advance ELX-02 and/or other product candidates further into clinical development;
•
experience additional delays in enrollment and completion of our clinical trials due to the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise;
•
continue the preclinical development of our research programs and advance candidates into clinical trials;
•
pursue regulatory authorization to conduct clinical trials of additional product candidates;
•
seek marketing approvals for our product candidates;
•
establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any product candidates for which we obtain marketing approval;
•
maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•
hire additional clinical, regulatory, management and scientific personnel;
•
add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel;
•
acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies; and
•
operate as a public company.
We may never achieve profitability, and unless and until we do, we will continue to need to raise additional cash to fund our operations. On February 24, 2020, our Board of Directors approved a leadership and organizational re-alignment, which is expected to achieve annual cost savings of approximately $4.9 million primarily related to salaries and benefits, with fiscal year 2020 savings of approximately $2.3 million, net of severance costs. Our cash, and cash equivalents are highly liquid investments with original maturities of one year or less at the date of purchase and consist of cash in operating accounts and secured investments, primarily money market funds.
Although the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on clinical operations and trial enrollment cannot fully be determined, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents of $24.7 million at December 31, 2020, will enable us to meet the anticipated cash needs required to reach top line Phase 2 data in cystic fibrosis; however, this amount is not sufficient to maintain our current and planned operations for at least the next twelve months following the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Beyond that point, we will need to raise additional capital to finance our operations, which cannot be assured. We have concluded that these conditions, in aggregate, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern without additional funding through one year after the date these consolidated financial statements are issued.
Management intends to fund future operations through private or public debt or equity financing transactions and may seek additional capital through arrangements with strategic partners or from other sources. The availability of sufficient funding to alleviate the conditions that raise substantial doubt are not within management’s control and cannot be assessed as being probable of occurring. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing, we will evaluate alternatives which may include reducing or deferring operating expenses, which may have a material adverse effect on our operations and future prospects.
Principal Financing Activities
On April 30, 2018, we completed an underwritten public offering of 5,899,500 shares of our common stock, including the exercise in full by the underwriter of its overallotment option to purchase an additional 769,500 shares, at the public offering price of $9.75 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $57.5 million, before deducing the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses of approximately $3.9 million.
In November 2018, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement with Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., pursuant to which we sold 236,462 shares of common stock and received proceeds of $2.9 million, net of issuance costs of $0.1 million through December 31, 2019, of which 35,362 shares of common stock, with received net proceeds of $0.7 million were sold in January of 2019. The shares sold were pursuant to an effective registration statement as described below.
On January 30, 2019, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”), and WestRiver Innovation Lending Fund VIII, L.P. (together with SVB, the “Lenders”). Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Loan Agreement, the Lenders extended a term loan to us of $15.0 million.
Outstanding principal on the loan accrues interest at a floating rate equal to the greater of (i) 5.25% per annum and (ii) the sum of 2.5% plus the prime rate, as published in the Wall Street Journal. Interest payments are payable monthly following the funding of the loan. On December 31, 2020, the interest rate was 5.75%. We commenced making payments on the outstanding principal balance of the loan on February 1, 2020, which is payable in 36 equal monthly installments. Amounts outstanding under the loan are due and payable on January 1, 2023.
In conjunction with the initial loan advance, we issued warrants (the “Warrants”) to the Lenders to purchase an aggregate of 40,834 shares of our common stock at a warrant exercise price of $11.02 (subject to certain adjustments), which price was calculated using the 10-day average bid price of our common stock prior to the date of the Loan Agreement.
We may prepay the outstanding principal balance of the loans advanced by the Lenders in whole but not in part, subject to a prepayment fee ranging from 1% to 3% of any amount prepaid, depending upon when the prepayment occurs. We will also pay a final payment fee equal to 6% of the total loans advanced, due upon the earlier of maturity or termination of the Loan Agreement.
Under the terms of the Loan Agreement, we granted first priority liens and security interests in substantially all of our assets (excluding all of its intellectual property, which is subject to a negative pledge) and a pledge by us of the shares of one of our wholly-owned subsidiaries as collateral for the obligations thereunder. The Loan Agreement also contains representations and warranties by us and the Lenders and indemnification provisions in favor of the Lenders and customary covenants (including limitations on other indebtedness, liens, acquisitions, investments and dividends, but no financial covenants), and events of default (including payment defaults, breaches of covenants following any applicable cure period, a material impairment in the perfection or priority of the Lenders’ security interest in the collateral, and events relating to bankruptcy or insolvency).
On June 24, 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering of 3,833,334 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $9.00 per share and received gross proceeds of approximately $34.5 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $2.1 million and offering expenses of $0.2 million.
In April 2020, we entered into a loan agreement with SVB under the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act of 2020 (the “CARES Act”) and received loan proceeds of $0.8 million (the “PPP Loan”). We expect to use the loan proceeds for payroll and other covered costs in accordance with the relevant terms and conditions of the CARES Act. We issued a promissory note for the PPP Loan with a maturity date of April 21, 2022 and an interest rate of 1.0% per annum. Monthly payments of principal and interest will be due beginning on September 21, 2021, although interest accrues from the issuance date. We may prepay the PPP Loan without penalty or premium, and the promissory note provides for customary events of default. A PPP loan may be partially or entirely forgiven based on employee retention for the 24-week period starting on the loan date through October 2020, and the use of loan proceeds for payroll or other specified costs during the same period. Forgiveness is also based on the employer maintaining or restoring headcount and maintaining salary levels. Forgiveness is reduced if headcount declines or if salaries decrease. Any loan forgiveness will be made subject to SVB approval in accordance with SBA requirements.
Cash Flows
The following table presents the major components of net cash flows provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities for the periods presented (in thousands):
Our operating activities used cash of $28.2 million and $39.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cash used in operations resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash items and changes in working capital. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our net loss was $34.6 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $8.7 million related to stock-based compensation expense and $0.1 million of depreciation expense. Changes in working capital for the period were $3.4 million, related primarily to decreases in accounts payable and accrued expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our net loss was $50.9 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $11.4 million related to stock-based compensation expense and $0.1 million of depreciation expense. Changes in working capital for the period were $0.6 million, related primarily to changes in accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Our investing activities provided cash of $33.8 million and used cash of $33.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to $33.8 million of proceeds from maturities of marketable securities. Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of purchases of marketable securities of $67.2 million, offset by proceeds of $33.8 million received upon maturities of marketable securities.
Our financing activities used cash of $3.4 million and provided cash of $46.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities resulted primarily from $4.6 million in term loan principal repayments, offset by $0.8 million received from the PPP Loan and $0.4 million in advances received from collaboration partners. During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities resulted primarily from net proceeds of $32.2 million from our public offering of common stock in June 2019, the issuance of debt of $14.7 million (net of issuance costs) in January 2019, and proceeds of $0.7 million from the sale of common stock, offset by $1.4 million of taxes paid upon the vesting of restricted stock units.
Form S-3 and Equity Sales
On April 10, 2018, we filed a shelf registration statement (the “April 2018 Shelf”) on Form S-3 with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). The April 2018 Shelf (File No. 333-224207) was declared effective on April 20, 2018 and covers the offering, issuance and sale of up to $125 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities or warrants and other securities, either individually or in combination.
In November 2018, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (collectively, the “Sales Agents”), pursuant to which we may sell and issue shares of our common stock up to an aggregate of $50 million through the Sales Agents. The shares were offered pursuant to the April 2018 Shelf. We agreed to pay the Sales Agents a commission of up to 3% of the gross proceeds of any sales of common stock pursuant to the Agreement. We incurred approximately $0.3 million related to legal, accounting and other fees in connection with the Agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2018, under the Agreement, we sold 201,100 shares of common stock and received net proceeds of $2.2 million. In January 2019, we sold 35,362 shares of common stock and received net proceeds of $0.7 million.
On November 16, 2018, we filed a shelf registration statement (the “November 2018 Shelf”) on Form S-3 with the SEC. The November 2018 Shelf (File No. 333-228430) was declared effective on November 26, 2018 and covers the offering, issuance and sale of up to $200 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities or warrants and other securities, either individually or in combination, and is available for future issuances.
On June 24, 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering of 3,833,334 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $9.00 per share and received net proceeds of approximately $34.5 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $2.1 million and estimated offering expenses of $0.2 million.
Government Grants from the Israeli Innovation Authority (“IIA”)
To date, we have received research and development grants from the IIA totaling $2.6 million. No grants were received for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Under the research and development agreements with the IIA and pursuant to applicable law, we are required to pay royalties at the rate of 3% on sales to end customers of product candidates developed with funds provided by the IIA, up to an amount equal to 100% of the IIA research and development grants received, plus interest based on the 12-month LIBOR rate. If we do not generate sales of product candidates developed with funds provided by the IIA, we are not obligated to pay royalties or repay the grants.
As of December 31, 2020, we have not commenced the payment obligation of the royalties and have a contingent obligation with respect to royalty-bearing participation received or accrued, amounting to $2.7 million, including accrued LIBOR interest.
Technion Research and Development Foundation Limited Agreement
On August 29, 2013, we entered into an agreement (the “Technion Agreement”) with the Technion Research and Development Foundation Limited (“TRDF”), with respect to certain technology relating to aminoglycosides and the redesign of aminoglycosides for the treatment of human genetic diseases caused by premature stop mutations and further results of the research of the technology, in order to develop and commercialize products based on such technology. Under the Technion Agreement, TRDF is obligated to provide us with research services for an estimated annual payment of $0.1 million, the precise amount to be agreed by the parties prior to the beginning of each year of the research period. During the year ended December 31, 2020 no expenses were incurred and for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we recorded research and development expenses of $0.2 million and $0.1 million, respectively, in relation to the Technion Agreement for the reimbursement of costs incurred during the preparation, filing, prosecution and maintenance of the TRDF patents rights related to Eloxx Limited (Israel). As of December 31, 2020 no amounts were recorded in accrued expenses and as of December 31, 2019, amounts recorded in accrued expenses were $0.1 million.
In addition, TRDF granted us a license to use, market, sell or sub-license the rights of the product developed under the TRDF research results (the “Licensed Product”), as defined in the Technion Agreement, for the following considerations: (a) milestone payments up to total consideration of $6.1 million, to be transferred upon meeting certain milestones as defined in the Technion Agreement; (b) certain royalties in the low- to mid-single-digit percentage of net sales (subject to change in the case of (x) sublicensing to a big pharmaceutical or biotechnology company, or (y) payment of royalties to third parties, or (z) commercialization by a third party of an authorized generic to a licensed product), for a period until the later of (i) the expiration of a valid claim on the Licensed Product in each country the Licensed Product is sold to, or (ii) a certain amount of years from the date of the first commercial sale of the Licensed Product in such country, and (c) a low- to mid-double-digit percentage of any non-royalty sub-license income received by us from a sub-licensed entity. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we made the first milestone payment of $0.1 million to TRDF.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as such term is defined under Item 303 of Regulation S-K, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.