Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated due to various factors discussed under “Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table contains selected financial information, for the periods indicated, from our statements of comprehensive income (loss) expressed as a percentage of net sales.
The following paragraphs discuss the Company’s performance for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Comparison of 2020 vs. 2019 (dollars in thousands)
Net Sales
Net sales for 2020 were $7,621, a decrease of $637, or 7.7%, from $8,258 in 2019. We believe sales during the year were negatively impacted by the global pandemic, during which customers continued to spend cautiously and defer certain planned strategic projects. The decrease in sales was most prominent in our HazardPRO product family where projects tend to be larger and have a longer-term focus. International sales during the year comprised 11.6% of our revenue, down from 12% in the prior year period.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for 2020 decreased $436, or 10.0%, to $3,930 from $4,366 in 2019. Gross margin in 2020 was 51.6% compared to 52.9% in 2019. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to idle staff time and related overhead expense.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses decreased $263, or 6.0%, to $4,134 in 2020 from $4,397 in 2019, but increased as a percentage of net sales to 54.3% from 53.3%. The decrease in operating expenses was primarily due to decreases in outside representative compensation, travel expenses, and trade show expenses.
●
Selling and marketing expenses decreased $317, or 16.4%, to $1,612 in 2020 from $1,929 in 2019, and decreased as a percentage of net sales to 21.2% from 23.4%. The decrease resulted primarily from lower outside sales representative compensation due to changes in commission plans and lower net sales, as well as decreases in travel expenses and trade shows, due to cancelled shows, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
●
General and administrative expenses increased $29, or 1.8%, to $1,686 in 2020 from $1,657 in 2019, and increased as a percentage of net sales to 22.1% from 20.1%. The increase was primarily due to higher legal and professional expenses related to corporate governance activities and amortization related to the purchase of the communication technology in the fourth quarter of 2019.
●
Research and development expenses increased $25, or 3.1%, to $836 in 2020 compared to $811 in 2019, and increased as a percentage of net sales to 11.0% from 9.8%. The increase was due to increased paid time off accruals and certification expenses for modifications to existing products.
Operating Loss
Our operating loss increased $173 to $204 in 2020 compared to $31 in 2019. The decrease was primarily related to the decrease in net sales.
Non-Operating Income (Expense)
Non-operating income decreased $185 to $32 in 2020 from $217 in 2019, primarily as a result of less interest income earned as a result of lower interest rates on Treasury Bills.
Equity securities are stated at fair value, and unrealized holding gains and losses are reported in our statement of comprehensive income (loss) in the non-operating income (expense) section. All other available-for-sale securities are stated at fair value, and unrealized holding gains and losses, net of the related deferred tax effect, are reported as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
Realized gains and losses, including losses from declines in value of specific securities determined by management to be other-than-temporary, are included in the statement of comprehensive income (loss). Realized gains and losses are determined on the basis of the specific securities sold.
Income Taxes
Income tax benefit was $48 in 2020 compared to $1 in 2019. The increase was due primarily to the net loss before income taxes. Detailed information on our income taxes are described in Note 11 to our financial statements.
Net Income (Loss)
We reported a net loss of $124 in 2020 compared to net income of $187 in 2019, a decrease of $311, or 166.3%. Basic and diluted earnings per share were $-0.04 and $0.06 in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements or obligations that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material effect on our financial condition, changes in the financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash and cash equivalents were $1,090 and $8,785 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease was due to the fact that at December 31, 2020 we held substantially all available funds in assets defined as investments. At December 31, 2019, we held substantially of our available funds in assets defined as cash and cash equivalents. Working capital was $11,323 at December 31, 2020 compared to $11,155 at December 31, 2019.
Cash generated from operating activities increased $179 from $152 in 2019 to $331 in 2020. The increase was primarily due to net decreases in trade receivables and inventories, partially offset by the net loss in 2020. The decrease in trade receivables and inventories were both primarily due to decreased net sales. The 2020 net loss compared to the 2019 net income was due to decreased sales and reduced interest income.
Cash used in investing activities in 2020 was $8,020, compared to cash generated from investing activities $7,581 in 2019. The decrease was due to an increase in purchases of Treasury Bills classified as investments. In addition, we purchased $25 and $257 of property, equipment, and intangibles in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash used in financing activities during 2020 was $6 compared to $5 in 2019. The cash used was for principal payments on a financing lease on right-to-use assets. In addition, during the second quarter of 2020, the Company received and subsequently repaid a Payroll Protection Loan of $645 from the Small Business Administration, as discussed in the next paragraph.
As previously disclosed, on May 5, 2020, we entered into a U.S. Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program promissory note in the principal amount of $645 (the “PPP Loan”). The PPP Loan was unsecured and was evidenced by a note in favor of US Bank National Association as the lender. Subsequent to receipt of the loan, our Board of Directors continued to monitor both our ongoing performance and the routinely issued clarifying guidance provided by the government. As a result of this review, the Board determined that given the strength of our operations and the government issued clarifications, we would repay the entire amount of the PPP Loan. We repaid the PPP Loan in full on June 4, 2020. There were no prepayment penalties in connection with this voluntary repayment.
Subject to the following section, entitled COVID-19 Pandemic Discussion, the Company believes its ongoing cash usage requirements will be primarily for capital expenditures, potential acquisitions, investments we believe present good opportunities for the Company and its shareholders, research and development, working capital, and growth initiatives. Management believes that cash on hand and any cash provided by operations will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements through at least the next 12 months.
COVID-19 Pandemic Discussion
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced weaker than anticipated performance in during 2020. Due to the ongoing uncertainty about the severity and duration associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, we considered furloughing or eliminating employees and taking other measures to reduce operating costs until there was more certainty about the short-term and long-term effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the nation’s economy and the Company’s business.
As of the end of December 2020, we have reduced our staff by five employees from its peak earlier in 2020. We expect our 2021 financial results to continue to be negatively affected, potentially to a material degree, as the effects of the pandemic continue to permeate the economy. We have not been able to offset reductions in our net sales with a comparable or proportional decrease in expenses, as we continue to incur cost related to employee compensation and operating expenses we believe are necessary to ensure the quality of our products and our ability to maintain or increase sales, resulting in a negative effect on the relationship between our net sales and expenses, resulting in a net loss.
We typically have multiple sources for product components. Although we have experienced some extended delivery times as vendors have difficulty sourcing components, we continue to believe we have adequate sources for our key components to meet anticipated demand. We continue to closely watch lead times and availability of product components. We continually assess our current inventory levels and take actions to minimize disruptions to our supply chain, although our actions may not be successful.
As of the date of this filing, we expect our business will continue to be negatively affected, but cannot currently determine the significance and duration of the pandemic on our business.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make decisions based upon estimates, assumptions, and factors it considers relevant to the circumstances. Those decisions include the selection of applicable accounting principles and the use of judgment in their application, the results of which impact reported amounts and disclosures. Changes in economic conditions or other business circumstances may affect the outcomes of management’s estimates and assumptions.
Significant estimates, including the underlying assumptions, consist of the economic lives of long-lived assets, realizability of trade receivables, valuation of deferred tax assets/liabilities, inventory, investments, and stock compensation expense. It is at least reasonably possible that these estimates may change in the near term.
Economic lives of long-lived assets
We estimate the economic useful life of long-lived assets used in the business. Expected asset lives may be shortened or an impairment may be recorded based on a change in the expected use of the asset. If the expected life of an asset is shortened or an impairment recorded, it could result in an additional charge to depreciation expense.
Realizability of trade receivables
We estimate our allowance for doubtful accounts based on prior history and the aging of our trade receivables. We are unable to predict which, if any, of our customers will be unable to pay their open invoices at a future date. If an account becomes uncollectible and we are required to write off the balance, we would recognize the amount of the additional expense within general and administrative expenses.
Valuation of deferred tax assets/liabilities
We estimate our deferred tax assets and liabilities based on current tax laws and rates. The tax laws and rates could change in the future to either disallow the deductions or increase/decrease the tax rates. We recognize changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities in the period in which the tax law changes become effective. Any change in our deferred tax assets or liabilities could have a material negative or positive effect on our income tax expense.
Valuation of inventory
We purchase inventory based on estimated demand of products. It is possible that the inventory we have purchased will not be used in the products that our customers need or will not meet future technological requirements. If we are unable to use the inventory in our products and it does not meet future technological requirements, we would be required to remove the items from inventory and expense the amount in cost of goods sold.
Valuation of investments
Our investments in available-for-sale securities are valued at market prices in an open market. The prices are subject to the normal fluctuations that could be either negative or positive. Changes in value of our equity securities affect our profitability as the value fluctuates. Any change in the value of our equity securities could have a material negative or positive effect on our profitability. Changes in the value of our treasury bills do not affect our profitability until the treasury bill is sold. At the time of sale, we recognize the interest earned on the treasury bill.
Valuation of stock-based compensation expense
We estimate the expected life and forfeiture rates of stock options granted when calculating the value of options using the Black-Scholes-Merton model. The actual life and forfeiture rate could differ from what we estimated. Changes in the life or forfeiture rate of stock options could have a negative or positive impact on our stock-based compensation.
Additional information regarding our significant accounting policies is provided below in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Financial Statements, Note 1, Nature of Business and Significant Accounting Policies.