Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is intended to help the reader understand our business, our results of operations and our financial condition. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” and "Note About Forward-Looking Statements" sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. We generally refer to loans, customers and other information and data associated with each of our brands (Rise, Elastic and Today Card) as Elevate’s loans, customers, information and data, irrespective of whether Elevate directly originates the credit to the customer or whether such credit is originated by a third party.
OVERVIEW
We provide online credit solutions to consumers in the US who are not well-served by traditional bank products and who are looking for better options than payday loans, title loans, pawn and storefront installment loans. Non-prime consumers now represent a larger market than prime consumers but are risky to underwrite and serve with traditional approaches. We’re succeeding at it - and doing it responsibly - with best-in-class advanced technology and proprietary risk analytics honed by serving more than 2.5 million customers with $8.8 billion in credit. Our current online credit products, Rise, Elastic and Today Card, reflect our mission to provide customers with access to competitively priced credit and services while helping them build a brighter financial future with credit building and financial wellness features. We call this mission "Good Today, Better Tomorrow."
Prior to June 29, 2020, we provided services in the United Kingdom ("UK") through our wholly-owned subsidiary, Elevate Credit International Limited (“ECIL”) under the brand name ‘Sunny.’ During the year ended December 31, 2018, ECIL began to receive an increased number of customer complaints initiated by claims management companies ("CMCs") related to the affordability assessment of certain loans. The CMCs' campaign against the high cost lending industry increased significantly during the third and fourth quarters of 2018 and continued through 2019 and into the first half of 2020, resulting in a significant increase in affordability claims against all companies in the industry over this period. The Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA"), a regulator in the UK financial services industry, began regulating the CMCs in April 2019 in order to ensure that the methods used by the CMCs are in the best interests of the consumer and the industry. Separately, the FCA asked all industry participants to review their lending practices to ensure that such companies are using an appropriate affordability and creditworthiness analysis. However, there continued to be a lack of clarity within the regulatory environment in the UK. This lack of clarity, coupled with the ongoing impact of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 ("COVID-19") on the UK market for Sunny, led the ECIL board of directors to place ECIL into administration under the UK Insolvency Act 1986 and appoint insolvency practitioners from KPMG LLP to take control and management of the UK business. As a result, we have deconsolidated ECIL and are presenting its results as discontinued operations.
We earn revenues on the Rise installment loans, on the Rise and Elastic lines of credit and on the Today Card credit card product. Our revenue primarily consists of finance charges and line of credit fees. Finance charges are driven by our average loan balances outstanding and by the average annual percentage rate (“APR”) associated with those outstanding loan balances. We calculate our average loan balances by taking a simple daily average of the ending loan balances outstanding for each period. Line of credit fees are recognized when they are assessed and recorded to revenue over the life of the loan. We present certain key metrics and other information on a “combined” basis to reflect information related to loans originated by us and by our bank partners that license our brands, Republic Bank, FinWise Bank and Capital Community Bank ("CCB"), as well as loans originated by third-party lenders pursuant to CSO programs, which loans originated through CSO programs are not recorded on our balance sheets in accordance with US GAAP. See “-Key Financial and Operating Metrics” and “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
We use our working capital, funds provided by third-party lenders pursuant to CSO programs and our credit facility with Victory Park Management, LLC ("VPC” and the "VPC Facility") to fund the loans we directly make to our Rise customers and provide working capital. The VPC Facility has a maximum total borrowing amount available of $218 million at December 31, 2020. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Debt facilities.”
We also license our Rise installment loan brand to two banks. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2018, we started licensing our Rise installment loan brand to a third-party lender, FinWise Bank, which originates Rise installment loans in 18 states. FinWise Bank initially provides all of the funding, retains a percentage of the balances of all of the loans originated and sells the remaining loan participation in those Rise installment loans to a third-party SPV, EF SPV, Ltd. ("EF SPV"). Prior to August 1, 2019, FinWise Bank retained 5% of the balances and sold a 95% participation to EF SPV. On August 1, 2019, EF SPV purchased an additional 1% participation in the outstanding portfolio with the participation percentage revised going forward to 96%. These loan participation purchases are funded through a separate financing facility (the "EF SPV Facility"), effective February 1, 2019, and through cash flows from operations generated by EF SPV. The EF SPV Facility has a maximum total borrowing amount available of $250 million. We do not own EF SPV, but we have a credit default protection agreement with EF SPV whereby we provide credit protection to the investors in EF SPV against Rise loan losses in return for a credit premium. Elevate is required to consolidate EF SPV as a variable interest entity under US GAAP and the consolidated financial statements include revenue, losses and loans receivable related to the 96% of the Rise installment loans originated by FinWise Bank and sold to EF SPV.
Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, we also license our Rise installment brand to an additional bank, CCB which originates Rise installment loans in three different states than FinWise Bank. Similar to the relationship with FinWise Bank, CCB initially provides all of the funding, retains 5% of the balances of all of the loans originated and sells the remaining 95% loan participation in those Rise installment loans to a third-party SPV, EC SPV, Ltd. ("EC SPV"). These loan participation purchases are funded through a separate financing facility (the "EC SPV Facility"), and through cash flows from operations generated by EC SPV. The EC SPV Facility has a maximum total borrowing amount available of $100 million. We do not own EC SPV, but we have a credit default protection agreement with EC SPV whereby we provide credit protection to the investors in EC SPV against Rise loan losses in return for a credit premium. Elevate is required to consolidate EC SPV as a variable interest entity under US GAAP and the consolidated financial statements include revenue, losses and loans receivable related to the 95% of the Rise installment loans originated by CCB and sold to EC SPV.
The Elastic line of credit product is originated by a third-party lender, Republic Bank, which initially provides all of the funding for that product. Republic Bank retains 10% of the balances of all loans originated and sells a 90% loan participation in the Elastic lines of credit. An SPV structure was implemented such that the loan participations are sold by Republic Bank to Elastic SPV, Ltd. (“Elastic SPV”) and Elastic SPV receives its funding from VPC in a separate financing facility (the “ESPV Facility”), which was finalized on July 13, 2015. We do not own Elastic SPV but we have a credit default protection agreement with Elastic SPV whereby we provide credit protection to the investors in Elastic SPV against Elastic loan losses in return for a credit premium. Per the terms of this agreement, under US GAAP, we are the primary beneficiary of Elastic SPV and are required to consolidate the financial results of Elastic SPV as a variable interest entity ("VIE") in our consolidated financial results. The ESPV Facility has a maximum total borrowing amount of $350 million as of December 31, 2020. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Debt facilities.”
Today Card is a credit card product designed to meet the spending needs of non-prime consumers by offering a prime customer experience. Today Card is originated by CCB under the licensed Mastercard brand, and a 95% participation interest in the credit card receivable is sold to us. As the lowest APR product in our portfolio, Today Card allows us to serve a broader spectrum of non-prime Americans. During 2020, Today Card experienced significant growth in its portfolio size despite the pandemic due to the success of our direct mail campaigns, the primary marketing channel for acquiring new Today Card customers. We followed a specific growth plan in 2020 to continue testing responses from the market and monitoring credit quality. Customer response to the Today Card is very strong, as we continue to see extremely high response rates, high customer engagement, and positive customer satisfaction scores.
Our management assesses our financial performance and future strategic goals through key metrics based primarily on the following three themes:
•Revenue growth. Key metrics related to revenue growth that we monitor by product include the ending and average combined loan balances outstanding, the effective APR of our product loan portfolios, the total dollar value of loans originated, the number of new customer loans made, the ending number of customer loans outstanding and the related customer acquisition costs (“CAC”) associated with each new customer loan made. We include CAC as a key metric when analyzing revenue growth (rather than as a key metric within margin expansion).
•Stable credit quality. Since the time they were managing our legacy US products, our management team has maintained stable credit quality across the loan portfolio they were managing. Additionally, in the periods covered in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, we have improved our credit quality and lowered our credit losses. The credit quality metrics we monitor include net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues, the combined loan loss reserve as a percentage of outstanding combined loans, total provision for loan losses as a percentage of revenues and the percentage of past due combined loans receivable - principal.
•Margin expansion. We aim to manage our business to achieve a long-term operating margin of 20%. While our operating margins may exceed 20% in certain years, such as in 2020 when we incurred lower levels of direct marketing expense and materially lower credit losses due to a lack of customer demand for loans resulting from the effects of COVID-19, we do not expect our operating margin to increase beyond that level over the long-term, as we intend to pass on any improvements over our targeted margins to our customers in the form of lower APRs. We believe this is a critical component of our responsible lending platform and over time will also help us continue to attract new customers and retain existing customers.
Impact of COVID-19
The spread of COVID-19 since March 2020 has created a global public health crisis that has resulted in unprecedented uncertainty, volatility and disruption in financial markets and in governmental, commercial and consumer activity in the United States and globally, including the markets that we serve. Governmental responses to the pandemic have included orders closing businesses not deemed essential and directing individuals to restrict their movements, observe social distancing and shelter in place. These actions, together with responses to the pandemic by businesses and individuals, have resulted in decreases in commercial and consumer activity, temporary closures of many businesses that have led to a loss of revenues and an increase in unemployment, material decreases in business valuations in numerous industries, disrupted global supply chains, market volatility, changes in consumer behavior related to pandemic fears, related emergency response legislation and an expectation that Federal Reserve policy will maintain a low interest rate environment for the foreseeable future. During the second half of 2020, regions of the United States were experiencing various levels of restrictions and closures, but overall, personal and business activities still have not returned to their previous normal levels as the virus continues to impact the population.
As COVID-19 has continued to impact our office locations, our employee base is currently working in a hybrid remote working environment in which employees may continue to work remotely or return to the office on a limited basis. We have sought to ensure our employees feel secure in their jobs, have flexibility in their work location and have the resources they need to stay safe and healthy. As an 100% online lending solutions provider, our technology and underwriting platform has continued to serve our customers and the bank originators that we support without any material interruption in services.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we, along with the banks we support, have also expanded our payment flexibility tools to provide payment assistance programs to certain customers who meet the program’s qualifications. These tools include a deferral of payments for an initial period of 30 to 60 days, which we may extend for an additional 30 days, for generally a maximum of 180 days on a cumulative basis. The customer will return to their normal payment schedule after the end of the deferral period with the extension of their maturity date equivalent to their deferral period not to generally exceed an additional 180 days. For Rise installment loans, finance charges continue to accrue at a lower effective APR over the expected extended term of the loan considering the deferral periods provided. For Elastic lines of credit, no fees accrue during the payment deferral period. As a result, the average APR of our products decreased due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the payment assistance tools that have been implemented. As of December 31, 2020, 8.7% of customers have been provided relief through a COVID-19 payment deferral program for a total of $34.6 million in loans with deferred payments. This compares to $38.7 million in loans with deferred payments, or 10.4% of customers, as of September 30, 2020. We believe that our customers are currently managing through the current crisis and returning to repayment status by meeting their next scheduled payment due while in the programs and continuing to meet their scheduled payments once they exit the programs.
Both we and the bank originators are closely monitoring the performance of the payment assistance tools and key credit quality indicators such as payment defaults, continued payment deferrals, and line of credit utilization. While we initially anticipated that the COVID-19 pandemic would have a negative impact on our credit quality, instead the monetary stimulus programs provided by the US government to our customer base have generally allowed customers to continue making payments on their loans. At the beginning of the pandemic, we expected an increase in net charge-offs as compared to prior periods. However, net charge-offs as a percentage of revenue during the third and fourth quarter of 2020 were at a historical low. Further, we believe the allowance for loan losses is adequate to absorb the losses inherent in the portfolio as of December 31, 2020, including loans that are part of the payment assistance tools. Both we, and the bank originators we support, have also implemented underwriting changes to address credit risk associated with loan originations during the economic crisis created by the COVID-19 pandemic and have reduced loan origination applications and loan origination volume since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020.
The portfolio of loan products we and the bank originators provide has experienced significantly decreased demand and application volume for both new and former customers since the COVID-19 pandemic began, including the effects of underwriting changes that limited the volume of new customer loan originations and monetary stimulus provided by the US government reducing demand for loan products. These events are resulting in materially lower new customer loans and a corresponding decrease in revenues compared to a year ago. While we increased our marketing spend to acquire new customer loans during the second half of 2020 as compared to the first half, our overall loan origination volumes during the second half of 2020 were still below our historical origination volumes due to continued reduction in loan demand for our products and increased underwriting criteria. Given the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, we are currently unable to determine if demand for our loan products will increase during 2021. Until demand increases, our loan balances and revenue will continue to be materially lower than the prior year periods.
Significant uncertainties as to future economic conditions exist, and we have taken deliberate actions in response, including assessing our minimum cash and liquidity requirement, monitoring our debt covenant compliance and implementing measures to ensure that our cash and liquidity position is maintained through the current economic cycle such as our operating expense reduction plan, which was implemented in July 2020. We continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 closely, as well as any effects that may result from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act and any further economic relief, stimulus payments or legislation by the federal government; however, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our operations and financial results during 2021 is highly uncertain.
KEY FINANCIAL AND OPERATING METRICS
As discussed above, we regularly monitor a number of metrics in order to measure our current performance and project our future performance. These metrics aid us in developing and refining our growth strategies and in making strategic decisions.
Certain of our metrics are non-GAAP financial measures. We believe that such metrics are useful in period-to-period comparisons of our core business. However, non-GAAP financial measures are not an alternative to any measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with US GAAP. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of our non-GAAP measures to US GAAP.
Revenues
_________
(1)Combined loans receivable is defined as loans owned by us and consolidated VIEs plus loans originated and owned by third-party lenders pursuant to our CSO programs. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation of Combined loans receivable to Loans receivable, net, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
(2)Average combined loans receivable - principal is calculated using an average of daily Combined loans receivable - principal balances.
(3)Average customer loan balance is an average of all three products and is calculated for each product by dividing the ending Combined loans receivable - principal by the number of loans outstanding at period end.
Revenues. Our revenues are composed of Rise finance charges, Rise CSO fees (which are fees we receive from customers who obtain a loan through the CSO program for the credit services, including the loan guaranty, we provide), revenues earned on the Elastic line of credit, and finance charges and fee revenues from the Today Card credit card product. See “-Components of our Results of Operations-Revenues.”
Ending and average combined loans receivable - principal. We calculate the average combined loans receivable - principal by taking a simple daily average of the ending combined loans receivable - principal for each period. Key metrics that drive the ending and average combined loans receivable - principal include the amount of loans originated in a period and the average customer loan balance. All loan balance metrics include only the 90% participation in the related Elastic line of credit advances (we exclude the 10% held by Republic Bank), the 96% participation in FinWise Bank originated Rise installment loans and the 95% participation in CCB originated Rise installment loans and the 95% participation in the CCB originated Today Card credit card receivables, but include the full loan balances on CSO loans, which are not presented on our Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Total combined loans originated - principal. The amount of loans originated in a period is driven primarily by loans to new customers as well as new loans to prior customers, including refinancing of existing loans to customers in good standing.
Average customer loan balance and effective APR of combined loan portfolio. The average loan amount and its related APR are based on the product and the underlying credit quality of the customer. Generally, better credit quality customers are offered higher loan amounts at lower APRs. Additionally, new customers have more potential risk of loss than prior or existing customers due to lack of payment history and the potential for fraud. As a result, newer customers typically will have lower loan amounts and higher APRs to compensate for that additional risk of loss. The effective APR is calculated based on the actual amount of finance charges generated from a customer loan divided by the average outstanding balance for the loan and can be lower than the stated APR on the loan due to waived finance charges and other reasons. For example, a Rise customer may receive a $2,000 installment loan with a term of 24 months and a stated rate of 180%. In this example, the customer’s monthly installment loan payment would be $310.86. As the customer can prepay the loan balance at any time with no additional fees or early payment penalty, the customer pays the loan in full in month eight. The customer’s loan earns interest of $2,337.81 over the eight-month period and has an average outstanding balance of $1,948.17. The effective APR for this loan is 180% over the eight-month period calculated as follows:
($2,337.81 interest earned / $1,948.17 average balance outstanding) x 12 months per year = 180%
8 months
In addition, as an example for Elastic, if a customer makes a $2,500 draw on the customer’s line of credit and this draw required bi-weekly minimum payments of 5% (equivalent to 20 bi-weekly payments), and if all minimum payments are made, the draw would earn finance charges of $1,148. The effective APR for the line of credit in this example is 109% over the payment period and is calculated as follows:
($1,148.00 fees earned / $1,369.05 average balance outstanding) x 26 bi-weekly periods per year = 109%
20 payments
The actual total revenue we realize on a loan portfolio is also impacted by the amount of prepayments and charged-off customer loans in the portfolio. For a single loan, on average, we typically expect to realize approximately 60% of the revenues that we would otherwise realize if the loan were to fully amortize at the stated APR. From the Rise example above, if we waived $400 of interest for this customer, the effective APR for this loan would decrease to 149%.
Number of new customer loans. We define a new customer loan as the first loan or advance made to a customer for each of our products (so a customer receiving a Rise installment loan and then at a later date taking their first cash advance on an Elastic line of credit would be counted twice). The number of new customer loans is subject to seasonal fluctuations. New customer acquisition is typically slowest during the first six months of each calendar year, primarily in the first quarter, compared to the latter half of the year, as our existing and prospective customers usually receive tax refunds during this period and, thus, have less of a need for loans from us. Further, many customers will use their tax refunds to prepay all or a portion of their loan balance during this period, so our overall loan portfolio typically decreases during the first quarter of the calendar year. Overall loan portfolio growth and the number of new customer loans tends to accelerate during the summer months (typically June and July), at the beginning of the school year (typically late August to early September) and during the winter holidays (typically late November to early December).
Customer acquisition costs. A key expense metric we monitor related to loan growth is our CAC. This metric is the amount of direct marketing costs incurred during a period divided by the number of new customer loans originated during that same period. New loans to former customers are not included in our calculation of CAC (except to the extent they receive a loan through a different product) as we believe we incur no material direct marketing costs to make additional loans to a prior customer through the same product.
The following tables summarize the changes in customer loans by product for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Recent trends. Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $465.3 million, a decrease of 27% versus the prior year period. Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $638.9 million, a decrease of 4% versus the prior year period. Both the Rise and Elastic products experienced a year-over-year decline in revenues of 26% and 31%, respectively, which were attributable to reductions in loan origination volume and lower effective APRs for the loan portfolio due to the economic crisis created by the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in March 2020. This decline in revenue was partially offset by a year-over-year increase in revenues for the Today Card product, which more than doubled its average principal balance outstanding in 2020. We believe Today Card balances increased during 2020 despite the impact of COVID-19 due to the nature of the product (credit card versus installment loan or line of credit), the lower APR of the product (effective APR of 30% in 2020 compared to Rise at 110% and Elastic at 94%) as customers receiving stimulus payments would be more apt to pay down more expensive forms of credit, and the added convenience of having a credit card for online purchases of day-to-day items such as groceries or clothing (whereas the primary usage of a Rise installment loan or Elastic line of credit is for emergency financial needs such as a medical deductible or automobile repair).
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we expanded our payment flexibility tools to provide temporary payment relief to certain customers who meet the program’s qualifications. This program allows for a deferral of payments for an initial period of 30 to 60 days, for generally a maximum of 180 days on a cumulative basis. The customer will return to their normal payment schedule after the end of the deferral period with the extension of their maturity date equivalent to their deferral period not to generally exceed an additional 180 days. For Rise installment loans, finance charges continue to accrue at a lower effective APR over the expected extended term of the loan considering the deferral periods provided. For Elastic lines of credit, no fees accrue during the payment deferral period. As a result, the average APR of our Rise and Elastic products has decreased due to the impact of the COVID pandemic and the payment flexibility tools that have been implemented.
Additionally, the portfolio of loan products we and the bank originators provide has experienced significantly decreased loan demand for both new and former customers since the COVID-19 pandemic began, including the effects of underwriting changes that limited the volume of new customer loan originations and monetary stimulus provided by the US government reducing demand for loan products. These events are resulting in materially lower new customer loans and a corresponding decrease in revenues compared to a year ago. While we increased our marketing spend to acquire new customer loans during the second half of 2020 as compared to the first half of 2020, our overall loan origination volumes during the second half of 2020 were still below our historical origination volumes due to continued reduction in loan demand for our products and increased underwriting criteria. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, Rise and Elastic principal loan balances at December 31, 2020 totaled $228.3 million and $157.4 million, respectively, down $121.8 million and $95.3 million, respectively, from a year ago. Conversely, Today Card principal loan balances at December 31, 2020 totaled $14.1 million, up $9.7 million from a year ago.
Given the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, we are currently unable to determine if demand for our Rise and Elastic loan products will increase in 2021. Until demand increases, our loan balances and revenue will continue to be materially lower than the prior year periods.
Credit quality
_________
(1)Net charge-offs and additional provision for loan losses are not financial measures prepared in accordance with US GAAP. Net charge-offs include the amount of principal and accrued interest on loans that are more than 60 days past due, or sooner if we receive notice that the loan will not be collected, such as a bankruptcy notice or identified fraud, offset by any recoveries. Additional provision for loan losses is the amount of provision for loan losses needed for a particular period to adjust the combined loan loss reserve to the appropriate level in accordance with our underlying loan loss reserve methodology. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation to Provision for loan losses, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
(2)Combined loans receivable is defined as loans owned by us and consolidated VIEs plus loans originated and owned by third-party lenders pursuant to our CSO programs. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation of Combined loans receivable to Loans receivable, net, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
(3)Combined loan loss reserve is defined as the loan loss reserve for loans originated and owned by us plus the loan loss reserve for loans owned by third-party lenders and guaranteed by us. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation of Combined loan loss reserve to Allowance for loan losses, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
(1)Net principal charge-offs is comprised of gross principal charge-offs less recoveries.
(2)Average combined loans receivable - principal is calculated using an average of daily Combined loans receivable - principal balances during each quarter.
(3)Combined loans receivable is defined as loans owned by us and consolidated VIEs plus loans originated and owned by third-party lenders pursuant to our CSO programs. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation of Combined loans receivable to Loans receivable, net, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
The above chart depicts the positive impact COVID-19 has had on credit quality. Due to the lack of new customer loan demand, our implementation of payment assistance tools, and government stimulus payments received by our customers, net principal charge-offs as a percentage of average combined loans receivable-principal for the third and fourth quarters of 2020 are at historical lows and less than half of prior year percentages. This decrease in losses, combined with a decrease in direct marketing costs, resulted in gross profit being higher in 2020 as compared to 2019 and 2018 despite the significant decline in revenue.
In reviewing the credit quality of our loan portfolio, we break out our total provision for loan losses that is presented on our income statements under US GAAP into two separate items-net charge-offs and additional provision for loan losses. Net charge-offs are indicative of the credit quality of our underlying portfolio, while additional provision for loan losses is subject to more fluctuation based on loan portfolio growth, recent credit quality trends and the effect of normal seasonality on our business. The additional provision for loan losses is the amount needed to adjust the combined loan loss reserve to the appropriate amount at the end of each month based on our loan loss reserve methodology.
Net charge-offs. Net charge-offs comprise gross charge-offs offset by recoveries on prior charge-offs. Gross charge-offs include the amount of principal and accrued interest on loans that are more than 60 days past due, or sooner if we receive notice that the loan will not be collected, such as a bankruptcy notice or identified fraud. Any payments received on loans that have been charged off are recorded as recoveries and reduce the total amount of gross charge-offs. Recoveries are typically less than 10% of the amount charged off, and thus, we do not view recoveries as a key credit quality metric.
Net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues can vary based on several factors, such as whether or not we experience significant growth or lower the APR of our products. Additionally, although a more seasoned portfolio will typically result in lower net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues, we do not intend to drive down this ratio significantly below our historical ratios and would instead seek to offer our existing products to a broader new customer base to drive additional revenues.
Net charge-offs as a percentage of average combined loans receivable-principal allow us to determine credit quality and evaluate loss experience trends across our loan portfolio.
Additional provision for loan losses. Additional provision for loan losses is the amount of provision for loan losses needed for a particular period to adjust the combined loan loss reserve to the appropriate level in accordance with our underlying loan loss reserve methodology.
Additional provision for loan losses relates to an increase in future inherent losses in the loan portfolio as determined by our loan loss reserve methodology. This increase could be due to a combination of factors such as an increase in the size of the loan portfolio or a worsening of credit quality or increase in past due loans. It is also possible for the additional provision for loan losses for a period to be a negative amount, which would reduce the amount of the combined loan loss reserve needed (due to a decrease in the loan portfolio or improvement in credit quality). The amount of additional provision for loan losses is seasonal in nature, mirroring the seasonality of our new customer acquisition and overall loan portfolio growth, as discussed above. The combined loan loss reserve typically decreases during the first quarter or first half of the calendar year due to a decrease in the loan portfolio from year end. Then, as the rate of growth for the loan portfolio starts to increase during the second half of the year, additional provision for loan losses is typically needed to increase the reserve for future losses associated with the loan growth. Because of this, our provision for loan losses can vary significantly throughout the year without a significant change in the credit quality of our portfolio.
The following provides an example of the application of our loan loss reserve methodology and the break-out of the provision for loan losses between the portion associated with replenishing the reserve due to net charge-offs and the amount related to the additional provision for loan losses. If the beginning combined loan loss reserve were $25 million, and we incurred $10 million of net charge-offs during the period and the ending combined loan loss reserve needed to be $30 million according to our loan loss reserve methodology, our total provision for loan losses would be $15 million, comprising $10 million in net charge-offs (provision needed to replenish the combined loan loss reserve) plus $5 million of additional provision related to an increase in future inherent losses in the loan portfolio identified by our loan loss reserve methodology.
Loan loss reserve methodology. Our loan loss reserve methodology is calculated separately for each product and, in the case of Rise loans originated under the state lending model (including CSO program loans), is calculated separately based on the state in which each customer resides to account for varying state license requirements that affect the amount of the loan offered, repayment terms and other factors. For each product, loss factors are calculated based on the delinquency status of customer loan balances: current, 1 to 30 days past due or 31 to 60 days past due. These loss factors for loans in each delinquency status are based on average historical loss rates by product (or state) associated with each of these three delinquency categories. Hence, another key credit quality metric we monitor is the percentage of past due combined loans receivable - principal, as an increase in past due loans will cause an increase in our combined loan loss reserve and related additional provision for loan losses to increase the reserve. For customers that are not past due, we further stratify these loans into loss rates by payment number, as a new customer that is about to make a first loan payment has a significantly higher risk of loss than a customer who has successfully made ten payments on an existing loan with us. Based on this methodology, during the past three years we have seen our net principal charge-offs as a percentage of average combined loans receivable - principal generally fluctuate between 10% and 14% depending on the overall mix of new, former and past due customer loans.
Recent trends. Total loan loss provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 34% of revenues, which was below our targeted range of 45% to 55%, and below the 51% in the prior year period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues totaled 41%, compared to 52% in the prior year period. While we initially anticipated that the COVID-19 pandemic would have a negative impact on our credit quality, instead the large quantity of monetary stimulus provided by the US government to our customer base has generally allowed customers to continue making payments on their loans. However, this has also caused weaker customer demand for additional loans resulting in lower overall loan balances and revenues. We continue to monitor the portfolio during this economic crisis resulting from COVID-19 and continue to adjust our underwriting and credit policies to mitigate any potential negative impacts. In the near term, we expect that net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues will continue to trend lower than our targeted range of 45% to 55% of revenue. In the long-term (post-COVID-19), we expect to continue to manage our total loan loss provision as a percentage of revenues to continue to remain within our targeted range of approximately 45% to 55% of revenue.
The combined loan loss reserve as a percentage of combined loans receivable totaled 12%, 13% and 14% as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The loan loss reserve percentage remains relatively steady due to an increase in loans outstanding with a payment deferral under the payment flexibility tools offered in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. While we have seen positive payment performance once loans complete their payment deferral status, the loans in this population have a higher inherent risk of loss which is reflected in our loan loss reserve calculations. Past due loan balances at December 31, 2020 were 6% of total combined loans receivable - principal, down from 10% from a year ago, which is attributable to the COVID-19 payment flexibility tools.
We also look at principal loan charge-offs (including both credit and fraud losses) by vintage as a percentage of combined loans originated - principal. As the below table shows, our cumulative principal loan charge-offs through December 31, 2020 for each annual vintage since the 2013 vintage are generally under 30% and continue to generally trend at or slightly below our 25% to 30% long-term targeted range. During 2019, we implemented new fraud tools that have helped lower fraud losses for the 2019 vintage and rolled out our next generation of credit models during the second quarter of 2019 and continued refining the models during the third and fourth quarters of 2019. Our payment deferral programs have also assisted in reducing losses in our 2019 and 2020 vintages coupled with a lower volume of new loan originations in our 2020 vintage. The preliminary data on the 2019 and 2020 vintages is that they are both performing better than the 2017 and 2018 vintages. However, it is possible that the cumulative loss rates on all vintages will increase and may exceed our recent historical cumulative loss experience due to the impact of a prolonged economic crisis resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
(1) The 2019 and 2020 vintages are not yet fully mature from a loss perspective.
(2) UK included in the 2013 to 2017 vintages only.
(3) Does not include Today Card data as it is not material since its launch in 2018.
Margins
_________
(1)Non-GAAP measure. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Net charge-offs and additional provision for loan losses.”
Gross margin is calculated as revenues minus cost of sales, or gross profit, expressed as a percentage of revenues, and operating margin is calculated as operating income expressed as a percentage of revenues. Due to the negative impact of COVID-19 on our loan balances and revenue, we are monitoring our profit margins closely. Long-term, we intend to continue to manage the business to a targeted 20% operating margin.
Recent operating margin trends. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our operating margin was 26%, which was an increase from 16% in the prior year period and up from 13% in 2018. These margin increases were primarily driven by lower net charge-offs due to improved credit quality and by lower additional provisions for loan losses due to the decrease in the loan balances resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. We also incurred lower marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to reduced marketing activities resulting from the reduced demand for our loan products during the COVID-19 pandemic.
While gross margins are currently above our targeted 40%, operating expenses as a percentage of revenue continue to increase
due to the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on loan balances and revenue. As a result, we implemented an operating expense reduction plan during the year ended December 31, 2020. We completed the following actions under our operating expense reduction plan:
• Reduction of our U.S. workforce by approximately 17% effective July 8, 2020;
• Reduction of executive salaries and board compensation beginning July 2020; and
• Elimination of discretionary operating expense items and renegotiated terms with key vendors.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
We believe that the inclusion of the following non-GAAP financial measures in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our core business, provide transparency and useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, and enable investors to better compare our operating performance with the operating performance of our competitors. Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures frequently in its decision-making because they provide supplemental information that facilitates internal comparisons to the historical operating performance of prior periods and give an additional indication of our core operating performance. However, non-GAAP financial measures are not a measure calculated in accordance with US generally accepted accounting principles, or US GAAP, and should not be considered an alternative to any measures of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with US GAAP. Other companies may calculate these non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do.
Adjusted Earnings
Adjusted earnings represent our net income from continuing operations, adjusted to exclude:
•Contingent loss related to legal matters
•Cumulative tax effect of adjustments
Adjusted diluted earnings per share is Adjusted earnings divided by Diluted weighted average shares outstanding.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income from continuing operations and diluted earnings per share to Adjusted earnings and Adjusted diluted earnings per share, which excludes the impact of the contingent loss for each of the periods indicated:
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
Adjusted EBITDA represents our net income from continuing operations, adjusted to exclude:
•Net interest expense primarily associated with notes payable under the VPC Facility, EF SPV Facility, EC SPV Facility and ESPV Facility used to fund the loan portfolios;
•Share-based compensation;
•Depreciation and amortization expense on fixed assets and intangible assets;
•Gains and losses from dispositions or contingent losses related to legal matters included in non-operating loss; and
•Income taxes.
Adjusted EBITDA margin is Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue.
Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are useful supplemental measures to assist management and investors in analyzing the operating performance of the business and provide greater transparency into the results of operations of our core business.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin should not be considered as alternatives to net income from continuing operations or any other performance measure derived in accordance with US GAAP. Our use of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under US GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect expected cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital assets;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; and
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest associated with notes payable used for funding the loan portfolios, for other corporate purposes or tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin for each of the periods indicated:
Free cash flow
Free cash flow (“FCF”) represents our net cash provided by continuing operating activities, adjusted to include:
•Net charge-offs - combined principal loans; and
•Capital expenditures.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net cash provided by continuing operating activities to FCF for each of the periods indicated:
_________
(1)Net cash provided by continuing operating activities includes net charge-offs - combined finance charges.
Net charge-offs and additional provision for loan losses
We break out our total provision for loan losses into two separate items-first, the amount related to net charge-offs, and second, the additional provision for loan losses needed to adjust the combined loan loss reserve to the appropriate amount at the end of each month based on our loan loss provision methodology. We believe this presentation provides more detail related to the components of our total provision for loan losses when analyzing the gross margin of our business.
Net charge-offs. Net charge-offs comprise gross charge-offs offset by recoveries on prior charge-offs. Gross charge-offs include the amount of principal and accrued interest on loans that are more than 60 days past due, or sooner if we receive notice that the loan will not be collected, such as a bankruptcy notice or identified fraud. Any payments received on loans that have been charged off are recorded as recoveries and reduce total gross charge-offs.
Additional provision for loan losses. Additional provision for loan losses is the amount of provision for loan losses needed for a particular period to adjust the combined loan loss reserve to the appropriate level in accordance with our underlying loan loss reserve methodology.
Combined loan information
The Elastic line of credit product is originated by a third-party lender, Republic Bank, which initially provides all of the funding for that product. Republic Bank retains 10% of the balances of all of the loans originated and sells a 90% loan participation in the Elastic lines of credit to a third-party SPV, Elastic SPV, Ltd. Elevate is required to consolidate Elastic SPV, Ltd. as a variable interest entity under US GAAP and the consolidated financial statements include revenue, losses and loans receivable related to the 90% of Elastic lines of credit originated by Republic Bank and sold to Elastic SPV.
Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2018, we started licensing our Rise installment loan brand to a third-party lender, FinWise Bank, which originates Rise installment loans in 18 states. Prior to August 1, 2019, FinWise Bank retained 5% of the balances of all originated loans and sold a 95% loan participation in those Rise installment loans to a third-party SPV, EF SPV. On August 1, 2019, EF SPV purchased an additional 1% participation in the outstanding portfolio with the participation percentage revised going forward to 96%. We do not own EF SPV, but we are required to consolidate EF SPV as a VIE under US GAAP and the consolidated financial statements include revenue, losses and loans receivable related to the 96% of Rise installment loans originated by FinWise Bank and sold to EF SPV.
Beginning in 2018, we started licensing the Today Card brand and our underwriting services and platform to launch a credit card product originated by CCB, which initially provides all of the funding for that product. CCB retains 5% of the credit card receivable balance of all the receivables originated and sells a 95% participation in the Today Card lines of credit to us. The Today Card program was expanded in 2020.
Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, we also license our Rise installment loan brand to an additional bank, CCB, which originates Rise installment loans in three different states than FinWise Bank. Similar to the relationship with FinWise Bank, CCB retains 5% of the balances of all of the loans originated and sells the remaining 95% loan participation in those Rise installment loans to EC SPV. We do not own EC SPV, but we are required to consolidate EC SPV as a variable interest entity under US GAAP and the consolidated financial statements include revenue, losses and loans receivable related to the 95% of the Rise installment loans originated by CCB and sold to EC SPV.
The information presented in the tables below on a combined basis are non-GAAP measures based on a combined portfolio of loans, which includes the total amount of outstanding loans receivable that we own and that are on our balance sheets plus outstanding loans receivable originated and owned by third parties that we guarantee pursuant to CSO programs in which we participate. See “-Basis of Presentation and Critical Accounting Policies-Allowance and liability for estimated losses on consumer loans” and “-Basis of Presentation and Critical Accounting Policies-Liability for estimated losses on credit service organization loans.”
We believe these non-GAAP measures provide investors with important information needed to evaluate the magnitude of potential loan losses and the opportunity for revenue performance of the combined loan portfolio on an aggregate basis. We also believe that the comparison of the combined amounts from period to period is more meaningful than comparing only the amounts reflected on our balance sheets since both revenues and cost of sales as reflected in our financial statements are impacted by the aggregate amount of loans we own and those CSO loans we guarantee.
Our use of total combined loans and fees receivable has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under US GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•Rise CSO loans are originated and owned by a third-party lender and
•Rise CSO loans are funded by a third-party lender and are not part of the VPC Facility.
As of each of the period ends indicated, the following table presents a reconciliation of:
•Loans receivable, net, Company owned (which reconciles to our Consolidated Balance Sheets included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K);
•Loans receivable, net, guaranteed by the Company (as disclosed in Note 3 of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K);
•Combined loans receivable (which we use as a non-GAAP measure); and
•Combined loan loss reserve (which we use as a non-GAAP measure).
_________
(1)Represents loans originated by third-party lenders through the CSO programs, which are not included in our financial statements.
(2)Represents finance charges earned by third-party lenders through the CSO programs, which are not included in our financial statements.
(3)Non-GAAP measure.
(4)Combined loan loss reserve as a percentage of combined loans receivable is determined using period-end balances.
COMPONENTS OF OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenues
Our revenues are composed of Rise finance charges and CSO fees (inclusive of finance charges attributable to the participation in Rise installment loans originated by FinWise Bank and CCB), cash advance fees attributable to the participation in Elastic lines of credit that we consolidate, finance charges and fee revenues related to the Today Card credit card product, and marketing and licensing fees received from third-party lenders related to the Rise, Rise CSO, Elastic, and Today Card products. See “-Overview” above for further information on the structure of Elastic.
Cost of sales
Provision for loan losses. Provision for loan losses consists of amounts charged against income during the period related to net charge-offs and the additional provision for loan losses needed to adjust the loan loss reserve to the appropriate amount at the end of each month based on our loan loss methodology.
Direct marketing costs. Direct marketing costs consist of online marketing costs such as sponsored search and advertising on social networking sites, and other marketing costs such as purchased television and radio advertising and direct mail print advertising. In addition, direct marketing cost includes affiliate costs paid to marketers in exchange for referrals of potential customers. All direct marketing costs are expensed as incurred.
Other cost of sales. Other cost of sales includes data verification costs associated with the underwriting of potential customers and automated clearing house (“ACH”) transaction costs associated with customer loan funding and payments.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses consist of compensation and benefits, professional services, selling and marketing, occupancy and equipment, depreciation and amortization as well as other miscellaneous expenses.
Compensation and benefits. Salaries and personnel-related costs, including benefits, bonuses and share-based compensation expense, comprise a majority of our operating expenses and these costs are driven by our number of employees.
Professional services. These operating expenses include costs associated with legal, accounting and auditing, recruiting and outsourced customer support and collections.
Selling and marketing. Selling and marketing costs include costs associated with the use of agencies that perform creative services and monitor and measure the performance of the various marketing channels. Selling and marketing costs also include the production costs associated with media advertisements that are expensed as incurred over the licensing or production period. These expenses do not include direct marketing costs incurred to acquire customers, which comprises CAC.
Occupancy and equipment. Occupancy and equipment include rent expense on our leased facilities, as well as telephony and web hosting expenses.
Depreciation and amortization. We capitalize all acquisitions of property and equipment of $500 or greater as well as certain software development costs. Costs incurred in the preliminary stages of software development are expensed. Costs incurred thereafter, including external direct costs of materials and services as well as payroll and payroll-related costs, are capitalized. Post-development costs are expensed. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the depreciable assets.
Other income (expense)
Net interest expense. Net interest expense primarily includes the interest expense associated with the VPC Facility that funds the Rise installment loans, the EF SPV and EC SPV Facilities that fund Rise installment loans originated by FinWise Bank and CCB, respectively, and the ESPV Facility related to the Elastic lines of credit and related Elastic SPV entity. Interest expense also includes any amortization of deferred debt issuance cost and prepayment penalties incurred associated with the debt facilities.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth our consolidated income statements data for each of the periods indicated. Effective June 29, 2020, ECIL was placed into administration in the UK, and we deconsolidated ECIL and present it as discontinued operations for all periods presented.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Revenues decreased by $173.5 million, or 27%, from $638.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $465.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Total revenue from both the Rise and Elastic products decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same time period in 2019. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in total revenue for the Today Card due to the growth of this portfolio during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in Other revenues is due to a decrease in marketing and licensing fees related to the Rise CSO programs as our CSO partners stopped originating loans in Ohio in April 2019 and in Texas in October 2020.
The tables below break out this change in revenue (including CSO fees and cash advance fees) by product:
_________
(1)Includes loans originated by third-party lenders through the CSO programs, which are not included in our consolidated financial statements..
(2)Average combined loans receivable - principal is calculated using daily Combined loans receivable - principal balances. Not a financial measure prepared in accordance with US GAAP. See reconciliation table accompanying this release for a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
Our average combined loans receivable principal decreased $107 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. This decrease in average balance is primarily due to reductions in the Rise and Elastic loan origination volume during the year attributable to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and accounted for approximately $111 million of the reduction in revenue for the period. Our average APR declined from 113% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 102% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This reduction in the effective APR is due to the lower effective interest rates earned on loans in a deferral status under the payment flexibility tools that were implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic coupled with reduced new customer loan originations which generally have a higher effective APR, and such lower effective APR accounted for approximately $62 million of the reduction in revenue for the period. The overall effective APR of the loan portfolio will continue to slightly decline as more loans are originated at near-prime rates, such as the Today Card.
Cost of sales
Provision for loan losses. Provision for loan losses decreased by $168.8 million, or 52%, from $325.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $156.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The tables below break out these changes by loan product:
_________
(1)Not a financial measure prepared in accordance with US GAAP. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
(2)Includes loans originated by third-party lenders through the CSO programs, which are not included in our financial statements.
Total loan loss provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 34% of revenues, which was below our targeted range of 45% to 55%, and lower than 51% for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 41%, a decrease from 52% for the comparable period in 2019. We continue to monitor the portfolio during this economic crisis resulting from COVID-19 and continue to adjust our underwriting and credit policies to mitigate any potential negative impacts. In the near-term, we expect that net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues will continue to trend lower than our targeted range of 45% to 55% of revenue. In the long-term (post-COVID-19), we expect to manage our total loan loss provision as a percentage of revenues to continue to remain within our targeted range.
The combined loan loss reserve as a percentage of combined loans receivable totaled 12% and 13% as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The loan loss reserve percentage is slightly down at December 31, 2020 due to improved credit quality and reduced past due balances as compared to the prior year. Past due loan balances at December 31, 2020 were 6% of total combined loans receivable - principal, down significantly from 10% from a year ago, attributable to the COVID-19 payment flexibility tools and reduced new loan origination volume. At December 31, 2020, $34.6 million of combined loans receivable-principal (8.7% of the portfolio) are outstanding with a payment deferral under the payment flexibility tools offered in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. While we have seen positive payment performance once loans complete their payment deferral status, the loans in this population have a higher inherent risk of loss which is reflected in our loan loss reserve calculation.
Direct marketing costs. Direct marketing costs decreased by $18.3 million, or 47%, from $38.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $20.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Collectively, all products were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic as we experienced reduced new customer loan demand starting in March 2020. In addition, we implemented underwriting changes in response to COVID-19 that had the effect of limiting the volume of new customer loan originations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the number of new customers acquired decreased to 68,245 compared to 159,725 during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other cost of sales. Other cost of sales decreased by $2.0 million, or 19%, from $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to decreased data verification costs resulting from reduced loan origination volume.
Operating expenses
Compensation and benefits. Compensation and benefits decreased by $5.3 million, or 6%, from $89.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $84.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the reduction in staff related to the operating expense reduction plan implemented in July 2020.
Professional services. Professional services decreased by $0.2 million, or 1%, from $31.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $31.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to decreased contractor and consulting expenses, partially offset by increased legal expenses.
Selling and marketing. Selling and marketing decreased by $1.3 million, or 28%, from $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to decreased marketing agency fees.
Occupancy and equipment. Occupancy and equipment increased by $2.9 million, or 18%, from $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $18.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to increased web hosting and additional licenses expense.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization increased by $2.3 million, or 14%, from $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to depreciation on internally developed software.
Other. Other operating expenses decreased by $1.5 million, or 29%, from $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to decreased travel, meals and entertainment expenses.
Net interest expense
Net interest expense decreased $13.5 million, or 22%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. Our average effective cost of funds on our notes payable outstanding decreased from 12.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 10.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in a decrease in interest expense of approximately $8.9 million. In addition, the average balance of notes payable outstanding under the debt facilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $44.2 million from $511.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $467.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to debt paydowns associated with a decrease in the loan portfolio due to COVID-19. This reduction resulted in a decrease in interest expense of approximately $4.6 million.
The following table shows the effective cost of funds of each debt facility for the period:
In January 2018, we entered into interest rate caps, which capped 3-month LIBOR at 1.75%, to mitigate the floating interest rate risk on $240 million of the US Term Notes included in the VPC Facility and on $216 million of the ESPV Facility. The interest rate caps matured on February 1, 2019. Additionally, effective February 1, 2019, the VPC Facility and ESPV Facility were amended and a new facility, the EF SPV Facility, was created. The amended facilities included reductions to the interest rates paid on our debt in addition to other changes. The reduction in interest rates was effective February 1, 2019 for the VPC Facility and the EF SPV Facility. The reduction in interest rates for the ESPV Facility was effective July 1, 2019. In July 2020, we entered into a new facility, the EC SPV Facility. As of December 31, 2020, we have drawn $25 million on the EC SPV facility. Per the terms of the February 2019 amendments and the July 31, 2020 EC SPV agreement, the Company qualifies for a 25 bps rate reduction on the VPC, EC SPV, EF SPV and ESPV facilities effective January 1, 2021. This reduction does not apply to the 4th Tranche Term Note. We have evaluated the interest rates for its debt and believe they represent market rates based on our size, industry, operations and recent amendments. As a result, the carrying value for the debt approximates the fair value. See "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Debt facilities" for more information.
Non-operating income (expense)
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $24.1 million in non-operating losses related to an estimated $17 million contingent loss associated with a legal matter related to our spin-off from our predecessor company in 2014 and a separate $7 million indemnification accrual related to a legal matter for a former executive of the Company. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized $0.7 million in non-operating expenses related to the write-off of an internally developed software project.
Income tax expense
Our income tax expense decreased $1.2 million, or 10%, from $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our effective tax rates for continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 23% and 32%, respectively. Our effective tax rates are different from the standard corporate federal income tax rate of 21% in the US primarily due to our permanent non-deductible items (including the impact of the GILTI provision of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act enacted in 2017), corporate state tax obligations in the states where we have lending activities, and research and development credits. Our US cash effective tax rate was approximately 2.8% for 2020.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security ("CARES Act"), as amended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act ("CAA") were signed into law on March 27, 2020 and December 27, 2020, respectively. We reviewed the tax relief provisions of the CARES Act, regarding our eligibility and determined that the impact is likely to be insignificant with regard to our effective tax rate. We continue to monitor and evaluate our eligibility for the amended CARES Act tax relief provisions to identify any portions that may become applicable in the future.
Net loss from discontinued operations
Our loss from discontinued operations on our UK entity (ECIL) consists of an investment loss of $28.0 million, operating losses of $5.1 million, and a goodwill impairment loss of $9.3 million, partially offset by an income tax benefit of $28.4 million.
Net income
Our net income decreased $11.6 million, or 36%, from $32.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $20.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to losses related to the UK discontinued operations, partially offset by increased operating income and lower net interest expense. Net income from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $10.0 million from the prior year period due to both increased operating income and lower net interest expense.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Revenues
Revenues decreased by $24.8 million, or 4%, from $663.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $638.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in revenue was primarily due to a decline in the effective APR of the combined loans receivable, partially offset by an increase in our average combined loans receivable - principal balance, as illustrated in the tables below. The decrease in Other revenues is due to a decrease in marketing and licensing fees related to the Rise CSO programs as our CSO partners stopped originating Rise CSO loans in Ohio in April 2019 due to a state law change.
The tables below break out this change in revenue (including CSO fees and cash advance fees) by product:
_________
(1)Includes loans originated by third-party lenders through the CSO programs, which are not included in our consolidated financial statements.
(2)Average combined loans receivable - principal is calculated using daily Combined loans receivable - principal balances. Not a financial measure prepared in accordance with US GAAP. See reconciliation table accompanying this release for a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
Our average APR declined from 119% for the year ended December 31, 2018 to 113% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This resulted in a $24.8 million decrease in finance charges on a year-over-year basis, primarily in our Rise product. The average APR of a new Rise loan originated for a FinWise Bank customer is 130%, which is lower than our typical state-licensed Rise customer but with a better credit profile. While this has impacted top-line revenue growth, the related decrease in net charge-offs due to the better customer credit profile has resulted in an increase in gross profits.
Cost of sales
Provision for loan losses. Provision for loan losses decreased by $36.5 million, or 10%, from $362.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $325.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a $30.0 million decrease in net charge-offs and a decrease of $6.6 million in the additional provision for loan losses resulting from improved credit quality.
The tables below break out these changes by loan product:
_________
(1)Not a financial measure prepared in accordance with US GAAP. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with US GAAP.
(2)Includes loans originated by third-party lenders through the CSO programs, which are not included in our financial statements.
Net charge-offs decreased $30.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, due to improved credit quality, with the primary decrease attributed to the Rise product and in particular the FinWise Bank customer, which has a better credit profile than the state-licensed Rise customer. Net charge-offs as a percentage of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 52%, a decrease from 54% for the comparable period in 2018. Provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled 51% of revenues, lower than 55% for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Direct marketing costs. Direct marketing costs decreased by $16.2 million, or 30%, from $54.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $38.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to slower new customer growth as we focused on deploying our new credit models during 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the number of new customers acquired decreased to 159,725 compared to 211,680 during the year ended December 31, 2018. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, our CAC was $241 and $259, respectively.
Other cost of sales. Other cost of sales decreased by $2.1 million, or 17%, from $12.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to decreased data verification costs incurred from the lower new customer loan volume.
Operating expenses
Compensation and benefits. Compensation and benefits increased by $8.6 million, or 11%, from $80.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $89.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to an increase in the number of employees and severance payments related to the resignation of our CEO in July 2019.
Professional services. Professional services increased by $2.0 million, or 7%, from $29.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $31.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to increased legal expenses related to various legal matters and outsourced servicing expense, partially offset by decreased contractor and consulting expenses.
Selling and marketing. Selling and marketing decreased by $1.4 million, or 23%, from $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to decreased marketing agency fees.
Occupancy and equipment. Occupancy and equipment increased by $2.2 million, or 16%, from $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to increased web hosting expense, increased software licenses, and increased rent expense needed to support a greater number of employees.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization increased by $4.4 million, or 38%, from $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to increased purchases of property and equipment, including depreciation on internally developed software.
Net interest expense
Net interest expense decreased $10.8 million, or 15%, during the year ended December 31, 2019 versus the year ended December 31, 2018. Our average effective cost of funds on our notes payable outstanding decreased to 12.2% from 14.8% on an unadjusted basis for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. This lower cost of funds led to a decrease in interest expense of $12.7 million, which was partially offset by additional interest expense of approximately $2.0 million due to a higher average debt balance in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we had an average balance of $495.4 million in notes payable outstanding under our debt facilities, which increased to $511.9 million on average for fiscal year 2019. In addition, we incurred an $850 thousand prepayment penalty during the second quarter of 2019 for the early repayment on the 4th Tranche Term Note that is included in net interest expense.
The following table shows the effective cost of funds of each debt facility for the period:
In January 2018, we entered into interest rate caps, which cap 3-month LIBOR at 1.75%, to mitigate the floating interest rate risk on $240 million of the US Term Notes included in the VPC Facility and on $216 million of the ESPV Facility. The interest rate caps matured on February 1, 2019. Additionally, effective February 1, 2019, the VPC Facility and ESPV Facility were amended and a third new facility, the EF SPV Facility, was also created. The amended facilities included reductions to the interest rates paid on our debt in addition to other changes. The reduction in interest rates was effective February 1, 2019 for the VPC Facility and the EF SPV Facility. The reduction in interest rates for the ESPV Facility was effective July 1, 2019. All existing debt outstanding under these facilities (excluding the 4th Tranche Term Note of $18.1 million under the VPC Facility) had an effective cost of funds of approximately 10.3% at December 31, 2019. Per the terms of the February 1, 2019 amendments, we qualified for a 25 bps rate reduction on all three facilities effective January 1, 2020. This reduction did not apply to the 4th Tranche Term Note. See "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Debt facilities" for more information.
Non-operating income (expense)
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized $0.4 million in non-operating expenses related to certain impairments and losses on disposals of fixed assets. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized $0.7 million in non-operating losses related to the write-off of an internally developed software project.
Income tax expense
Our income tax expense increased $11.8 million, or 3,151%, from $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our effective tax rates for continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were 32% and 3%, respectively. Our effective tax rates are different from the standard corporate federal income tax rate of 21% primarily due to our permanent non-deductible items (including the impact of the GILTI provision of the Tax Cuts and the Jobs Act ("TCJA") enacted in 2017), corporate state tax obligations in the states where we have lending activities, and research and development credits. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized a tax benefit of $970 thousand when finalizing our provisional amounts associated with the enactment of the new corporate tax rate of 21% under the TCJA. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our cash effective tax rate was approximately 2%.
Net income (loss) from discontinued operations
During the year ended December 31, 2019, our net income from our discontinued UK operations was $5.9 million. The discontinued UK operations generated a net loss of $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2018.
Net income
Our net income increased $19.7 million, or 157%, from $12.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $32.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to improved gross profit and lower interest expense offset by higher income tax expense.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As previously discussed, we are closely monitoring the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic across our business, including the resulting uncertainties around customer demand, credit performance of loans with deferred payments, our levels of liquidity and our ongoing compliance with debt covenants. We had cash and cash equivalents available of $198.0 million at December 31, 2020. We have a principal debt payment obligation of $18.1 million (4% of outstanding debt) in February 2021 and no additional required principal payments on our outstanding debt until January 2024. While the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business, financial condition, liquidity and results of operations is dependent on future developments which are highly uncertain, we believe that our actions taken to date, future cash provided by operating activities, availability under our debt facilities with VPC, and possibly the capital markets, as well as certain potential measures within our control that could be put in place to maintain a sound financial position and liquidity will provide adequate resources to fund our operating and financing needs. We are continuing to assess minimum cash and liquidity requirements and implementing measures to ensure that our strong liquidity position is maintained through the current economic cycle created by the COVID-19 pandemic. We principally rely on our working capital and our credit facility with VPC to fund the loans we make to our customers.
Stock Repurchase Program
At December 31, 2020, we had an outstanding stock repurchase plan authorized by our Board of Directors providing for the repurchase of up to $30 million of our common stock through July 31, 2024. We repurchased $3.3 million of common shares during the second half of 2019, and an additional 7,694,896 shares were repurchased at a total cost of $19.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. In January 2021, we repurchased an additional 1,241,513 of common shares at a total cost of $5.3 million.
The Board of Directors authorized a $25 million increase to the plan in January 2021 providing for the repurchase of up to $55 million of our common stock through July 31, 2024.
The amended stock repurchase program provides that up to a maximum aggregate amount of $25 million shares may be repurchased in any given fiscal year. Repurchases will be made in accordance with applicable securities laws from time-to-time in the open market and/or in privately negotiated transactions at our discretion, subject to market conditions and other factors. The share repurchase program does not require the purchase of any minimum number of shares and may be implemented, modified, suspended or discontinued in whole or in part at any time without further notice. Any repurchased shares will be available for use in connection with equity plans and for other corporate purposes.
Debt Facilities
VPC Facility
VPC Facility Term Notes
On January 30, 2014, we entered into the VPC Facility in order to fund our Rise product and provide working capital. The VPC Facility has been amended several times, with the most recent amendment effective July 31, 2020, to decrease the maximum total borrowing amount available and other terms of the VPC Facility.
The VPC Facility provided the following term notes as of December 31, 2020:
•A maximum borrowing amount of $200 million (amended as of July 31, 2020) used to fund the Rise loan portfolio (“US Term Note”). Prior to the February 1, 2019 amendment, the interest rate paid on this facility was a base rate (defined as the 3-month LIBOR, with a 1% floor) plus 11%. Upon the February 1, 2019 amendment date, the interest rate of the debt outstanding as of the amendment date was fixed through the January 1, 2024 maturity date at 10.23% (base rate of 2.73% plus 7.5%, which was reduced to 7.25% on January 1, 2020 as part of the amendment). At December 31, 2019 the weighted-average base rate on the outstanding balance was 2.73% and the overall interest rate was 10.23%. The weighted-average base rate on the outstanding balance at December 31, 2020 was 2.73% and the overall rate was 9.98%. All future borrowings under this facility will bear an interest rate at a base rate (defined as the greater of 3-month LIBOR, the five-year LIBOR swap rate or 1%) plus 7.25% at the borrowing date.
•A maximum borrowing amount of $18 million used to fund working capital, and prior to February 1, 2019, at a base rate (defined as the 3-month LIBOR, with a 1% floor) plus 13% ("4th Tranche Term Note"). Upon the February 1, 2019 amendment date, the interest rate was fixed through the February 1, 2021 maturity date at a base rate of 2.73% plus 13%. The interest rate at both December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 15.73%. There was no change in the interest rate spread on this facility upon the February 1, 2019 amendment.
•A revolving feature which provides the option to pay down up to 20% of the outstanding balance, excluding the 4th Tranche Term note, once per year during the first quarter. Amounts paid down may be drawn again at a later date prior to maturity.
There are no principal payments due or scheduled under the VPC Facility until the respective maturity dates of the US Term Note and the 4th Tranche Term Note. The 4th Tranche Term Note matures on February 1, 2021. In January 2021,we paid off the remaining $18.1 million balance of the 4th Tranche Term Note using our available cash. Additionally, in January 2021, we paid down approximately $21 million, or 20%, of the current outstanding debt balance on the VPC Facility under the revolving feature noted above. The remaining outstanding debt on the US Term Note matures on January 1, 2024.
All of our assets are pledged as collateral to secure the VPC Facility. The agreement contains customary financial covenants, including minimum cash and excess spread requirements, maximum roll rate and charge-off rate levels, maximum loan-to-value ratios and a minimum book value of equity requirement. We were in compliance with all covenants as of December 31, 2020.
Prior to our UK operations (ECIL) entering administration and being classified as a discontinued operation on June 29, 2020, the VPC Facility included a note used to fund the UK Sunny loan portfolio (“UK Term Note”). Upon deconsolidation of ECIL, this note was removed from our Consolidated Balance Sheets and is presented within Liabilities from discontinued operations in all prior periods presented. Under the terms of the VPC Facility, Elevate Credit, Inc. (the "Parent") had provided a guarantee to VPC for the repayment of the debt of any subsidiary, which included the outstanding debt of ECIL. Upon deconsolidation of ECIL, we evaluated and recognized a $566 thousand liability at the Parent level related to the guarantee of ECIL's outstanding debt balance at June 30, 2020. The liability was recognized at the fair value of the guarantee obligation based on ECIL's cash flows and ability to repay the outstanding debt balance. ECIL completed repayment of the UK Term Note in the third quarter of 2020 and the liability was released as of September 30, 2020.
ESPV Facility
ESPV Facility Term Note
The ESPV Facility has a maximum borrowing amount of $350 million used to purchase loan participations from a third-party lender. Prior to the February 1, 2019 amendment, the interest rate paid on this facility was a base rate (defined as the greater of the 3-month LIBOR rate or 1% per annum) plus 13% for the outstanding balance up to $50 million, plus 12% for the outstanding balance greater than $50 million up to $100 million, plus 13.5% for any amounts greater than $100 million up to $150 million, and plus 12.75% for borrowing amounts greater than $150 million. Upon the February 1, 2019 amendment date, the interest rate on the debt outstanding as of the amendment date was fixed at 15.48% (base rate of 2.73% plus 12.75%). Effective July 1, 2019, the interest rate on the debt outstanding as of the amendment date was set at 10.23% (base rate of 2.73% plus 7.5%, which was reduced to 7.25% on January 1, 2020 as part of the amendment). The weighted-average base rate on the outstanding balance at December 31, 2019 was 2.72% and the overall interest rate was 10.22%. The weighted-average base rate on the outstanding balance at December 31, 2020 was 2.72% and the overall interest rate was 9.97%. All future borrowings under this facility will bear an interest rate at a base rate (defined as the greater of 3-month LIBOR, the five-year LIBOR swap rate or 1%) plus 7.25% at the borrowing date. The ESPV Term Note has a revolving feature providing the option to pay down up to 20% of the outstanding balance once per year during the first quarter. Amounts paid down may be drawn again at a later date prior to maturity. In January 2021, we paid down approximately $40 million, or 20%, of the current outstanding debt balance on the ESPV Facility under the revolving feature. The remaining outstanding debt on the ESPV Term Note matures on January 1, 2024.
All of our assets are pledged as collateral to secure the ESPV Facility. The agreement contains customary financial covenants, including minimum cash and excess spread requirements, maximum roll rate and charge-off levels, maximum loan-to-value ratios and a minimum book value of equity requirement. We were in compliance with all covenants related to the ESPV Facility as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
EF SPV Facility
EF SPV Facility Term Note
The EF SPV Facility has a maximum borrowing amount of $250 million (amended as of July 31, 2020) to be used to purchase Rise installment loan participations from a third-party bank, FinWise Bank. Prior to execution of the agreement with VPC effective February 1, 2019, EF SPV was a borrower on the US Term Note under the VPC Facility and the interest rate paid on this facility was a base rate (defined as 3-month LIBOR, with a 1% floor) plus 11%. Upon the February 1, 2019 amendment date, $43 million was re-allocated into the EF SPV Facility and the interest rate on the debt outstanding as of the amendment date was fixed through the January 1, 2024 maturity date at 10.23% (base rate of 2.73% plus 7.5%, which was reduced to 7.25% on January 1, 2020 as part of the amendment). The weighted-average base rate on the outstanding balance at December 31, 2019 was 2.49% and the overall interest rate was 9.99%. The weighted-average base rate on the outstanding balance at December 31, 2020 was 2.45% and the overall interest rate was 9.70%. All future borrowings under this facility will bear an interest rate at a base rate (defined as the greater of 3-month LIBOR, the five-year LIBOR swap rate or 1%) plus 7.25% at the borrowing date. The EF SPV Term Note has a revolving feature providing the option to pay down up to 20% of the outstanding balance once per year during the first quarter. Amounts paid down may be drawn again at a later date prior to maturity. In January 2021, we paid down approximately $19 million, or 20%, of the current outstanding debt balance on the EF SPV Facility under the revolving feature. The remaining outstanding debt on the EF SPV Term Note matures on January 1, 2024.
All of our assets are pledged as collateral to secure the EF SPV Term Note. The agreement contains customary financial covenants, including minimum cash and excess spread requirements, maximum roll rate and charge-off rate levels, maximum loan-to-value ratios and a minimum book value of equity requirement. We were in compliance with all covenants as of December 31, 2020.
EC SPV Facility
EC SPV Term Note
VPC entered into a new debt facility with EC SPV on July 31, 2020. The EC SPV Facility has a maximum borrowing amount of $100 million used to purchase loan participations from a third-party bank, CCB. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate paid on this facility is a base rate (defined as the greater of 3-month LIBOR, the five-year LIBOR swap rate or 1%) plus 7.25% at the borrowing date. The weighted-average base rate on the outstanding balance at December 31, 2020 was 2.73% and the overall interest rate was 9.98%. The EC SPV Term Note has a revolving feature providing the option to pay down up to 20% of the outstanding balance once per year during the first quarter. Amounts paid down may be drawn again at a later date prior to maturity. The remaining outstanding debt on the EC SPV Term Note matures on January 1, 2024.
All assets of the Company and EC SPV are pledged as collateral to secure the EC SPV Facility. The EC SPV Facility contains certain covenants for the Company such as minimum cash requirements and a minimum book value of equity requirement. There are also certain covenants for the product portfolio underlying the facility including, among other things, excess spread requirements, maximum roll rate and charge-off rate levels, and maximum loan-to-value ratios. We were in compliance with all covenants related to the EC SPV Facility as of December 31, 2020.
Outstanding Notes Payable
The outstanding balance of notes payable as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
The change in the facility balances includes the following:
•US Term Note - Paydowns of $27.5 million, $25 million and $25 million in the first, second, and fourth quarter of 2020, respectively;
•ESPV Term Note - Paydowns of $6.5 million and $20 million in the first and second quarter of 2020, respectively.
•EF SPV Term Note - Draw of $6.5 million in the first quarter of 2020 and a paydown of $15 million in the second quarter of 2020; and
•EC SPV Term Note - Draw of $25 million in the fourth quarter of 2020.
The following table presents the future debt maturities, as of December 31, 2020:
As discussed above, we paid down $97.6 million in debt in January 2021, including the $18.1 million 4th Tranche Term Note that matured on February 1, 2021. As of January 31, 2021, the outstanding balance of notes payable totaled $343 million.
Cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, loans (net of allowance for loan losses), and cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, loans receivable, net and cash flows for the periods indicated:
Our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 were held primarily for working capital purposes. We may, from time to time, use excess cash and cash equivalents to fund our lending activities, paydown debt or repurchase stock. We do not enter into investments for trading or speculative purposes. Our policy is to invest any cash in excess of our immediate working capital requirements in investments designed to preserve the principal balance and provide liquidity. Accordingly, our excess cash is invested primarily in demand deposit accounts that are currently providing only a minimal return.
Net cash provided by operating activities
We generated $210.1 million in cash from our operating activities-continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily from revenues derived from our loan portfolio. This was down $123.3 million from the $333.3 million of cash provided by operating activities-continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a decrease in revenues. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was up $7.3 million from the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was the result of the expansion of our gross margin, which contributed to the $12.4 million increase in our net income-continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same prior year period
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, cash provided by (used in) investing activities-continuing operations was $25.6 million, $(307.8) million and $(347.3) million, respectively. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in net loans originated to customers related to the COVID-19 pandemic. For the year ended December 31, 2019 net cash used in investing activities decreased $39.5 million from the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in net loans originated to customers compared to prior year.
The following table summarizes cash provided by (used in) investing activities-continuing operations for the periods indicated:
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Cash flows from financing activities-continuing operations primarily include cash received from issuing notes payable, payments on notes payable, and activity related to stock awards. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, cash provided by (used in) financing activities-continuing operations was $(108.0) million, $(2.9) million and $39.0 million, respectively. The following table summarizes cash provided by (used in) financing activities-continuing operations for the periods indicated:
The increase in cash provided by (used in) financing activities-continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus the comparable period of 2019 was primarily due to increased payments made on notes payable during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year, and increased repurchases of common stock which commenced in the third quarter of 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2019 net cash provided by financing activities decreased $42.0 million from the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was due primarily to payments made on notes payable during 2019.
Free Cash Flow
In addition to the above, we also review FCF when analyzing our cash flows from operations. We calculate free cash flow as cash flows from operating activities-continuing operations, adjusted for the principal loan net charge-offs and capital expenditures incurred during the period. While this is a non-GAAP measure, we believe it provides a useful presentation of cash flows derived from our core continuing operating activities.
Our FCF was $49.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $57.3 million for the prior year. The decrease in our FCF was the result of the decrease in cash provided by continuing operations, partially offset by a decrease in net-charge-offs - combined principal loans and capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating and capital expenditure requirements
We are continuing to assess our minimum cash and liquidity requirements and implementing measures to ensure that our cash and liquidity position is maintained through the current economic cycle created by the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe that our existing cash balances, together with the available borrowing capacity under the VPC Facility, ESPV Facility, EF SPV Facility and EC SPV Facility, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash operating expense and capital expenditure requirements through at least the next year. If our loan growth exceeds our expectations, our available cash balances may be insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, and we may seek additional equity or debt financing. This additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, or at all.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
Our principal commitments consist of obligations under our debt facilities and operating lease obligations. The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We provide services in connection with installment loans originated by independent third-party lenders (“CSO lenders”) whereby we act as a credit service organization/credit access business on behalf of consumers in accordance with applicable state laws through our “CSO program.” The CSO program includes arranging loans with CSO lenders, assisting in the loan application, documentation and servicing processes. Under the CSO program, we guarantee the repayment of a customer’s loan to the CSO lenders as part of the credit services we provide to the customer. A customer who obtains a loan through the CSO program pays us a fee for the credit services, including the guaranty, and enters into a contract with the CSO lenders governing the credit services arrangement. We estimate a liability for losses associated with the guaranty provided to the CSO lenders using assumptions and methodologies similar to the allowance for loan losses, which we recognize for our consumer loans.
Prior to ECIL entering administration and being classified a discontinued operation by us on June 29, 2020, the VPC Facility included the UK Term Note. Upon deconsolidation of ECIL, this note was removed from our Consolidated Balance Sheets and is presented within Liabilities from discontinued operations in all prior periods presented. Under the terms of the VPC Facility, we had provided a guarantee to VPC for the repayment of the debt of any subsidiary, which included the outstanding debt of ECIL. We estimated a liability for losses of $566 thousand associated with the debt guarantee based on the fair value of the obligation at June 30, 2020. ECIL completed repayment of the UK Term Note in the third quarter of 2020 and the liability has been released as of September 30, 2020.
RECENT REGULATORY DEVELOPMENTS
On October 30, 2020, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (the "CFPB") announced its final debt collection rule (Regulation F) and corresponding Official Commentary, and on December 18, 2020, the CFPB announced the final rule with regard to disclosures in debt collection (also under Regulation F). Both rules will be effective on November 30, 2021. The final Regulation F will apply to persons who are "debt collectors" as defined by the federal Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (the "FDCPA"). It will not apply to creditors collecting their own debts in their own names, like Elevate. Key provisions of Regulation F include: (i) a model safe harbor debt validation notice, (ii) a telephone contact frequency rule establishing that if the debt collector makes fewer than seven attempts in seven consecutive days there is a rebuttable presumption that the debt collector was not calling with such frequency as to harass the person being called and a position that the telephone contact frequency only applies to phone calls, not to all "communications" including permitted text messages and emails, (iii) rules around electronic communications, specifically text messages and emails, ensuring that the debt collector is not revealing the existence of the debt to a third-party, establishing a clear and conspicuous opt-out notice for consumers and ensuring that debt collectors comply with the federal ESIGN Act for required disclosures of electronic communications, (iv) prohibitions on communications via a work email or social media, unless the debt collector follows certain of the safe harbor provisions for electronic communications, (v) a "limited content message" rule establishing that communications and voicemails are allowed if they include (1) a business name for the debt collector (that does not indicate that the debt collector is in the debt collection business); (2) a request that the consumer reply to the message; (3) the name (or names) of one or more person(s) whom the consumer can contact to reply to the debt collector; and (4) a phone number (or numbers) that the consumer can use to reply to the debt collector (a limited-content message also may include: (1) a salutation; (2) the date and time of the message; (3) suggested dates and times for the consumer to reply to the message; and (4) a statement that if the consumer replies, the consumer may speak to any of the company's representatives or associates), (vi) a rule establishing limits on debt transfers, prohibiting transfers if the debt collector knows or should know that the debt has been paid or settled, or discharged in bankruptcy, and detailed requirements for handling consumer disputes and requests for original creditor information, (vii) restrictions on collecting time-barred debts, (viii) a requirement to provide notice before reporting to credit bureaus and
(ix) a requirement for retention of records and recorded telephone calls for three years following the debt collector's last collection activity on the debt, and that allows debt collectors to sell, transfer, or place for collection a debt that was discharged in bankruptcy if all that remains is a security interest, and as long as the debt collector notifies the transferee that the consumer's personal liability for the debt was discharged. We will take the necessary steps to ensure that the third-party debt collectors we work with are compliant with the final rule. In August 2020, final implementing regulations were approved to guide covered businesses' implementation of the California Consumer Privacy Act ("CCPA"), and since that time, the California Attorney General has proposed four sets of modifications to these regulations. We are closely tracking these amendments as they are released. In November 2020, the California Privacy Rights Act ("CPRA") became law. The CPRA significantly expands the CCPA, establishes the California Privacy Protection Agency, removes the CCPA's thirty-day cure period, and imposes a number of GDPR-styled obligations on businesses, among other requirements. Most of the substantive provisions of the CPRA take effect January 1, 2023, with certain provisions having gone into effect as soon as late in 2020. Ongoing implementation of and changes to the CCPA, the CPRA and related requirements will increase costs and create further challenges in the California market.
The CFPB’s Payday, Vehicle Title and Certain High-Cost Installment Loan rule continues to be stayed pursuant to litigation in a Texas federal court. If this rule becomes effective, it will place limitations on the ability to re-present failed ACH and debit card payments and to continue taking such payments pursuant to a valid authorization. The rule also requires substantial disclosures. The parties to the litigation have filed summary judgment briefs, but it is unclear when or if the stay will be lifted. Elevate is prepared to comply with the rule when and if it becomes effective.
BASIS OF PRESENTATION AND CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Revenue recognition
We recognize consumer loan fees as revenues for each of the loan products we offer. Revenues on the Consolidated Income Statements include: finance charges, lines of credit fees, fees for services provided through CSO programs (“CSO fees”), and interest, as well as any other fees or charges permitted by applicable laws and pursuant to the agreement with the borrower. Other revenues also include marketing and licensing fees received from the originating lender related to the Elastic product and Rise bank-originated loans and from CSO fees related to the Rise product. Revenues related to these fees are recognized when the service is performed.
We accrue finance charges on installment loans on a constant yield basis over their terms. We accrue and defer fixed charges such as CSO fees and lines of credit fees when they are assessed and recognize them to earnings as they are earned over the life of the loan. We accrue interest on credit cards based on the amount of the loan outstanding and their contractual interest rate. Credit card membership fees are amortized to revenue over the card membership period. Other credit card fees, such as late payment fees and returned payment fees, are accrued when assessed. We do not accrue finance charges and other fees on installment loans or lines of credit for which payment is greater than 60 days past due. Credit card interest charges are recognized based on the contractual provisions of the underlying arrangements and are not accrued for which payment is greater than 90 days past due. Installment loans and lines of credit are considered past due if a grace period has not been requested and a scheduled payment is not paid on its due date. Credit cards have a grace period of 25 days and are considered delinquent after the grace period. Payments received on past due loans are applied against the loan and accrued interest balance to bring the loan current. Payments are generally first applied to accrued fees and interest, and then to the principal loan balance.
In March 2020, the outbreak of the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) was recognized as a pandemic impacting businesses and economies. In accordance with federal and state guidelines, we expanded our payment flexibility programs for our customers, including payment deferrals. This program allows for a deferral of payments for an initial period of 30-60 days, and generally up to a maximum of 180 days on a cumulative basis. The customer will return to their normal payment schedule after the end of the deferral period with the extension of their maturity date equivalent to the deferral period, which is generally not to exceed an additional 180 days. Per FASB guidance, the finance charges will continue to accrue at a lower effective interest rate over the expected term of the loan considering the deferral period provided (not to exceed an amount greater than the amount at which the borrower could settle the loan) or placed on non-accrual status.
Our business is affected by seasonality, which can cause significant changes in portfolio size and profit margins from quarter to quarter. Although this seasonality does not impact our policies for revenue recognition, it does generally impact our results of operations by potentially causing an increase in its profit margins in the first quarter of the year and decreased margins in the second through fourth quarters.
Allowance and liability for estimated losses on consumer loans
We have adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) guidance for disclosures about the credit quality of financing receivables and the allowance for loan losses (“allowance”). We maintain an allowance for loan losses for loans and interest receivable for loans not classified as TDRs at a level estimated to be adequate to absorb credit losses inherent in the outstanding loans receivable. We primarily utilize historical loss rates by product, stratified by delinquency ranges, to determine the allowance, but we also consider recent collection and delinquency trends, as well as macro-economic conditions that may affect portfolio losses. Additionally, due to the uncertainty of economic conditions and cash flow resources of our customers, the estimate of the allowance for loan losses is subject to change in the near-term and could significantly impact the consolidated financial statements. If a loan is deemed to be uncollectible before it is fully reserved, it is charged-off at that time. For loans classified as TDRs, impairment is typically measured based on the present value of the expected future cash flows discounted at the original effective interest rate. As permitted by the SEC, we have elected to not adopt the Current Expected Credit Losses ("CECL") model which would require a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. See "- Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements And JOBS Act Election" for more information.
We classify loans as either current or past due. An installment loan or line of credit customer in good standing may request a 16-day grace period when or before a payment becomes due and, if granted, the loan is considered current during the grace period. Credit card customers have a 25-day grace period for each payment. Installment loans and lines of credit are considered past due if a grace period has not been requested and a scheduled payment is not paid on its due date. Credit cards are considered past due if the grace period has passed and the scheduled payment has not been made. Increases in the allowance are created by recording a Provision for loan losses in the Consolidated Income Statements. Installment loans and lines of credit are charged off, which reduces the allowance, when they are over 60 days past due or earlier if deemed uncollectible. Credit cards are charged off, which reduces the allowance, when they are over 120 days past due or earlier if deemed uncollectible. Recoveries on losses previously charged to the allowance are credited to the allowance when collected.
Liability for estimated losses on credit service organization loans
Under the CSO program, we guarantee the repayment of a customer’s loan to the CSO lenders as part of the credit services we provide to the customer. A customer who obtains a loan through the CSO program pays us a fee for the credit services, including the guaranty, and enters into a contract with the CSO lenders governing the credit services arrangement. We estimate a liability for losses associated with the guaranty provided to the CSO lenders using assumptions and methodologies similar to the allowance for loan losses, which we recognize for our consumer loans.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in each business combination. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 350-20-35, Goodwill-Subsequent Measurement, we perform a quantitative approach method impairment review of goodwill and intangible assets with an indefinite life annually at October 1 and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. Prior to 2019, we performed this test at October 31.
Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2017-04, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment ("ASU 2017-04"), our impairment evaluation of goodwill was already based on comparing the fair value of our reporting units to their carrying value. The adoption of ASU 2017-04 as of January 1, 2020 had no impact on our evaluation procedures. The fair value of the reporting units is determined based on a weighted average of the income and market approaches. The income approach establishes fair value based on estimated future cash flows of the reporting units, discounted by an estimated weighted-average cost of capital developed using the capital asset pricing model, which reflects the overall level of inherent risk of the reporting units. The income approach uses our projections of financial performance for a six to nine-year period and includes assumptions about future revenues growth rates, operating margins and terminal values. The market approach establishes fair value by applying cash flow multiples to the reporting units’ operating performance. The multiples are derived from other publicly traded companies that are similar but not identical from an operational and economic standpoint.
Internal-use software development costs
We capitalize certain costs related to software developed for internal-use, primarily associated with the ongoing development and enhancement of our technology platform. Costs incurred in the preliminary development and post-development stages are expensed. These costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the related asset, generally three years.
Income taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences and benefits attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts that are more likely than not to be realized.
Relative to uncertain tax positions, we accrue for losses we believe are probable and can be reasonably estimated. The amount recognized is subject to estimate and management judgment with respect to the likely outcome of each uncertain tax position. The amount that is ultimately sustained for an individual uncertain tax position or for all uncertain tax positions in the aggregate could differ from the amount recognized. If the amounts recorded are not realized or if penalties and interest are incurred, we have elected to record all amounts within income tax expense.
We have no recorded liabilities for US uncertain tax positions at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Tax periods from fiscal years 2014 to 2019 remain open and subject to examination for US federal and state tax purposes. As we had no operations nor had filed US federal tax returns prior to May 1, 2014, there are no other US federal or state tax years subject to examination.
The CARES Act as amended by the CAA were signed into law on March 27, 2020 and December 27, 2020, respectively. We reviewed the tax relief provisions of the CARES Act, regarding our eligibility and determined that the impact is likely to be insignificant with regard to our effective tax rate. We continue to monitor and evaluate our eligibility for the amended CARES Act tax relief provisions to identify any portions that may become applicable in the future.
Share-Based Compensation
In accordance with applicable accounting standards, all share-based payments, consisting of stock options, and restricted stock units ("RSUs") issued to employees are measured based on the grant-date fair value of the awards and recognized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the period during which the recipient is required to perform services in exchange for the award (the requisite service period). We also offer an employee stock purchase plan ("ESPP"). The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards and ESPP purchase rights on the date of grant using option-pricing models is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of highly complex and subjective variables. These variables include, but are not limited to, the expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, actual and projected employee stock option exercise activity, risk-free interest rate, expected dividends and expected term. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton Option Pricing Model to estimate the grant-date fair value of stock options. We also use an equity valuation model to estimate the grant-date fair value of RSUs. Additionally, the recognition of share-based compensation expense requires an estimation of the number of awards that will ultimately vest and the number of awards that will ultimately be forfeited.
Derivative Financial Instruments
On January 11, 2018, we and ESPV each entered into one interest rate cap transaction with a counterparty to mitigate the floating rate interest risk on a portion of the debt underlying the Rise and Elastic portfolios, respectively, which matured on February 1, 2019. The interest rate caps were designated as cash flow hedges against expected future cash flows attributable to future interest payments on debt facilities held by each entity. We initially reported the gains or losses related to the hedges as a component of Accumulated other comprehensive income in the Consolidated Balance Sheets in the period incurred and subsequently reclassified the interest rate caps’ gains or losses to interest expense when the hedged expenses were recorded. We excluded the change in the time value of the interest rate caps in its assessment of their hedge effectiveness. We present the cash flows from cash flow hedges in the same category in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as the category for the cash flows from the hedged items. The interest rate caps do not contain any credit risk related contingent features. Our hedging program is not designed for trading or speculative purposes.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS AND JOBS ACT ELECTION
Under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (the “JOBS Act”), we meet the definition of an emerging growth company. We have irrevocably elected to opt out of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards pursuant to Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
See Note 1 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.