ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Business Description
We are one of the largest electrical and mechanical construction and facilities services firms in the United States. In addition, we provide a number of building services and industrial services. Our services are provided to a broad range of commercial, industrial, utility and institutional customers through approximately 85 operating subsidiaries. Our offices are located in the United States and the United Kingdom.
We have the following reportable segments, which provide services associated with the design, integration, installation, start-up, operation and maintenance of various systems: (a) United States electrical construction and facilities services (involving systems for electrical power transmission and distribution; premises electrical and lighting systems; process instrumentation in the refining, chemical processing, food processing, and mining industries; low-voltage systems, such as fire alarm, security, and process control; voice and data communication, including fiber-optic and low-voltage cabling, distributed antenna systems, and audiovisual systems; roadway and transit lighting and signaling; and fiber optic lines); (b) United States mechanical construction and facilities services (involving systems for heating, ventilation, air conditioning, refrigeration, and clean-room process ventilation; fire protection; plumbing, process, and high-purity piping; controls and filtration; water and wastewater treatment; central plant heating and cooling; cranes and rigging; millwrighting; and steel fabrication, erection and welding); (c) United States building services; (d) United States industrial services; and (e) United Kingdom building services. The “United States building services” and “United Kingdom building services” segments principally consist of those operations which provide a portfolio of services needed to support the operation and maintenance of customers’ facilities, including commercial and government site-based operations and maintenance; facility management, maintenance, and services; outage services to utilities and industrial plants; military base operations support services; mobile mechanical maintenance and services, including maintenance and service of mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and building automation systems; indoor air quality improvement services; floor care and janitorial services; landscaping, lot sweeping, and snow removal; other building services, including reception, security, and catering services; vendor management; call center services; installation and support for building systems; program development, management and maintenance for energy systems; technical consulting and diagnostic services; infrastructure and building projects for federal, state and local governmental agencies and bodies; and small modification and retrofit projects, which services are not generally related to customers’ construction programs. The “United States industrial services” segment principally consists of those operations which provide industrial maintenance and services for refineries, petrochemical plants, and other customers within the oil and gas industry. Services of this segment include refinery turnaround planning and engineering; specialty welding; overhaul and maintenance of critical process units; specialty technical services; on-site repairs, maintenance and service of heat exchangers, towers, vessels, and piping; and design, manufacturing, repair, and hydro blast cleaning of shell and tube heat exchangers and related equipment.
COVID-19 and Market Update
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) emerged and has spread around the world. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 to be a global pandemic. In response, government authorities in the U.S. and U.K. imposed various social distancing, quarantine, and isolation measures on large portions of the population.
As a result of the pandemic, as well as the related containment and mitigation measures, we have experienced disruptions that have impacted our ability to execute on our remaining performance obligations in many of the markets in which we operate. Such impacts include, but are not limited to, access restrictions and temporary job site shutdowns, reduced labor efficiency resulting from the adherence to physical distancing and other enhanced safety protocols mandated at the majority of our worksite locations, and the curtailment or deferral of maintenance and service projects by our customers. Although we have not experienced significant project cancellations, and we continue to actively quote new work for our customers, as evidenced by the 14% increase in our remaining performance obligations since December 31, 2019, we are experiencing delays in certain projects and a reduction in the number of call-out service and repair opportunities. Additionally, the demand for oil has significantly deteriorated as a result of the pandemic and the corresponding preventative measures taken around the world to mitigate the spread of the virus, including travel restrictions imposed by various local, state, and other governmental authorities. Other macroeconomic events, including geopolitical tensions between the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (“OPEC”) and Russia, resulted in significant volatility in the price of crude oil during the first half of 2020. Although oil prices have subsequently experienced a partial recovery, the overall uncertainty driven by these events has significantly impacted the markets in which our United States industrial services segment operates. As a result, many customers have responded by reducing capital spending, implementing various cost cutting measures, and closing certain of their facilities. Such customer actions have resulted in a significant decrease in the demand for our service offerings within such segment.
During the second half of the year, we experienced stabilization within our United States construction segments and our United States and United Kingdom building services segments as certain shelter-in-place orders were lifted, various other containment and mitigation measures were eased, and/or our teams and customers further adapted to this new work environment; however, this positive trend may not continue. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our business and results of operations in future periods remains highly uncertain and will be affected by a number of factors. These include the duration and extent of the pandemic; limitations on the ability of our employees to perform their work due to illness caused by the pandemic or local, state, or federal orders requiring employees to quarantine; the extent, duration, and effective execution of ongoing government stabilization and recovery efforts; the timing, availability, efficacy, adoption, and distribution of vaccines or other preventative treatments; the continued impact of the pandemic on broader economic activity, including on construction projects and the oil and gas and related industrial markets; our customers’ demand for our services; our ability to effectively operate in this environment; the ability of our customers to pay us for services rendered; and any prolonged delays or shutdowns of active projects or closures of our and our customers’ offices and facilities. To date, we have been able to source the supplies and materials needed to operate our business with minimal disruptions. However, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our vendors continues to evolve and may make it difficult to obtain such materials in future periods. While we believe our remaining performance obligations are firm, customers may also slow down decision-making, delay planned work or seek to terminate existing agreements. Any of these events could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and/or results of operations.
2020 versus 2019
Overview
The following table presents selected financial data for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except percentages and per share data):
Revenues of $8.80 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 4.1% from revenues of $9.17 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. As discussed in further detail below, such decrease in revenues was attributable to revenue declines within our United States industrial services segment and our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, largely as a result of a decrease in demand for our service offerings within the oil and gas and related industrial markets given the aforementioned negative macroeconomic conditions impacting these markets. These revenue declines were partially offset by revenue growth within our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment and our United States building services segment, inclusive of the impact of businesses acquired, as discussed below, as well as an increase in revenues of our United Kingdom building services segment.
Operating income for 2020 was $256.8 million, or 2.9% of revenues, compared to operating income of $460.9 million, or 5.0% of revenues, in 2019. Our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $232.8 million of non-cash impairment charges recorded during the second quarter, primarily within our United States industrial services segment, which negatively impacted the Company’s operating margin for 2020 by approximately 270 basis points. Excluding the impact of such impairments, operating income and operating margin for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 increased by $28.7 million and 60 basis points, respectively, primarily as a result of favorable execution within our United States construction segments, as described in further detail below.
Net income of $132.9 million, or $2.40 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compares unfavorably to net income of $325.1 million, or $5.75 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decline in both net income and diluted earnings per common share are a result of the aforementioned impairment charges and the related tax effects as the majority of such charges are non-deductible for tax purposes.
Impact of Acquisitions
In order to provide a more meaningful period-over-period discussion of our operating results, we may discuss amounts generated or incurred (revenues, gross profit, selling, general and administrative expenses and operating income) from companies acquired. The amounts discussed reflect the acquired companies’ operating results in the current reported period only for the time period these entities were not owned by EMCOR in the comparable prior reported period.
We acquired three companies in 2020, including: (a) a company that provides building automation and controls solutions within the Northeastern region of the United States, (b) a full service provider of mechanical services within the Washington, D.C. metro area, and (c) a company, the results of operations of which were de minimis, that provides mobile mechanical services in the Southern region of the United States. The results of operations for all three companies have been included within our United States building services segment.
On November 1, 2019, we completed the acquisition of Batchelor & Kimball, Inc. (“BKI”), a leading full service provider of mechanical construction and maintenance services. This acquisition strengthens our position and broadens our capabilities in the Southern and Southeastern regions of the United States, and the results of its operations have been included within our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment. In addition to BKI, during 2019, we acquired: (a) a company that provides electrical contracting services in central Iowa, the results of operations of which have been included within our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, (b) a company that provides mechanical contracting services in south-central and eastern Texas, the results of operations of which have been included within our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment, and (c) four companies included within our United States building services segment, consisting of: (i) a company that provides mobile mechanical services in the Southern region of the United States and (ii) three companies, the results of operations of which were de minimis, which bolster our presence in geographies where we have existing operations and provide either mobile mechanical services or building automation and controls solutions.
Companies acquired in 2020 and 2019 generated incremental revenues of $269.6 million and incremental operating income of $15.4 million, inclusive of $16.0 million of amortization expense associated with identifiable intangible assets, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations
Revenues
The following table presents our revenues for each of our operating segments and the approximate percentages that each segment’s revenues were of total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except for percentages):
As described in more detail below, revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $8.80 billion compared to $9.17 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue declines within our United States industrial services segment and our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, largely as a result of a decrease in demand for our service offerings within the oil and gas and related industrial markets, were partially offset by revenue growth within our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment, our United States building services segment, and our United Kingdom building services segment. Companies acquired in 2020 and 2019, which are reported in our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment and our United States building services segment, generated incremental revenues of $269.6 million in 2020.
Revenues of our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment were $1,973.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to revenues of $2,216.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in revenues was attributable to: (a) a reduction in industrial project activities within the manufacturing market sector due to adverse market conditions within the oil and gas industry, as previously referenced, (b) a decline in revenues from construction projects within the commercial market sector, as a result of the completion or substantial completion of certain projects, and (c) the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, which resulted in: (i) a decrease in the number of short duration projects and (ii) project delays or access restrictions resulting from the various containment and mitigation measures mandated by certain of our customers and/or governmental authorities. The results for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $25.4 million of incremental revenues generated by a company acquired in 2019.
Our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $3,485.5 million, a $145.2 million increase compared to revenues of $3,340.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The results for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $188.8 million of incremental revenues generated by companies acquired in 2019. Excluding the impact of acquisitions, revenues of this segment decreased by $43.7 million, primarily as a result of a decline in revenues from: (a) the manufacturing market sector, inclusive of certain large food processing construction projects, and (b) several telecommunications and technology projects. Similar to our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, revenues of this segment were negatively impacted by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in project delays and temporary job site shutdowns, as well as a decrease in the number of short duration projects. These revenue reductions were partially offset by increased revenues from the majority of the remaining market sectors in which we operate, most notably the institutional, transportation, and commercial market sectors.
Revenues of our United States building services segment were $2,110.1 million and $2,106.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Excluding acquisition revenues of $55.4 million, this segment’s revenues decreased by approximately $52.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Such reduction in revenues was primarily attributable to: (a) decreased project and controls activities within our mobile mechanical services operations, largely as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in fewer project opportunities given the temporary closure of certain customer facilities, (b) decreased large project activity within our energy services operations, primarily as a result of the completion of certain projects which were active in the prior year, and (c) the loss of certain contracts not renewed pursuant to rebid within our government services business. These revenue declines were partially offset by increased customer demand for certain services aimed at improving the indoor air quality within their facilities as well as an increase in revenues within our commercial site-based services operations, as a result of new contract awards and scope expansion on certain contracts with existing customers.
Revenues of our United States industrial services segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $797.4 million, a $290.1 million decrease compared to revenues of $1,087.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenues of this segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 were negatively impacted by adverse market conditions including unprecedented volatility in the price of crude oil, largely as a result of a decline in demand caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Such macroeconomic conditions led to a decrease in demand for our services, which resulted in: (a) a decrease in maintenance and capital project activity within our field services operations and (b) a reduction in new build heat exchanger sales and a decrease in maintenance, repair, and hydro blast cleaning services within our shop services operations. In addition, revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were negatively impacted by project stoppages resulting from hurricanes, including certain named storms, within the Gulf Coast region.
Our United Kingdom building services segment revenues were $430.6 million in 2020 compared to $423.3 million in 2019. The increase in revenues within this segment was primarily attributable to: (a) an increase in revenues from new maintenance contract awards within the commercial market sector, and (b) increased project activity with existing customers, primarily within the water and wastewater market sector, despite reduced opportunities for project work brought upon by the temporary closure of certain customer facilities and the temporary suspension of capital spending as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in the first half of 2020. This segment’s revenues were positively impacted by $2.3 million related to the effect of favorable exchange rates for the British pound versus the United States dollar.
Cost of sales and Gross profit
The following table presents cost of sales, gross profit (revenues less cost of sales), and gross profit margin (gross profit as a percentage of revenues) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except for percentages):
Our gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,395.4 million, a $39.5 million increase compared to gross profit of $1,355.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our gross profit margin was 15.9% and 14.8% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a result of an increase in gross profit from our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment and our United Kingdom building services segment. The increase in gross profit margin was predominantly attributable to improved operating performance within both of our United States construction segments, as described in further detail below.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
The following table presents selling, general and administrative expenses and SG&A margin (selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except for percentages):
Our selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $903.6 million compared to selling, general and administrative expenses of $893.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, selling, general and administrative expenses included $29.6 million of incremental expenses directly related to companies acquired in 2020 and 2019, including amortization expense attributable to identifiable intangible assets of $9.5 million. Excluding incremental expenses from businesses acquired, our selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $19.4 million, primarily as a result of certain cost reductions resulting from, or actions taken in response to, the COVID-19 pandemic, including: (a) a reduction in certain discretionary spending, such as travel and entertainment costs, (b) a decrease in salary expense due to: (i) a reduction in headcount, resulting from lower revenues than in the same prior year period, and (ii) certain short-term cost cutting measures, including temporary furloughs and salary reductions, and (c) a decrease in employee benefit costs, partially due to a decline in medical claims. These cost reductions were partially offset by an increase in incentive compensation expense, predominantly within our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment, due to improved operating performance by several of our subsidiaries when compared to the prior year.
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues were 10.3% and 9.7% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in SG&A margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a reduction in revenues without a commensurate decrease in certain of our overhead costs, including: (a) certain fixed costs within our United States industrial services segment, despite the significant revenue decline within such segment, and (b) the above referenced increase in incentive compensation expense.
Restructuring expenses
Restructuring expenses, relating to employee severance obligations, were $2.2 million and $1.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the balance of restructuring related obligations yet to be paid was $2.7 million and $1.6 million, respectively. The obligations outstanding as of December 31, 2020 will be paid pursuant to our contractual obligations through 2022. No material expenses in connection with restructuring are expected to be incurred during 2021.
Impairment loss on goodwill, identifiable intangible assets, and other long-lived assets
During the second quarter of 2020, we identified certain indicators of impairment resulting from the aforementioned uncertainties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the significant volatility in the price of crude oil. These uncertainties have resulted in lower forecasted revenue and operating margin expectations for those of our businesses that are highly dependent on the strength of the oil and gas and related industrial markets, resulting in the recognition of impairment charges totaling $232.8 million during the three months ended June 30, 2020. Of this amount, $230.3 million related to our United States industrial services segment and was comprised of: (a) $225.5 million related to goodwill, (b) $4.2 million associated with a subsidiary trade name, and (c) $0.6 million related to certain long-lived assets. The remaining $2.5 million represented a subsidiary trade name impairment within our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment. No additional impairment charges were recorded during the remainder of 2020 and no impairment of our goodwill, identifiable intangible assets, or other long-lived assets was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating income (loss)
The following table presents by segment our operating income (loss) and each segment’s operating income (loss) as a percentage of such segment’s revenues from unrelated entities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except for percentages):
As described in more detail below, operating income was $256.8 million, or 2.9% of revenues, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to operating income of $460.9 million, or 5.0% of revenues, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our operating results for 2020 included $232.8 million of non-cash impairment charges recorded during the second quarter, which negatively impacted the Company’s full year operating margin in 2020 by approximately 270 basis points. Excluding the impact of such impairments, operating income and operating margin for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 increased by $28.7 million and 60 basis points, primarily as a result of favorable execution within our United States construction segments. Companies acquired in 2020 and 2019, which are reported in our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment, and our United States building services segment, generated incremental operating income of $15.4 million, inclusive of $16.0 million of amortization expense associated with identifiable intangible assets, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating income of our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $166.5 million, or 8.4% of revenues, compared to operating income of $161.7 million, or 7.3% of revenues, for the year ended December 31, 2019. A company acquired in 2019 contributed incremental operating income of $1.6 million, inclusive of $0.1 million of amortization expense associated with identifiable intangible assets, during 2020. The year-over-year increase in operating income was largely attributable to a reduction in selling, general and administrative expenses, including a curtailment in certain discretionary spending, such as travel and entertainment costs, and a decrease in employee benefit costs, resulting from a decline in medical claims. Despite an increase in gross profit from project activities within the commercial market sector, driven by several telecommunication construction projects, this segment experienced a marginal reduction in annual gross profit given: (a) a decrease in gross profit within the manufacturing market sector due to a reduction in industrial project activities resulting from the adverse market conditions within the oil and gas industry, (b) a decline in gross profit from short duration project activities, given the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to fewer short duration project opportunities, and (c) the under absorption of certain indirect costs due to the overall reduction in segment revenues. The increase in operating margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a result of an increase in gross profit margin given favorable project execution and a more profitable mix of work within this segment. These gross profit margin improvements were partially offset by an increase in the ratio of selling, general and administrative expenses to revenues, as a result of the revenue declines experienced by this segment during 2020.
Our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment’s operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $292.5 million, a $67.5 million increase compared to operating income of $225.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Companies acquired in 2019 contributed incremental operating income of $9.3 million, inclusive of $12.7 million of amortization expense associated with identifiable intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding the impact of businesses acquired, annual operating income of this segment increased by approximately $58.2 million. Despite the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment experienced an increase in gross profit from construction projects within the majority of the market sectors in which we operate. Operating margins within this segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 8.4% and 6.7%, respectively. The year-over-year increase in operating margin for this segment was attributable to an increase in gross profit margin, primarily within: (a) the manufacturing market sector, driven by certain large food processing construction projects, and (b) the commercial market sector, inclusive of a number of technology projects, which reached substantial completion during the year. The increases in gross profit and gross profit margin were partially offset by an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses, as well as the ratio of selling, general and administrative expenses to revenues, largely as a result of an increase in incentive compensation expense due to the improved year-over-year operating performance and an increase in amortization expense associated with identifiable intangible assets resulting from companies acquired in 2019.
Operating income of our United States building services segment was $113.4 million in 2020, compared to $114.8 million in 2019. Operating margin of this segment was 5.4% in both periods. Companies acquired in 2020, which are included within this segment’s mobile mechanical services division, contributed incremental operating income of $4.5 million, inclusive of $3.2 million of amortization expense associated with identifiable intangible assets. The decrease in segment operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in gross profit resulting from: (a) a reduction in large project activity within our energy services operations, and (b) when excluding the impact of acquired businesses, reduced project and controls activities within our mobile mechanical services operations, largely as a result of the temporary closure of certain customer facilities impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. These gross profit reductions were partially offset by increased gross profit from service repair and maintenance activities within our mobile mechanical services operations, partially as a result of increased customer demand for certain services aimed at improving the indoor air quality within their facilities. Operating income of this segment additionally benefited from an overall decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses due to certain cost reduction measures enacted during the year.
Our United States industrial services segment reported an operating loss of $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to operating income of $44.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating margin of this segment was (0.3)% and 4.1% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. As previously referenced, this segment’s results for the year ended December 31, 2020 were severely impacted by adverse macroeconomic factors impacting the oil and gas industry. As a result of such conditions, this segment experienced a reduction in gross profit from both our field services and shop services operations due to: (a) a decrease in demand for our service offerings, (b) the deferral, curtailment, or cancellation of previously scheduled projects with certain customers, and (c) an unfavorable mix of work, which included a greater number of projects with lower than typical gross profit margins. The aforementioned decrease in gross profit was partially offset by a reduction in selling, general and administrative expenses during the year, including: (a) incentive compensation and salaries, (b) employee benefit costs, and (c) certain discretionary spending, such as travel and entertainment costs. The decrease in operating margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to a decrease in gross profit margin resulting from the above noted factors, as well as an increase in the ratio of selling, general and administrative expenses to revenues due to a decrease in revenue without a commensurate decrease in certain of this segment’s fixed overhead costs.
Our United Kingdom building services segment operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $20.7 million, or 4.8% of revenues, which compares favorably to operating income of $18.3 million, or 4.3% of revenues, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in annual operating income of this segment was primarily a result of incremental gross profit from new maintenance contract awards. Exchange rate movements for the British pound versus the United States dollar did not have a significant impact on this segment’s operating income for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The year-over-year increase in this segment’s operating margin was attributable to an increase in gross profit margin, primarily as a result of a more favorable mix of work, and a decrease in the ratio of selling, general and administrative expenses to revenues.
Our corporate administration operating loss was $98.5 million for 2020 compared to $101.7 million in 2019. The decrease in corporate administration expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to: (a) a decrease in long-term incentive compensation expense, (b) a decrease in salary expense as a result of: (i) certain short-term cost cutting measures, including temporary furloughs and salary reductions, and (ii) permanent headcount reductions resulting from the realignment of certain of our back office functions, (c) curtailment in certain discretionary spending, such as travel and entertainment costs, and (d) a reduction in professional fees.
Non-operating items
Interest expense was $9.0 million and $13.8 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest income was $1.5 million and $2.3 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in both interest expense and interest income for 2020 resulted from lower interest rates. The decrease in interest expense was partially offset by the impact of higher average outstanding borrowings.
Our income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $119.4 million based on an income tax rate of 47.3%, compared to an income tax provision and an income tax rate of $125.7 million and 27.9%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our income tax rate and income tax provision for 2020 were impacted by the tax-effect of the $232.8 million of non-cash goodwill, identifiable intangible asset, and other long-lived asset impairment charges recorded during the second quarter, the majority of which is non-deductible for tax purposes.
Remaining Unsatisfied Performance Obligations
The following table presents the transaction price allocated to remaining unsatisfied performance obligations (“remaining performance obligations”) for each of our reportable segments and their respective percentage of total remaining performance obligations (in thousands, except for percentages):
Remaining performance obligations increase with awards of new contracts and decrease as we perform work and recognize revenue on existing contracts. We include a project within our remaining performance obligations at such time as the project is awarded and agreement on contract terms has been reached. Our remaining performance obligations include amounts related to contracts for which a fixed price contract value is not assigned when a reasonable estimate of the total transaction price can be made.
Remaining performance obligations include unrecognized revenues to be realized from uncompleted construction contracts. Although many of our construction contracts are subject to cancellation at the election of our customers, in accordance with industry practice, we do not limit the amount of unrecognized revenue included within remaining performance obligations for these contracts as the risk of cancellation is very low due to the inherent substantial economic penalty that our customers would incur upon cancellation or termination. We believe our reported remaining performance obligations for our construction contracts are firm and contract cancellations have not had a material adverse effect on us.
Remaining performance obligations also include unrecognized revenues expected to be realized over the remaining term of service contracts. However, to the extent a service contract includes a cancellation clause which allows for the termination of such contract by either party without a substantive penalty, the remaining contract term, and therefore, the amount of unrecognized revenues included within remaining performance obligations, is limited to the notice period required for the termination.
Our remaining performance obligations are comprised of: (a) original contract amounts, (b) change orders for which we have received written confirmations from our customers, (c) pending change orders for which we expect to receive confirmations in the ordinary course of business, (d) claim amounts that we have made against customers for which we have determined we have a legal basis under existing contractual arrangements and as to which the variable consideration constraint does not apply, and (e) other forms of variable consideration to the extent that such variable consideration has been included within the transaction price of our contracts. Such claim and other variable consideration amounts were immaterial for all periods presented.
Our remaining performance obligations at December 31, 2020 were $4.59 billion compared to $4.04 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase in remaining performance obligations at December 31, 2020 was attributable to an increase in remaining performance obligations within all of our reportable segments, except for our United States industrial services segment.
Computer System Attack
On February 15, 2020, we became aware of an infiltration and encryption of portions of our information technology network. This attack temporarily disrupted our use of the impacted systems. As part of our investigation into this incident, we engaged outside security experts, who did not identify any exfiltration of customer or employee data or any inappropriate access to our accounting or finance systems. The Company maintains insurance coverage for these types of incidents; such policies, however, may not completely provide coverage for, or completely offset the costs of, this infiltration.
2019 versus 2018
Overview
The following table presents selected financial data for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands, except percentages and per share data):
The results of our operations for 2019 set new company records in terms of revenues, operating income, net income attributable to EMCOR Group, Inc., and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations. Operating margin (operating income as a percentage of revenues) for 2019 remained consistent with our previously established annual record of 5.0%.
Revenues increased by 12.8% from $8.13 billion for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $9.17 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating income for 2019 of $460.9 million, or 5.0% of revenues, increased by $57.8 million compared to operating income of $403.1 million, or 5.0% of revenues, in 2018.
The strong operating results in 2019 were due to revenue growth and an increase in operating income within all of our reportable segments, as well as operating margin expansion across all such segments, except for our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment due to a change in revenue mix when compared to 2018.
Impact of Acquisitions
On November 1, 2019, we completed the acquisition of Batchelor & Kimball, Inc. (“BKI”), a leading full service provider of mechanical construction and maintenance services. This acquisition strengthens our position and broadens our capabilities in the Southern and Southeastern regions of the United States, and the results of its operations have been included within our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment. In addition to BKI, during 2019, we acquired: (a) a company that provides electrical contracting services in central Iowa, the results of operations of which have been included within our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, (b) a company that provides mechanical contracting services in south-central and eastern Texas, the results of operations of which have been included within our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment, and (c) four companies included within our United States building services segment, consisting of: (i) a company that provides mobile mechanical services in the Southern region of the United States and (ii) three companies, the results of operations of which were de minimis, which bolster our presence in geographies where we have existing operations and provide either mobile mechanical services or building automation and controls solutions.
We acquired four companies in 2018. Two companies provide mobile mechanical services, one within the Eastern region and the other within the Western region of the United States. The third company is a full service provider of mechanical services within the Southern region of the United States. The results of operations for these three companies have been included in our United States building services segment. The fourth company provides electrical construction and maintenance services for industrial and commercial buildings in North Texas, and the results of its operations have been included in our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment.
Companies acquired in 2019 and 2018 generated incremental revenues of $290.3 million and incremental operating income of $16.6 million, inclusive of $9.3 million of amortization expense associated with identifiable intangible assets, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations
Revenues
The following table presents our revenues for each of our operating segments and the approximate percentages that each segment’s revenues were of total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands, except for percentages):
As described in more detail below, revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased to $9.17 billion compared to $8.13 billion for the year ended December 31, 2018, with all reportable segments experiencing revenue growth year-over-year. Companies acquired in 2019 and 2018, which are reported in our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment and our United States building services segment, generated incremental revenues of $290.3 million in 2019.
Revenues of our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment were $2,216.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to revenues of $1,954.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in revenues was attributable to: (a) an increase in revenues from the commercial market sector, primarily as a result of several large telecommunication construction projects, and (b) an increase in project activities within the manufacturing and institutional market sectors. In addition, the results for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $134.5 million of incremental revenues generated by companies acquired in 2019 and 2018. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in revenues due to the completion or substantial completion of certain large construction projects within the transportation, healthcare, and hospitality market sectors.
Our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $3,340.3 million, a $377.5 million increase compared to revenues of $2,962.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in revenues was primarily attributable to an increase in revenues from the majority of the market sectors in which we operate, including: (a) the manufacturing market sector, due to several food processing construction projects, (b) the commercial market sector, primarily as a result of certain telecommunication and technology construction projects in process during 2019, and (c) the healthcare, water and wastewater, and institutional market sectors due to increased project activity. In addition, the results for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $49.1 million of incremental revenues generated by companies acquired in 2019. These increases were partially offset by decreased revenues within the hospitality market sector as a result of the completion of certain large projects.
Revenues of our United States building services segment were $2,106.9 million and $1,875.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The $231.4 million increase in this segment’s revenues was due to: (a) incremental revenues of $106.7 million generated by companies acquired in 2019 and 2018 within our mobile mechanical services operations, (b) greater project, controls, and service repair and maintenance activities within our mobile mechanical services operations, (c) an increase in revenues within our commercial site-based services operations, partially as a result of: (i) scope expansion on certain contracts with existing customers and (ii) new contract awards, and (d) increased large project activity within our energy services operations. These increases were partially offset by revenue declines within our government site-based services operations due to the loss of certain contracts not renewed pursuant to rebid, which resulted in a reduction in both base maintenance and indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity project revenues.
Revenues of our United States industrial services segment for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $1,087.5 million, a $164.4 million increase compared to revenues of $923.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in revenues was primarily due to increased maintenance and capital project activity within our field services operations. In addition, the results for the year ended December 31, 2019 benefited from a more normalized demand pattern for our turnaround services as compared to 2018, which was negatively impacted by the lingering effects of Hurricane Harvey, which led to the cancellation or deferral of certain previously scheduled maintenance activities with our customers. The increased revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 were partially offset by a decrease in revenues from our shop services operations, primarily as a result of a reduction in new build heat exchanger sales.
Our United Kingdom building services segment revenues were $423.3 million in 2019 compared to $414.9 million in 2018. The increase in revenues within this segment was primarily the result of: (a) new contract awards within the commercial and institutional market sectors and (b) increased project activity with existing customers. Unfavorable exchange rates for the British pound versus the United States dollar negatively impacted this segment’s revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 by $19.5 million.
Cost of sales and Gross profit
The following table presents cost of sales, gross profit, and gross profit margin for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands, except for percentages):
Our gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1,355.9 million, a $150.4 million increase compared to gross profit of $1,205.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Our gross profit margin was 14.8% for 2019 and 2018. The increase in consolidated gross profit was due to an increase in gross profit from all of our reportable segments, partially as a result of an increase in revenues within each segment during 2019. Additionally, gross profit within our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment, and our United States building services segment was favorably impacted by incremental gross profit generated by companies acquired.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
The following table presents selling, general and administrative expenses and SG&A margin, for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands, except for percentages):
Our selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $893.5 million, a $94.3 million increase compared to selling, general and administrative expenses of $799.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues were 9.7% and 9.8% for 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $35.1 million of incremental expenses directly related to companies acquired in 2019 and 2018, including amortization expense attributable to identifiable intangible assets of $4.5 million. In addition to the impact of acquisitions, selling, general and administrative expenses increased due to: (a) an increase in salaries and related employee benefit costs, partially as a result of an increase in headcount to support our revenue growth, (b) an increase in incentive compensation expense, due to higher annual operating results than in 2018, (c) an increase in information technology costs related to various initiatives in process during 2019, and (d) an increase in certain non-income based taxes. The decrease in SG&A margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to an increase in revenues without commensurate increases in our overhead cost structure.
Restructuring expenses
Restructuring expenses, primarily relating to employee severance obligations, were $1.5 million and $2.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the balance of restructuring related obligations yet to be paid was $1.6 million.
Impairment loss on goodwill, identifiable intangible assets, and other long-lived assets
No impairment of our identifiable intangible assets was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2019. During 2018, we recorded a $0.9 million non-cash impairment charge associated with a finite-lived subsidiary trade name within our United States industrial services segment. No impairment of our goodwill was recognized for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Operating income (loss)
The following table presents by segment our operating income (loss) and each segment’s operating income (loss) as a percentage of such segment’s revenues from unrelated entities for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands, except for percentages):
As described in more detail below, we had operating income of $460.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to operating income of $403.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Operating margin was 5.0% for both periods. Operating income and operating margin increased within all of our reportable segments except, in the case of operating margin, our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment, which experienced a 0.7% decline in operating margin as a result of a change in revenue mix compared to 2018.
Operating income of our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $161.7 million, or 7.3% of revenues, compared to operating income of $139.4 million, or 7.1% of revenues, for the year ended December 31, 2018. The $22.3 million increase in operating income year-over-year was primarily attributable to an increase in gross profit within the commercial market sector, inclusive of certain telecommunication construction projects, partially offset by a decrease in gross profit within the transportation market sector as a result of the completion or substantial completion of certain multi-year construction projects. Additionally, companies acquired in 2019 and 2018 contributed incremental operating income of $6.1 million, inclusive of $1.7 million of amortization expense associated with identifiable intangible assets. The increase in operating margin for 2019 was attributable to an increase in gross profit margin, partially as a result of improved project execution.
Our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment’s operating income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $225.0 million, a $5.2 million increase compared to operating income of $219.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Companies acquired in 2019 contributed incremental operating income of $0.1 million, inclusive of $2.8 million of amortization expense associated with identifiable intangible assets. The increase in operating income for 2019 was primarily attributable to an increase in gross profit from activities within the commercial and institutional market sectors, partially offset by a decrease in gross profit from construction projects within the manufacturing and hospitality market sectors. Operating margins within this segment for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were 6.7% and 7.4%, respectively.
The decrease in annual operating margin was attributable to a decrease in gross profit margin, primarily within the manufacturing market sector as a result of a change in the mix of work year-over-year, including several large food processing projects that had not achieved key milestones and were therefore being recognized at lower gross profit margins. This segment’s operating margin for 2018 was favorably impacted by the successful close-out of certain large manufacturing and hospitality construction projects.
Operating income of our United States building services segment was $114.8 million, or 5.4% of revenues, and $93.8 million, or 5.0% of revenues, in 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in operating income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to our mobile mechanical services operations, as a result of increased gross profit from project, controls, and service repair and maintenance activities. In addition, operating income benefited from increased gross profit within our commercial site-based services operations, as a result of scope expansion on certain existing contracts, and our energy services operations, due to an increase in large project activity. Companies acquired in 2019 and 2018 contributed incremental operating income of $10.4 million, inclusive of $4.8 million of amortization expense associated with identifiable intangible assets. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in operating income from our government site-based services operations as a result of a decrease in gross profit due to the loss of certain contracts within their portfolio, which were not renewed pursuant to rebid. The increase in operating margin of this segment for the year ended December 31, 2019 was attributable to an increase in gross profit margin, primarily from building automation and controls and repair project activities within our mobile mechanical services operations.
Our United States industrial services segment operating income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $44.3 million, a $16.7 million increase compared to operating income of $27.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Operating margin of this segment was 4.1% and 3.0% for 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in operating income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to an increase in demand for our service offerings during the year as we experienced a more normalized demand pattern within our field services operations as compared to 2018. The increase in operating margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to a decrease in the ratio of selling, general and administrative expenses to revenues, partially as a result of an increase in revenues without commensurate increases in this segment’s overhead cost structure.
Our United Kingdom building services segment operating income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $18.3 million, or 4.3% of revenues, compared to operating income of $15.9 million, or 3.8% of revenues, for the year ended December 31, 2018. Operating income increased primarily as a result of increased gross profit within the commercial market sector due to: (a) an increase in project activity with existing customers and (b) new contract awards. This segment’s operating income was negatively impacted by $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 related to the effect of unfavorable exchange rates for the British pound versus the United States dollar. The increase in operating margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 was attributable to an increase in gross profit margin, partially as a result of a favorable project mix during the year.
Our corporate administration operating loss was $101.7 million for 2019 compared to $90.4 million in 2018. The increase in corporate administration expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to: (a) an increase in employment costs, such as incentive compensation and salaries, (b) an increase in professional fees as a result of various information technology initiatives in process during 2019, and (c) an increase in certain non-income based taxes.
Non-operating items
Interest expense was $13.8 million and $13.5 million for 2019 and 2018, respectively. Interest income was $2.3 million and $2.7 million for 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in interest expense for 2019 was due to higher average interest rates, partially offset by the impact of reduced average outstanding borrowings. The decrease in interest income was a result of lower average daily cash balances during the first half of 2019.
Our 2019 income tax provision was $125.7 million compared to $109.1 million for 2018. Our income tax rate was 27.9% and 27.6% for 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in the 2019 income tax provision was primarily driven by increased income from continuing operations before income taxes while the increase in the income tax rate was a result of: (a) an increase in our state deferred tax rate, partially as a result of a change in the mix of income, and (b) the continued impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, including the application of guidance regarding certain permanent differences and other nondeductible expenses.
Discontinued operations
During the third quarter of 2014, we ceased construction operations in the United Kingdom. The results of the construction operations of our United Kingdom segment for all periods are presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements as discontinued operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following section discusses our principal liquidity and capital resources, as well as our primary liquidity requirements and sources and uses of cash. Our cash and cash equivalents are maintained in highly liquid investments with original maturity dates of three months or less.
Our short-term liquidity requirements primarily arise from: (a) working capital requirements, (b) business acquisitions, (c) share repurchases, (d) cash dividend payments, (e) interest and principal payments related to our outstanding indebtedness, (f) capital expenditures, and (g) income tax payments. We can expect to meet those requirements through our cash and cash equivalent balances, cash generated from our operations, and, if necessary, the borrowing capacity available under our revolving credit facility. However, negative macroeconomic trends, including prolonged impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, could have an adverse effect on future liquidity if we experience delays in the payment of outstanding receivables beyond normal payment terms or an increase in credit losses. In addition, during economic downturns, there have typically been fewer small discretionary projects from the private sector and our competitors have aggressively bid larger long-term infrastructure and public sector contracts. Our short-term liquidity is also impacted by: (a) the type and length of construction contracts in place as performance of long duration contracts typically requires greater amounts of working capital, (b) the level of turnaround activities within our United States industrial services segment as such projects are billed in arrears pursuant to contractual terms that are standard within the industry, and (c) the billing terms of our maintenance contracts, including those within our United States and United Kingdom building services segments. While we strive to negotiate favorable billing terms, which allow us to invoice in advance of costs incurred on certain of our contracts, there can be no assurance that such terms will be agreed to by our customers.
Our long-term liquidity requirements can be expected to be met initially through cash generated from operating activities and, if necessary, the borrowing capacity available under our revolving credit facility. Based upon our current credit ratings and financial position, we can also reasonably expect to be able to secure long-term debt financing if required to achieve our strategic objectives. Over the long term, our primary revenue risk factor continues to be the level of demand for non-residential construction as well as building and industrial services, all of which are influenced by macroeconomic trends including interest rates and governmental economic policy. In addition, our ability to perform work is critical to meeting our long-term liquidity requirements.
Despite the economic uncertainty described above, we believe that we have sufficient financial resources available to meet our short-term and foreseeable long-term liquidity requirements.
Cash Flows
The following table presents our net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, investing activities, and financing activities (in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our cash balance, including cash equivalents and restricted cash, increased by approximately $543.6 million from $359.9 million at December 31, 2019 to $903.6 million at December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, our cash balance, including cash equivalents and restricted cash decreased by approximately $6.3 million from $366.2 million at December 31, 2018. Changes in our cash position can be characterized as follows:
Operating Activities - Operating cash flows generally represent our net income as adjusted for certain non-cash items and changes in assets and liabilities. For 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $806.4 million compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $355.7 million in 2019 and $271.0 million in 2018.
The $450.7 million increase in net cash provided by operating activities during 2020, when compared to 2019, was primarily attributable to: (a) a decline in organic revenues within all our United States reportable segments, which resulted in a net reduction in outstanding accounts receivable, primarily within our United States industrial services segment and our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, (b) a reduction in the payment of certain non-income based taxes resulting from various government measures enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including: (i) a $102.5 million reduction in the payment of certain payroll taxes given the enactment of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, which provided that employers may defer payment of the employer’s portion of Social Security taxes throughout 2020, with payment of such deferred amounts due in two equal installments in December of 2021 and December of 2022, and (ii) the deferral of nearly $15.0 million in value-added tax within our United Kingdom building services segment, payment of which is substantially due in 2021, and (c) the timing of invoicing to our customers, including advanced billings on our long-term construction contracts.
For 2019 compared to 2018, the $84.7 million increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to: (a) a $41.6 million increase in net income and (b) the timing of cash receipts from our customers.
Investing Activities - Investing cash flows consist primarily of payments for the acquisition of businesses, capital expenditures, and proceeds from the sale or disposal of property, plant, and equipment. For 2020, we utilized approximately $94.9 million of cash for investing activities compared to $345.3 million in 2019 and $117.7 million in 2018. Year-over-year fluctuations in investing cash flows were primarily driven by increases or decreases in payments for acquisitions within the respective year.
Financing Activities - Financing cash flows consist primarily of the issuance and repayment of short-term and long-term debt, repurchases of common stock, payment of dividends to stockholders, and the issuance of common stock through certain employee equity plans. Net cash used in financing activities for 2020 was $171.9 million compared to $19.2 million in 2019 and $253.0 million in 2018.
The increase in cash used in financing activities in 2020, when compared to 2019, was primarily due to a $112.6 million increase in funds used for the repurchase of common stock and a net increase in repayments made on our revolving credit facility and term loan during 2020. The decrease in cash used for financing activities in 2019, when compared to 2018, was primarily a result of a $216.2 million decrease in funds used for the repurchase of our common stock and $25.0 million in net borrowings made under our revolving credit facility during 2019.
Debt
Until March 2, 2020, we had a credit agreement dated as of August 3, 2016, which provided for a $900.0 million revolving credit facility (the “2016 Revolving Credit Facility”) and a $400.0 million term loan (the “2016 Term Loan”) (collectively referred to as the “2016 Credit Agreement”). On March 2, 2020, we amended and restated the 2016 Credit Agreement to provide for a $1.3 billion revolving credit facility (the “2020 Revolving Credit Facility”) and a $300.0 million term loan (the “2020 Term Loan”) (collectively referred to as the “2020 Credit Agreement”) expiring March 2, 2025. We may increase the 2020 Revolving Credit Facility to $1.9 billion if additional lenders are identified and/or existing lenders are willing to increase their current commitments. We may allocate up to $400.0 million of available capacity under the 2020 Revolving Credit Facility to letters of credit for our account or for the account of any of our subsidiaries.
At the Company’s election, borrowings under the 2020 Credit Agreement bear interest at either: (1) a base rate plus a margin of 0.00% to 0.75%, based on certain financial tests, or (2) United States dollar LIBOR (0.15% at December 31, 2020) plus 1.00% to 1.75%, based on certain financial tests. The base rate is determined by the greater of (a) the prime commercial lending rate announced by Bank of Montreal from time to time (3.25% at December 31, 2020), (b) the federal funds effective rate, plus ½ of 1.00%, (c) the daily one month LIBOR rate, plus 1.00%, or (d) 0.00%. The interest rate in effect at December 31, 2020 was 1.15%. A commitment fee is payable on the average daily unused amount of the 2020 Revolving Credit Facility, which ranges from 0.10% to 0.25%, based on certain financial tests. The fee was 0.10% of the unused amount as of December 31, 2020. Fees for letters of credit issued under the 2020 Revolving Credit Facility range from 0.75% to 1.75% of the respective face amounts of outstanding letters of credit, depending on the nature of the letter of credit, and are computed based on certain financial tests.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the balance of the 2020 Term Loan and the 2016 Term Loan was $270.6 million and $254.4 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, there were no direct borrowings outstanding under the 2020 Revolving Credit Facility; however, we had $71.3 million of letters of credit outstanding, which reduce the available capacity under such facility. As of December 31, 2019, we had $50.0 million in direct borrowings outstanding and $109.0 million of letters of credit outstanding under the 2016 Revolving Credit Facility. We capitalized an additional $3.1 million of debt issuance costs associated with the 2020 Credit Agreement. Debt issuance costs are amortized over the life of the agreement and are included as part of interest expense.
Obligations under the 2020 Credit Agreement are guaranteed by most of our direct and indirect subsidiaries and are secured by substantially all of our assets. The 2020 Credit Agreement contains various covenants providing for, among other things, the maintenance of certain financial ratios and certain limitations on the payment of dividends, common stock repurchases, investments, acquisitions, indebtedness, and capital expenditures. We were in compliance with all such covenants as of December 31, 2020 with respect to the 2020 Credit Agreement and, as of December 31, 2019, with respect to the 2016 Credit Agreement.
We are required to make annual principal payments on the 2020 Term Loan. On September 30, 2020, we made a voluntary prepayment of $22.5 million, which was applied against our scheduled payments on a ratable basis. Principal payments of $13.9 million are due on December 31 of each subsequent year. All unpaid principal and interest is due on March 2, 2025.
Share Repurchase Program and Dividends
In September 2011, our Board of Directors (the “Board”) authorized a share repurchase program allowing us to begin repurchasing shares of our outstanding common stock. Subsequently, the Board has from time to time increased the amount of our common stock that we may repurchase under such program. Since the inception of the repurchase program, the Board has authorized us to repurchase up to $1.15 billion of our outstanding common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased approximately 1.7 million shares of our common stock for approximately $112.6 million. Since the inception of the repurchase program through December 31, 2020, we have repurchased approximately 17.5 million shares of our common stock for approximately $904.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, there remained authorization for us to repurchase approximately $246.0 million of our shares. The repurchase program has no expiration date, does not obligate the Company to acquire any particular amount of common stock, and may be suspended, recommenced, or discontinued at any time or from time to time without prior notice. We may repurchase our shares from time to time to the extent permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements, including provisions in our 2020 Credit Agreement placing limitations on such repurchases. The repurchase program has been and will be funded from our operations.
We have paid quarterly dividends since October 25, 2011. We paid a regular quarterly dividend of $0.08 per share throughout 2020. In December 2020, our Board of Directors announced its intention to increase the regular quarterly dividend to $0.13 per share commencing with the dividend to be paid in the first quarter of 2021. Our 2020 Credit Agreement places limitations on the payment of dividends on our common stock. However, we do not believe that the terms of such agreement currently materially limit our ability to pay a quarterly dividend of $0.13 per share for the foreseeable future. The payment of dividends has been and will be funded from our operations.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements and Other Commitments
The terms of our construction contracts frequently require that we obtain from surety companies (“Surety Companies”), and provide to our customers, payment and performance bonds (“Surety Bonds”) as a condition to the award of such contracts. Surety Bonds are issued in return for premiums, which vary depending on the size and type of the bond, and secure our payment and performance obligations under such contracts. We have agreed to indemnify the Surety Companies for amounts, if any, paid by them in respect of Surety Bonds issued on our behalf. Public sector contracts require Surety Bonds more frequently than private sector contracts and, accordingly, our bonding requirements typically increase as the amount of our public sector work increases. As of December 31, 2020, based on the percentage-of-completion of our projects covered by Surety Bonds, our aggregate estimated exposure, assuming defaults on all our then existing contractual obligations, was approximately $1.3 billion, which represents approximately 29% of our total remaining performance obligations. In addition, Surety Bonds are sometimes provided to secure obligations for wages and benefits payable to or for certain of our employees, at the request of labor unions representing such employees, or as collateral for certain insurance obligations. As of December 31, 2020, we satisfied approximately $37.5 million of the collateral requirements of our insurance programs by utilizing Surety Bonds. We are not aware of any losses in connection with Surety Bonds that have been posted on our behalf, and we do not expect to incur significant losses in the foreseeable future.
From time to time, we discuss with our current and other Surety Bond providers the amounts of Surety Bonds that may be available to us based on our financial strength and the absence of any default by us on any Surety Bond issued on our behalf and believe those amounts are currently adequate for our needs. However, if we experience changes in our bonding relationships or if there are adverse changes in the surety industry, we may (a) seek to satisfy certain customer requests for Surety Bonds by posting other forms of collateral in lieu of Surety Bonds, such as letters of credit, parent company guarantees, or cash, in order to convince customers to forego the requirement for Surety Bonds, (b) increase our activities in our business segments that rarely require Surety Bonds, such as our building and industrial services segments, and/or (c) refrain from bidding for certain projects that require Surety Bonds. There can be no assurance that we would be able to effectuate alternatives to providing Surety Bonds to our customers or to obtain, on favorable terms, sufficient additional work that does not require Surety Bonds. Accordingly, if we were to experience a reduction in the availability of Surety Bonds, we could experience a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations and/or cash flows.
In the ordinary course of business, we, at times, guarantee obligations of our subsidiaries under certain contracts. Generally, we are liable under such an arrangement only if our subsidiary fails to perform its obligations under the contract. Historically, we have not incurred any substantial liabilities as a consequence of these guarantees.
We do not have any other material financial guarantees or off-balance sheet arrangements other than those disclosed herein.
Contractual Obligations
The following is a summary of material contractual obligations and other commercial commitments (in millions):
_________________
(1) As of December 31, 2020, the amount outstanding under the 2020 Term Loan was $270.6 million. There were no direct borrowings outstanding under the 2020 Revolving Credit Facility.
(2) Represents open purchase orders for material and subcontracting costs related to construction and services contracts. These purchase orders are not reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheets and should not impact future cash flows as amounts should be recovered through customer billings.
(3) Primarily represents insurance related liabilities, and liabilities for deferred income taxes, incentive compensation and deferred compensation, classified as other long-term obligations in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Cash payments for insurance and deferred compensation related liabilities may be payable beyond three years, however it is not practical to estimate these payments; therefore, these liabilities are reflected in the 1-3 years payment period. Amounts also include the employer portion of Social Security taxes, which have been deferred pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, and are payable in two equal installments in December of 2021 and December of 2022. Such deferred payroll taxes are classified as either accrued payroll and benefits or other long-term obligations in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020. We provide funding to our post retirement plans based on at least the minimum funding required by applicable regulations. In determining the minimum required funding, we utilize current actuarial assumptions and exchange rates to forecast amounts that may be payable for up to five years in the future. In our judgment, minimum funding estimates beyond a five year time horizon cannot be reliably estimated and, therefore, have not been included in the table.
Legal Proceedings
We are involved in several legal proceedings in which damages and claims have been asserted against us. While litigation is subject to many uncertainties and the outcome of litigation is not predictable with assurance, we do not believe that any such matters will have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or liquidity.
Certain Insurance Matters
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we utilized approximately $71.2 million of letters of credit obtained under our 2020 Revolving Credit Facility and $108.9 million of letters of credit obtained under our 2016 Revolving Credit Facility, respectively, as collateral for insurance obligations. As of December 31, 2020, we satisfied an additional $37.5 million of these collateral requirements by utilizing Surety Bonds.
New Accounting Pronouncements
We review new accounting standards to determine the expected impact, if any, that the adoption of such standards will have on our financial position and/or results of operations. See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information regarding new accounting standards, including the anticipated dates of adoption and the effects on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or liquidity.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are based on the application of significant accounting policies, which require management to make estimates and assumptions. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K. We believe that some of the more subjective areas in the application of accounting policies that affect our financial condition and results of operations are the impact of changes in the estimates and judgments pertaining to: (a) revenue recognition from contracts with customers; (b) collectability or valuation of accounts receivable and the associated allowance for credit losses; (c) insurance liabilities; (d) income taxes; and (e) goodwill, identifiable intangible assets, and other long-lived assets.
Revenue Recognition from Contracts with Customers
We believe our most critical accounting policy is revenue recognition. The Company recognizes revenue by applying the following five step model: (1) identify the contract with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue as performance obligations are satisfied.
The Company recognizes revenue at the time the related performance obligation is satisfied by transferring a promised good or service to its customers. A good or service is considered to be transferred when the customer obtains control. The Company can transfer control of a good or service and satisfy its performance obligations either over time or at a point in time. The Company transfers control of a good or service over time and, therefore, satisfies a performance obligation and recognizes revenue over time if one of the following three criteria are met: (a) the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided by the Company’s performance as we perform, (b) the Company’s performance creates or enhances an asset that the customer controls as the asset is created or enhanced, or (c) the Company’s performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to us, and we have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date.
For our performance obligations satisfied over time, we recognize revenue by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of that performance obligation. The selection of the method to measure progress towards completion can be either an input method or an output method and requires judgment based on the nature of the goods or services to be provided.
For our construction contracts, revenue is generally recognized over time as our performance creates or enhances an asset that the customer controls as it is created or enhanced. Our fixed price construction projects generally use a cost-to-cost input method to measure our progress towards complete satisfaction of the performance obligation as we believe it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer which occurs as we incur costs on our contracts. Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. For our unit price construction contracts, progress towards complete satisfaction is measured through an output method, such as the amount of units produced or delivered, when our performance does not produce significant amounts of work in process or finished goods prior to complete satisfaction of such performance obligations.
For our services contracts, revenue is also generally recognized over time as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of our performance as we perform the service. For our fixed price service contracts with specified service periods, revenue is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over such service period when our inputs are expended evenly, and the customer receives and consumes the benefits of our performance throughout the contract term.
The timing of revenue recognition for the manufacturing of new build heat exchangers within our United States industrial services segment depends on the payment terms of the contract, as our performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to us. For those contracts for which we have a right to payment for performance completed to date at all times throughout our performance, inclusive of a cancellation, we recognize revenue over time. For these performance obligations, we use a cost-to-cost input method to measure our progress towards complete satisfaction of the performance obligation as we believe it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer which occurs as we incur costs on our contracts. However, for those contracts for which we do not have a right, at all times, to payment for performance completed to date, we recognize revenue at the point in time when control is transferred to the customer. For bill-and-hold arrangements, revenue is recognized when the customer obtains control of the heat exchanger, which may be prior to shipping, if certain recognition criteria are met.
For certain of our revenue streams, such as call-out repair and service work, outage services, refinery turnarounds and specialty welding services that are performed under time and materials contracts, our progress towards complete satisfaction of such performance obligations is measured using an output method as the customer receives and consumes the benefits of our performance completed to date.
Due to uncertainties inherent in the estimation process, it is possible that estimates of costs to complete a performance obligation will be revised in the near-term. For those performance obligations for which revenue is recognized using a cost-to-cost input method, changes in total estimated costs, and related progress towards complete satisfaction of the performance obligation, are recognized on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the revisions to the estimates are made. When the current estimate of total costs for a performance obligation indicate a loss, a provision for the entire estimated loss on the unsatisfied performance obligation is made in the period in which the loss becomes evident. During each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no changes in total estimated costs that had a significant impact on our operating results. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized losses of $10.0 million related to a change in total estimated costs on a transportation project within our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, resulting in part from contract scope issues.
The timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing to customers. Contract assets include unbilled amounts from our long-term construction projects when revenues recognized under the cost-to-cost measure of progress exceed the amounts invoiced to our customers, as the amounts cannot be billed under the terms of our contracts. Such amounts are recoverable from our customers based upon various measures of performance, including achievement of certain milestones, completion of specified units, or completion of a contract. In addition, many of our time and materials arrangements, as well as our contracts to perform turnaround services within the United States industrial services segment, are billed in arrears pursuant to contract terms that are standard within the industry, resulting in contract assets and/or unbilled receivables being recorded as revenue is recognized in advance of billings. Also included in contract assets are amounts we seek or will seek to collect from customers or others for errors or changes in contract specifications or design, contract change orders or modifications in dispute or unapproved as to scope and/or price, or other customer-related causes of unanticipated additional contract costs (claims and unapproved change orders). Our contract assets do not include capitalized costs to obtain and fulfill a contract. Contract assets are generally classified as current within the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, contract assets included unbilled revenues for unapproved change orders of approximately $15.3 million and $33.1 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no claim amounts included within contract assets or accounts receivable. There were contractually billed amounts and retention related to contracts with unapproved change orders and claims of approximately $87.9 million and $89.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For contracts in claim status, contractually billed amounts will generally not be paid by the customer to us until final resolution of the related claims.
Contract liabilities from our long-term construction contracts arise when amounts invoiced to our customers exceed revenues recognized under the cost-to-cost measure of progress. Contract liabilities additionally include advanced payments from our customers on certain contracts. Contract liabilities decrease as we recognize revenue from the satisfaction of the related performance obligation and are recorded as either current or long-term, depending upon when we expect to recognize such revenue. The long-term portion of contract liabilities is included in “Other long-term obligations” in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
See Note 3 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further disclosure regarding revenue recognition.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Credit Losses
Accounts receivable are recognized in the period we deliver goods or provide services to our customers or when our right to consideration is unconditional. The Company maintains an allowance for credit losses. A considerable amount of judgment is required when determining expected credit losses. Estimates of such losses are recorded when we believe a customer, or group of customers, may not be able to meet their financial obligations due to deterioration in financial condition or credit rating. Relevant factors include our prior collection history with our customers, the related aging of past due balances, projections of credit losses based on historical trends in credit quality indicators or past events, and forecasts of future economic conditions. In addition to monitoring delinquent accounts, management reviews the credit quality of its receivables by, among other things, obtaining credit ratings of significant customers, assessing economic and market conditions, and evaluating material changes to a customer’s business, cash flows , and financial condition.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our accounts receivable of $1,922.1 million and $2,030.8 million, respectively, were recorded net of allowances for credit losses of $18.0 million and $14.5 million, respectively. Due to the economic disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, our allowance for credit losses increased based on our evaluation of: (a) specific outstanding balances and (b) forecasts of future economic conditions and the expected impact on customer collections. Allowances for credit losses are based on the best facts available and are reassessed and adjusted on a regular basis as additional information is received. Should anticipated collections fail to materialize, or if future economic conditions compare unfavorably to our forecasts, we could experience an increase in our allowances for credit losses. The provision for our credit losses during 2020, 2019, and 2018 amounted to approximately $3.3 million, $2.6 million, and $2.1 million, respectively.
Insurance Liabilities
We have loss payment deductibles for certain workers’ compensation, automobile liability, general liability and property claims, have self-insured retentions for certain other casualty claims and are self-insured for employee-related healthcare claims. In addition, we maintain a wholly-owned captive insurance subsidiary to manage certain of our insurance liabilities. Losses are recorded based upon estimates of our liability for claims incurred and for claims incurred but not reported. The liabilities are derived from known facts, historical trends and industry averages utilizing the assistance of an independent third-party actuary to determine the best estimate for the majority of these obligations. We believe the liabilities recognized on the Consolidated Balance Sheets for these obligations are adequate. However, such obligations are difficult to assess and estimate due to numerous factors, including severity of injury, determination of liability in proportion to other parties, timely reporting of occurrences and effectiveness of safety and risk management programs. Therefore, if our actual experience differs from the assumptions and estimates used for recording the liabilities, adjustments may be required and will be recorded in the period that the experience becomes known. Our estimated net insurance liabilities for workers’ compensation, automobile liability, general liability and property claims increased by $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, partially as a result of greater potential exposures, including the impact of acquired companies. If our estimated insurance liabilities for workers’ compensation, automobile liability, general liability and property claims were to increase by 10%, it would have resulted in $17.2 million of additional expense for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial statement and income tax bases of assets and liabilities as well as for net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred income taxes are valued using enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when income taxes are paid or recovered, with the effect of a change in tax laws or rates recognized in the statement of operations in the period in which such change is enacted. The ultimate realization of deferred income tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. Deferred income taxes are recorded net of a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In making such determination, we consider all available evidence, including projections of future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and recent results of operations.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had net deferred income tax liabilities of $29.4 million and $71.7 million, respectively, primarily resulting from differences between the carrying value and income tax bases of certain identifiable intangible assets, goodwill, and depreciable fixed assets. Included within these net deferred income tax liabilities are $217.1 million and $176.2 million of deferred income tax assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The total valuation allowance on deferred income tax assets, primarily related to state net operating loss carryforwards, was approximately $3.9 million and $3.5 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Based on our taxable income, which has generally exceeded the amount of our net deferred tax asset balance, as well as current projections of future taxable income, we have determined that it is more likely than not that our net deferred income tax assets will be realized. However, revisions to our forecasts or declining macroeconomic conditions could result in changes to our assessment of the realization of these deferred tax assets.
Goodwill, Identifiable Intangible Assets, and Other Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had goodwill of $851.8 million and $1,063.9 million, respectively, arising out of the acquisition of businesses. Goodwill is not amortized but instead allocated to its respective reporting unit and evaluated for impairment annually, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of goodwill may be impaired. We have determined that our reporting units are consistent with the reportable segments identified in Note 19 - Segment Information included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 16.7% of our goodwill related to our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, approximately 35.2% related to our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment, approximately 35.5% related to our United States building services segment, and approximately 12.6% related to our United States industrial services segment.
Absent any earlier identified impairment indicators, we perform our annual goodwill impairment assessment on October 1 each fiscal year. Qualitative indicators that may trigger the need for interim quantitative impairment testing include, among others, a deterioration in macroeconomic conditions, declining financial performance, deterioration in the operational environment, or an expectation of selling or disposing of a portion of a reporting unit. Additionally, an interim impairment test may be triggered by a significant change in business climate, a loss of a significant customer, increased competition, or a sustained decrease in share price. In assessing whether our goodwill is impaired, we compare the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value exceeds the carrying amount, no impairment is recognized. However, if the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value, the goodwill of the reporting unit is impaired and an impairment loss in the amount of the excess is recognized and charged to operations.
Our operations were significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic starting with the second quarter of 2020. During the same period, the demand for oil significantly deteriorated as a result of the pandemic and the corresponding preventative measures taken around the world to mitigate the spread of the virus, including various local, state, and national jurisdictional “shelter-in-place” orders. Further, other macroeconomic events, including the escalation of geopolitical tensions between the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and Russia, resulted in a significant drop in the price of crude oil. These negative factors created significant volatility and uncertainty in the markets in which our United States industrial services segment operates, resulting in a significant decrease in the demand for our service offerings. Consequently, in the second quarter of 2020, we revised our near-term revenue and operating margin expectations for our United States industrial services segment and concluded that a triggering event had occurred which indicated it was more likely than not that the fair value of our United States industrial services segment was less than its carrying amount.
Accordingly, we performed a quantitative goodwill impairment test and determined the fair value of our United States industrial services segment using an income approach whereby fair value was calculated utilizing discounted estimated future cash flows, assuming a risk-adjusted industry weighted average cost of capital of 12.0%. Such weighted average cost of capital was developed with the assistance of an independent third-party valuation specialist and reflected the overall level of inherent risk within the business and the rate of return a market participant would expect to earn as of the interim date. Cash flow projections were derived from internal forecasts of anticipated revenue growth rates and operating margins, updated for the events discussed above, with cash flows beyond the discrete forecast period estimated using a terminal value calculation which incorporated historical and forecasted trends, an estimate of long-term growth rates, and assumptions about the future demand for our services. The perpetual growth rate utilized in the interim terminal value calculation was 2.0%.
Based on the outcome of our interim goodwill impairment test, we concluded that the carrying amount of our United States industrial services segment exceeded its fair value, resulting in the recognition of a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $225.5 million, which is included within our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. We did not identify impairment indicators related to any other reporting unit that would have required an interim impairment assessment.
As of October 1, 2020, we performed our annual impairment assessment of all reporting units and determined there was no incremental impairment of goodwill. Based on these latest impairment assessments, the fair values of our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment, our United States building services segment, and our United States industrial services segment exceeded their carrying values by approximately $946.5 million, $1,682.2 million, $715.8 million, and $18.9 million, respectively.
Consistent with the methodology applied in our interim impairment test, we determined the fair value of each of our reporting units using an income approach whereby fair value was calculated utilizing discounted estimated future cash flows, assuming a risk-adjusted industry weighted average cost of capital. The weighted average cost of capital used in our annual impairment testing was 10.6%, 10.4%, and 11.6% for our United States construction segments, our United States building services segment, and our United States industrial services segment, respectively. These weighted average cost of capital estimates were developed with the assistance of an independent third-party valuation specialist and reflect the overall level of inherent risk within the respective reporting unit and the rate of return a market participant would expect to earn.
Our cash flow projections were derived from our most recent internal forecasts of anticipated revenue growth rates and operating margins, with cash flows beyond the discrete forecast period estimated using a terminal value calculation which incorporated historical and forecasted trends, an estimate of long-term growth rates, and assumptions about the future demand for our services. The perpetual growth rate used for our annual testing was 2.0% for all of our reporting units.
Due to the inherent uncertainties involved in making estimates, our assumptions may change in future periods. Estimates and assumptions made for purposes of our goodwill impairment testing may prove to be inaccurate predictions of the future, and other factors used in assessing fair value, such as the weighted average cost of capital, are outside the control of management. Unfavorable changes in certain of these key assumptions may affect future testing results. For example, keeping all other assumptions constant, a 50 basis point increase in the weighted average cost of capital would cause the estimated fair values of our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment, our United States building services segment, and our United States industrial services segment to decrease by approximately $63.3 million, $115.9 million, $69.9 million, and $23.2 million, respectively. In addition, keeping all other assumptions constant, a 50 basis point reduction in the perpetual growth rate would cause the estimated fair values of our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment, our United States mechanical construction and facilities services segment, our United States building services segment, and our United States industrial services segment to decrease by approximately $31.0 million, $58.9 million, $33.5 million, and $9.7 million, respectively. Given the amounts by which the fair value exceeds the carrying value for each of our reporting units other than our United States industrial services segment, the decreases in estimated fair values described above would not have significantly impacted the results of our impairment tests. In the case of our United States industrial services segment, however, such decreases would cause the estimated fair value of such reporting unit to approximate its carrying value.
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, no impairment of our goodwill was recognized.
Identifiable Intangible Assets and Other Long-Lived Assets
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, net identifiable intangible assets (primarily consisting of our contract backlog, developed technology/vendor network, customer relationships, and subsidiary trade names) arising out of the acquisition of businesses were $582.9 million and $611.4 million, respectively. The determination of related estimated useful lives for identifiable intangible assets and whether those assets are impaired involves significant judgments based upon short and long-term projections of future performance. These forecasts reflect assumptions regarding anticipated macroeconomic conditions as well as our ability to successfully integrate acquired businesses.
Absent earlier indicators of impairment, we test for impairment of subsidiary trade names that are not subject to amortization on an annual basis (October 1). In performing this test, we calculate the fair value of each trade name using the “relief from royalty payments” methodology. This approach involves two steps: (a) estimating reasonable royalty rates for each trade name and (b) applying these royalty rates to a net revenue stream and discounting the resulting cash flows to determine fair value. This fair value is then compared with the carrying value of each trade name. If the carrying amount of the trade name is greater than the implied fair value of the trade name, an impairment in the amount of the excess is recognized and charged to operations. In addition, we review for impairment of identifiable intangible assets that are being amortized as well as other long-lived assets whenever facts and circumstances indicate that their carrying values may not be fully recoverable. This test compares their carrying values to the undiscounted pre-tax cash flows expected to result from the use of the assets. If the assets are impaired, the assets are written down to their fair values, generally determined based on their discounted estimated future cash flows.
Given the negative market conditions disclosed above, we also evaluated certain of our identifiable intangible assets and other long-lived assets for impairment during the second quarter of 2020. Such assets included those associated with the businesses in our United States industrial services segment and certain businesses within our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment whose results are also highly dependent on the strength of the oil and gas industry. As a result of these assessments, we recorded non-cash impairment charges of $7.3 million, which have been included within our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. Of this amount, $4.8 million related to our United States industrial services segment and was comprised of: (a) a $4.2 million subsidiary trade name impairment and (b) a $0.6 million impairment on certain other long-lived assets. The remaining $2.5 million represented a subsidiary trade name impairment within our United States electrical construction and facilities services segment.
As of October 1, 2020, we performed our annual impairment testing of all subsidiary trade names that are not subject to amortization and determined that there was no incremental impairment of these assets. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, no impairment of our indefinite-lived trade names was recognized.
With respect to identifiable intangible assets that are being amortized as well as other long-lived assets, we did not identify any further circumstances indicating that their carrying values may not be fully recoverable and, therefore, no additional impairment testing was required for these assets during the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, no impairment of our finite-lived intangible assets or other long-lived assets was recognized. We recorded a $0.9 million non-cash impairment charge associated with a finite-lived trade name within our United States industrial services segment during the year ended December 31, 2018.
Other Considerations
As referenced above, impairment testing is based upon assumptions and estimates determined by management from a review of our operating results and business plans as well as forecasts of anticipated growth rates and margins, among other considerations. In addition, estimates of weighted average costs of capital are developed with the assistance of an independent third-party valuation specialist. These assumptions and estimates may change in future periods, especially in consideration of the uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic and its continued impact on the broader economy and our results of operations. Significant adverse changes to external market conditions or our internal forecasts, if any, could result in future impairment charges. It is not possible at this time to determine if any future impairment charge will result or, if it does, whether such a charge would be material to our results of operations.