ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto included in Financial Statements and Supplementary Data under Item 8 within this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect plans, estimates, and beliefs. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. See Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.
Business Overview
EMCORE Corporation (referred to herein, together with its subsidiaries, as the “Company,” “we,” “our,” or “EMCORE”) is a leading provider of sensors for navigation in the aerospace and defense market as well as a manufacturer of lasers and optical subsystems for use in the Cable TV ("CATV") industry.
We pioneered the linear fiber optic transmission technology that enabled the world’s first delivery of CATV directly on fiber, and today is a leading provider of advanced mixed-signal products serving the aerospace and defense and broadband communications markets. The mixed-signal technology, at the heart of our broadband communications products, is shared with our fiber optic gyroscopes ("FOG") and inertial sensors to provide the aerospace and defense markets with state-of-the-art navigation systems technology. We have fully vertically-integrated manufacturing capability through our indium phosphide ("InP") compound semiconductor wafer fabrication facility at our headquarters in Alhambra, CA, and through our quartz processing and sensor manufacturing facility in Concord, CA. These facilities support our vertically-integrated manufacturing strategy for quartz and FOG products for navigation systems, and for our chip, laser, transmitter, and receiver products for broadband applications.
We have two reporting segments: (a) Aerospace and Defense and (b) Broadband. Aerospace and Defense is comprised of two product lines: (i) Navigation and Inertial Sensing, and (ii) Defense Optoelectronics. Broadband is comprised of three product lines: (i) CATV Lasers and Transmitters, (ii) Chip Devices, and (iii) Other Optical Products.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
We are subject to ongoing risks and uncertainties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The full extent of the COVID-19 impact on operational and financial performance is highly uncertain, out of our control, and cannot be predicted.
Each region we and our supply chain partners operate in has been affected by COVID-19 at varying times and magnitudes, often creating unforeseen challenges associated with logistics, raw material supply and labor shortages. Many of our suppliers have at times temporarily ceased or limited operations as a result of COVID-19 and failed to deliver parts or components to us.
For example, at various times during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, unexpected delays and cancellations of key component deliveries required us to source critical components from alternative sources and, in some cases, forced us to design in alternative parts and qualify them with customers on short schedules, and COVID-19 transmission in Thailand negatively affected production levels of our CATV Lasers and Transmitters products by our contract manufacturer located there. These and other actions resulting from the effects of COVID-19 may continue in the future and cause additional challenges to and disruptions of our business, inventory levels, operating results, and cash flows.
In addition, restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic have negatively affected the timing of the sale and transfer of certain CATV module and transmitter manufacturing equipment to Hytera and Fastrain (each as defined below), as described in more detail below under “Hytera and Fastrain Transactions”. Travel into Thailand by manufacturing engineers to support the transfer has at times been difficult. While we are taking actions within our supply chain and manufacturing operations to mitigate the effects of these delays and now expect the transfer to be completed during the quarter ending March 31, 2022, the timing and completion of these transfers may be further disrupted as a result of COVID-19, which could delay recognition of the anticipated benefits of transferring this equipment and could disrupt manufacturing activities for these products.
Our customer orders to date have generally remained stable with our pre-COVID-19 outlook, except with respect to customer orders related to the CATV Lasers and Transmitters product line, which have increased compared to our pre-COVID-19 outlook. However, qualification testing for certain of our products has been delayed due to customer engineering shortages and limitations on their ability to access their facilities, and development timelines for certain programs have been extended. We continue to analyze on an ongoing basis how COVID-19 related actions could affect our product development efforts, future customer demand, timing of orders, recognized revenues, and cash flows.
Equity Offering
On February 16, 2021, we closed an offering of 6,655,093 shares of our common stock, which included the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase 868,056 additional shares of common stock, at a price to the public of $5.40 per share, resulting in net proceeds to us from the offering, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, of approximately $33.1 million. The shares were sold by us pursuant to an underwriting agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC, dated February 10, 2021.
Hytera and Fastrain Transactions
As part of the effort to streamline operations and move to a variable cost model in our CATV Lasers and Transmitters product line, on October 25, 2019, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Hytera Asset Purchase Agreement”) with Hytera Communications (Hong Kong) Company Limited, a limited liability company incorporated in Hong Kong (“Hytera HK”), and Shenzhen Hytera Communications Co., Ltd., a corporation formed under the laws of the P.R.C. (“Shenzhen Hytera”, and together with Hytera HK, “Hytera”), pursuant to which Hytera agreed to purchase from us certain CATV module and transmitter manufacturing equipment (the “Equipment”) that we owned and that was located at the manufacturing facility of our wholly-owned subsidiary, EMCORE Optoelectronics (Beijing) Co, Ltd., a corporation formed under the laws of the P.R.C..
On August 9, 2021, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Fastrain Asset Purchase Agreement”) with each of Shenzhen Fastrain Technology Co., Ltd., a corporation formed under the laws of the P.R.C. (“Shenzhen Fastrain”), and Hong Kong Fastrain Company Limited, a limited liability company incorporated in Hong Kong (“HK Fastrain”, and together with Shenzhen Fastrain, collectively, “Fastrain”), pursuant to which, among other items, Fastrain agreed to purchase all of the Equipment subject to the Hytera Asset Purchase Agreement, along with certain other equipment owned by us, for an aggregate price of $6.2 million, of which (a) $3.8 million had been paid to us as of September 30, 2021 and (b) $2.4 million remains to be paid to us in connection with Equipment currently located at our Beijing facility and to be transferred pursuant to one or more closings on dates mutually agreed between us and Fastrain.
Concurrently with the execution of the Fastrain Asset Purchase Agreement, we and Fastrain entered into a Manufacturing Supply Agreement, dated August 9, 2021 (the “Fastrain Manufacturing Agreement”), pursuant to which Fastrain agreed to manufacture for us, from a manufacturing facility located in Thailand and for an initial term ending on December 31, 2025, the CATV Laser and Transmitter products set forth in the Fastrain Manufacturing Agreement. In the Fastrain Manufacturing Agreement, (a) we agreed to pay certain shortfall penalties in the event that orders for manufactured products are below certain thresholds beginning in calendar year 2021 and continuing through calendar year 2025, and (b) Fastrain agreed to pay certain surplus bonuses to EMCORE in the event that deliveries for manufactured products in either of the 24 month periods beginning on January 1, 2021 and ending on December 31, 2022 or beginning on January 1, 2023 and ending on December 31, 2024 exceed certain thresholds.
As described under “COVID-19” above, travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic have negatively affected the timing of the sale and transfer of some of the Equipment to Hytera and Fastrain. The transfer of the Equipment currently remaining at our Beijing facility is now expected to occur during the fiscal year ending September 30, 2022, with corresponding payments totaling $2.4 million expected to be received during the fiscal year ending September 30, 2022.
PPP Loan
In May 3, 2020, we entered into a Paycheck Protection Program Promissory Note and Agreement (the “PPP Loan Agreement”) with Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. (“Wells Fargo”) under the Paycheck Protection Program established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act and administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) to receive loan proceeds of approximately $6.5 million (the “PPP Loan”), which we received on May 6, 2020. On July 12, 2021, we received a notification from Wells Fargo that the SBA approved our PPP Loan forgiveness application for the entire PPP Loan balance of approximately $6.5 million, including all accrued interest thereon, and that the remaining PPP Loan balance is zero. The forgiveness of the PPP Loan was recognized during our fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2021.
Other Significant Actions that Affect the Comparability of Our Operating Results and Financial Condition
Customer Settlement Agreement
On November 17, 2020, we entered into an agreement with a customer to resolve certain potential product claims (the “Customer Settlement Agreement”). In exchange for a release of any and all potential claims the customer may have related to the applicable product, we have agreed to provide up to $1.5 million of product discounts on future purchases from us by the customer. We recorded the full potential expense of $1.5 million in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 within Research and Development expense.
Systron Donner Inertial, Inc. Acquisition
On June 7, 2019, we completed the acquisition of Systron Donner Inertial, Inc. ("SDI"), a navigation systems provider with a scalable, chip-based platform for higher volume gyro applications utilizing QMEMS technology. Following the closing, we began integrating SDI into our current Navigation and Inertial Sensing product line and have included the financial results of SDI in the consolidated financial statements beginning on the acquisition date. We incurred approximately $0.8 million of merger and acquisition costs in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019 in conjunction with the acquisition of SDI.
Concord Sale/Leaseback Transaction
In February 2020, SDI sold its property located in Concord, California (the "Concord Real Property") to Eagle Rock Holdings, LP ("Eagle Rock"), an affiliate of Parkview Management Group, Inc. for a total purchase price of $13.2 million pursuant to a Standard Offer, Agreement and Escrow Instructions for Purchase of Real Estate (Non-Residential), dated December 31, 2019, by and between SDI and Eagle Rock, as amended by that certain First Amendment to Standard Offer, Agreement and Escrow Instructions for Purchase of Real Estate (Non-Residential), dated January 13, 2020, by and between SDI and Eagle Rock (as amended, the "Concord Purchase Agreement"). SDI received net proceeds of $12.8 million after transaction commissions and expenses incurred in connection with the sale of the Concord real Property.
At the consummation of the sale of the Concord Real Property, SDI entered into a Single-Tenant Triple Net Lease (the “Concord Lease Agreement”) with Eagle Rock pursuant to which SDI leased back from Eagle Rock the Concord Real Property for a term commencing in February 2020 and ending in February 2035, unless earlier terminated or extended in accordance with the terms of the Concord Lease Agreement. Under the Concord Lease Agreement, SDI’s financial obligations include base monthly rent of $0.75 per square foot, or approximately $77,500 per month, during the initial 12 month period of February 2020 through February 2021, which increases on an annual basis at 3.0% over the life of the lease. SDI is also responsible for all monthly expenses related to the Concord Real Property, including insurance premiums, taxes and other expenses, such as utilities. In connection with the execution of the Concord Lease Agreement, we executed a Lease Guaranty with Eagle Rock under which we guaranteed the payment when due of the monthly rent, and all other additional rent, interest and charges to be paid by SDI under the Concord Lease Agreement.
Other Actions Related to CATV Lasers and Transmitters Business
We recorded a $4.7 million inventory write-down on CATV Lasers and Transmitters products and a $1.3 million write-down on non-current inventory in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019 due to the decline, at such time, in sales and future demand of the inventory. In the quarter ended September 30, 2019, we also reduced the size of our CATV Lasers and Transmitters -related employee headcount and reduced the capacity of our wafer fab to one shift, and in January 2020, we further reduced the
size of our employee headcount. These actions incurred costs of $0.4 million in the quarter ended September 30, 2019 and $0.4 million in the quarter ended March 31, 2020 and, together with previously-disclosed headcount reductions at our Beijing, China facility and the continuing shift to a variable cost model in our CATV Lasers and Transmitters product line as described under “Hytera and Fastrain Transactions” above, fulfill a strategic objective of better positioning the CATV Lasers and Transmitters product line to generate positive cash flow to help fund growth areas including Aerospace and Defense Chip Devices, and Other Optical Products.
Phoenix Litigation
During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019, we recorded an award to Phoenix of attorneys’ fees and costs in the amount of approximately $3.8 million. In connection with the litigation proceedings involving Phoenix, we incurred approximately $5.7 million of legal expenses in aggregate during the fiscal years ended September 30, 2018 and 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements require us to make estimates and judgements in applying our most critical accounting policies that can have a significant impact on the results we report in our financial statements. We develop estimates based on historical experience and on various assumptions about the future that are believed to be reasonable based on the best information available to us. The reported financial position or results of operations may be materially different under changed conditions or when using different estimates and assumptions, particularly with respect to significant accounting policies. In the event that estimates or assumptions prove to differ from actual results, adjustments are made in subsequent periods to reflect more current information.
The SEC has defined critical accounting policies as those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and which require our most difficult, complex, or subjective judgments or estimates. Based on this definition, our most critical accounting policies include revenue recognition, which impacts the recording of revenue; inventory valuation, which impacts the cost of goods sold and gross margin; assessment of goodwill and long-lived assets, which impacts the impairment of the respective assets; share-based compensation, which impacts costs of goods sold and operating expenses; loss contingencies, which impacts operating expenses; and income taxes, which impacts the income tax provision. These policies and significant judgments involved are discussed further below. We have other significant accounting policies that do not generally require subjective estimates or judgments or would not have a material impact on our results of operations. Our significant accounting policies are described in Item 8, Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The majority of our products have shipping terms that are free on board or free carrier alongside shipping point, which means that we fulfill our delivery obligation and control has transferred to the customer when the goods are handed over to the freight carrier at our shipping dock. In those instances where inventory is maintained at a consigned location, revenue is recognized only when our customer pulls product for use and control has transferred to the customer. Any warranty cost and remaining obligations that are inconsequential or perfunctory are accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized.
Income Taxes
In accordance with the authoritative guidance on accounting for income taxes, we recognize income taxes using an asset and liability approach. This approach requires the recognition of taxes payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. The measurement of current and deferred taxes is based on provisions of the enacted tax law. The effects of future changes in tax laws or rates are not anticipated.
The authoritative guidance provides for recognition of deferred tax assets if the realization of such deferred tax assets is more likely than not to occur based on an evaluation of all available evidence, both positive and negative, and the relative weight of the evidence. We have determined that at this time it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets attributable to all other items will not be realized, primarily due to uncertainties related to the ability to utilize net operating loss carryforwards before they expire. Accordingly, we have established a valuation allowance for such deferred tax assets which we do not expect to realize. If there is a change in the ability to realize deferred tax assets for which a valuation allowance has been established, then the tax valuation allowance may decrease in the period in which we determine that realization is more likely than not.
Likewise, if we determine that it is not more likely than not that deferred tax assets will be realized, then a valuation allowance may be established for such deferred tax assets and the tax provision may increase in the period in which we make the determination. See Note 10 - Income and Other Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to income taxes.
Inventory
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value (first-in, first-out). Inventory that is expected to be used within the next twelve months is classified as current inventory. We write-down inventory once it has been determined that conditions exist that may not allow the inventory to be sold for its intended purpose or the inventory is determined to be excess or obsolete based on assumptions about future demand and market conditions. The charge related to inventory write-downs is recorded as a cost of revenue. We evaluate inventory levels at least quarterly against sales forecasts on a significant part-by-part basis, in addition to determining its overall inventory risk. We have incurred, and may in the future incur, charges to write-down inventory. See Note 6 - Inventory in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to inventory.
***
The above listing is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all our accounting policies. In many cases, U.S. GAAP specifically dictates the accounting treatment of a particular transaction. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result. For a complete discussion of our accounting policies, recently adopted accounting pronouncements, and other required U.S. GAAP disclosures, we refer you to the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of Results of Operations
Comparison of Revenue
Aerospace and Defense
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, revenue decreased $4.4 million, or 8.0%, compared to the same period in the prior year, due to lower Navigation and Inertial Sensing and Defense Optoelectronics revenue. The Navigation and Inertial Sensing revenue decrease was due primarily to lower FOG revenue, where customer demand under a large single-axis gyro program fluctuated down during the first half of fiscal 2021 and where non-recurring engineering contract revenue decreased. Lower QMEMS revenue, due primarily to a decline in revenue from pandemic-impacted commercial aviation programs, also contributed to the decrease in Navigation and Inertial Sensing revenue. The Defense Optoelectronics revenue decrease was caused by a drop in product shipments during the second half of fiscal 2021 due primarily to the delay in orders on one large program as well as supply chain interruptions associated with a contract manufacturer transition.
Broadband
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, revenue increased $52.7 million, or 96.0%, compared to the same period in the prior year, driven by increased customer demand. Increased customer demand arose in part from an increase in investment by CATV multiple-system operators (“MSO”) in their networks to address the bottlenecks created by bandwidth demands from both work-from-home initiatives and “stay at home” entertainment.
Gross Profit
Cost of revenue consists of raw materials, compensation expense including non-cash stock-based compensation expense, depreciation expense and other manufacturing overhead costs, expenses associated with excess and obsolete inventories, and product warranty costs. Historically, cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue, which we refer to as gross margin, has fluctuated significantly due to product mix, manufacturing yields, sales volumes, inventory and specific product warranty charges, as well as the amount of our revenue relative to fixed manufacturing costs.
Consolidated gross margins were 38.8% and 32.3% for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Stock-based compensation expense within cost of revenue totaled approximately $0.8 million and $0.7 million for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Aerospace and Defense
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, Aerospace and Defense gross profit decreased $3.0 million, or 18.1%, compared to the same period in the prior year, primarily due to lower revenue. For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, Aerospace and Defense gross margin was 27.0% and 30.3%, respectively. Gross margin in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 decreased due to lower product sales resulting from decreased customer program demand, which resulted in lower absorption of fixed costs. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, there was a shift of product mix to products requiring a higher level of technical performance, which resulted in lower yields and higher costs.
Broadband
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, Broadband gross profit increased $28.9 million, or 153.5%, compared to the same period in the prior year, primarily driven by higher product revenue. For the fiscal years ended fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, Broadband gross margin was 44.4% and 34.3%, respectively. The gross margin in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased driven by higher levels of product revenue and factory utilization.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general, and administrative ("SG&A") consists primarily of compensation expense including non-cash stock-based compensation expense related to executive, finance, and human resources personnel, as well as sales and marketing expenses, professional fees, legal and patent-related costs, and other corporate-related expenses.
Stock-based compensation expense within SG&A totaled $2.6 million and $2.1 million for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. SG&A expense for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 decreased from the amount reported in the same period in the prior year, due to lower consulting fees, facility and travel expenses, and partially offset by an increase in compensation and insurance expenses. As a percentage of revenue, SG&A expenses were 15.5% and 22.4% for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Research and Development
Research and development ("R&D") consists primarily of compensation expense including non-cash stock-based compensation expense, as well as engineering and prototype costs, depreciation expense, and other overhead expenses, as they relate to the design, development, and testing of our products. R&D costs are expensed as incurred. We believe that in order to remain competitive, we must invest significant financial resources in developing new product features and enhancements and in maintaining customer satisfaction worldwide.
Stock-based compensation expense within R&D totaled approximately $0.8 million and $0.7 million for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, Aerospace and Defense R&D expense was $14.6 million and $17.5 million, respectively. For each of the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and
2020, Broadband R&D expense was $2.8 million. R&D expense for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 decreased from the amounts reported in the same period in the prior year primarily due to the expense incurred in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 from the Customer Settlement Agreement of $1.5 million and a decrease in compensation, supplies, and consulting costs. As a percentage of revenue, R&D expenses were 11.0% and 18.4% for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Operating Income (Loss)
Operating income (loss) represents revenue less the cost of revenue and direct operating expenses incurred. Operating income (loss) is a measure that executive management uses to assess performance and make decisions.
As a percentage of revenue, operating income (loss) was 12.0% and (6.4)% for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Operating income increased by $26.0 million in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the same period in the prior year driven by the increase in revenue which resulted in higher gross profit while operating expenses remained flat.
Other Income
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
Gain on extinguishment of debt is related to the forgiveness in full of our PPP Loan, including accrued interest. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, we recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt of $6.6 million.
Interest Income (Expense), net
Interest expense is related to our Credit Facility and interest income is earned on cash and cash equivalent balances. During the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, we recorded $0.5 million and $(0.1) million of interest income (expense), respectively. The interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents balances, which was partially offset by interest expense and letter of credit fees related to our Credit Facility. Interest income was lower than the amount reported in the same period in the prior year due to the impact of COVID-19 on U.S. financial markets. Lower interest expense was the result of the reversal of previously recorded sales tax interest expense.
Foreign Exchange Gain
Gains or losses from foreign currency transactions denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, both realized and unrealized, are recorded as foreign exchange gain (loss) on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The gain recorded relate to the change in value of the Yuan Renminbi relative to the U.S. dollar. For each of the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, we recorded foreign exchange gain of approximately $0.2 million.
Income Tax Expense
For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, we recorded income tax expense of approximately $0.6 million and $0.1 million. Income tax expense for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 is composed primarily of state minimum tax expense.
Comparison of Financial Results
Revenue
Aerospace and Defense
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, Aerospace and Defense revenue increased $22.2 million, or 67.0%, compared to the same period in the prior year. Included in Aerospace and Defense revenue is $30.3 million and $9.8 million of revenue from SDI for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively partially offset by a decrease in our other Aerospace and Defense revenue of $4.7 million. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, Navigation and Inertial Sensing product line revenue increased $15.8 million compared to the same period in the prior year, driven by inclusion of SDI revenue, of $20.5 million, for the full 2020 fiscal year, and an increase in revenue from our Defense Optoelectronics product line of $6.4 million compared to the same period in the prior year partially offset by a decrease in our other Aerospace and Defense revenue of $4.7 million. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, our Defense Optoelectronics product line revenue increase was primarily due to an increase in products sold arising from increased customer demand.
Broadband
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, Broadband revenue increased $0.7 million or 1.3%, compared to the same period in the prior year driven by higher customer demand in the CATV Lasers and Transmitters and Sensing product lines partially offset by a decrease in demand of the Chips product line.
Gross Profit
Consolidated gross margins were 32.3% and 17.3% for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Stock-based compensation expense within cost of revenue totaled approximately $0.7 million and $0.5 million during each of the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Aerospace and Defense
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, Aerospace and Defense gross profit increased $7.5 million, or 81.7%, compared to the same period in the prior year, driven by higher revenue, of which $9.3 million results from the inclusion of SDI gross profit in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, compared to a $2.6 million inclusion of SDI gross profit in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019. For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, Aerospace and Defense gross margin was 30.3% and 27.8%, respectively. The increased gross margin in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 was driven by improved product mix.
Broadband
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, Broadband gross profit increased $13.0 million, or 220.5%, compared to the same period in the prior year, driven by improved product mix in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 and product costs and inventory charges related to excess and obsolete inventory in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019. For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, Broadband gross margin was 34.3% and 10.9%, respectively. The increased gross margin in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 was driven by improved product mix and lower product costs and inventory related charges.
Selling, General and Administrative
Stock-based compensation expense within SG&A totaled approximately $2.2 million and $1.5 million for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019. SG&A expense for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 decreased from the amount reported in the prior year by $7.4 million due to lower attorneys’ fees and costs arising from litigation proceedings, partially offset by an increase in compensation, insurance and bad debt expenses. As a percentage of revenue, SG&A expenses were 22.4% and 36.8% for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Research and Development
Stock-based compensation expense within R&D totaled approximately $0.6 million for each of the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019. For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, Aerospace and Defense R&D expense was $17.5 million and $10.4 million, respectively. For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, Broadband R&D expense was $2.8 million and $9.0 million, respectively. Total R&D expense for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 increased from the amounts reported in the same period in the prior year by $0.8 million driven by the expense arising from the Customer Settlement Agreement of $1.5 million partially offset by lower project spending. As a percentage of revenue, R&D expenses were 18.4% and 22.3% for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Operating Loss
As a percentage of revenue, operating loss was 6.4% and 41.5% for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Operating loss improved by $29.1 million in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to the increased gross profit of $20.5 million, the decreased SG&A expense of $7.4 million, the gain on sale of assets of $2.0 million, offset by increased R&D expense of $0.8 million.
Other Income
Interest (Expense) Income, net
During the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, we recorded $(0.1) million and $0.6 million, respectively. Interest expense was due to letter of credit fees related to our Credit Facility. Interest income for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 was lower than the amount reported in the same period in the prior year due to the impact of COVID-19 on U.S. financial markets and lower cash and cash equivalents balances.
Foreign Exchange Gain (Loss)
During the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, we recorded foreign exchange gain (loss) of $0.2 million and a $(0.4) million, respectively.
Income Tax Expense
During each of the fiscal years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, we recorded income tax expense of approximately $0.1 million. Income tax expense for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 is composed primarily of state minimum tax expense partially offset by the reversal of a deferred tax liability related to the Concord Real Property. Income tax expense for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019 is primarily comprised of state minimum tax expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically consumed cash from operations, and in most periods, have incurred operating losses from continuing operations. We have managed our liquidity position through the sale of assets and cost reduction initiatives, as well as borrowings from our Credit Facility and capital markets transactions. As of September 30, 2021, cash and cash equivalents totaled $71.7 million and net working capital totaled $116.5 million. Net working capital, calculated as current assets (including inventory) minus current liabilities, is a financial metric we use which represents available operating liquidity.
We have taken a number of actions to continue to support our operations and meet our obligations:
•We maintain a credit facility with Wells Fargo that provides us with a revolving credit line of up to $15.0 million that can be used as required for operations, subject to certain liquidity and availability requirements (the "Credit Facility"). The Credit Facility had $13.4 million available for borrowing as of September 30, 2021. See Note 9 - Credit Facility and Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Credit Facility.
•In October 2019, we entered into the Hytera Asset Purchase Agreement pursuant to which we agreed to sell certain of our CATV Lasers and Transmitters manufacturing equipment for purposes of outsourcing manufacturing of our CATV Lasers and Transmitters product lines to Hytera. In August 2021, we entered into the Fastrain Asset Purchase Agreement, pursuant to which, among other items, Fastrain agreed to purchase the same equipment subject to the Hytera Asset Purchase Agreement, along with additional equipment, for aggregate consideration of $6.2 million. See Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Recent Developments under the heading "Hytera and Fastrain Transactions" for additional information regarding the transactions with Hytera and Fastrain.
•In May 2020, we received PPP Loan proceeds of approximately $6.5 million under the PPP Loan Agreement. In July 2021, we received a notification from Wells Fargo that the SBA approved our PPP Loan forgiveness application for the entire PPP Loan balance of approximately $6.5 million, including all accrued interest thereon, and that the remaining PPP Loan balance is zero. The forgiveness of the PPP Loan was recognized during our fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2021.
•In February 2020, SDI sold the Concord Real Property to Eagle Rock for a total purchase price of $13.2 million, netting proceeds of $12.8 million after transaction commissions and expenses incurred in connection with the sale. See Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Recent Developments for additional information regarding the sale of the Concord Real Property and Concord Lease Agreement.
•On February 16, 2021, we closed our offering of 6,655,093 shares of our common stock at a price of $5.40 per share, resulting in net proceeds to us from the offering of $33.1 million. See Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Recent Developments under the heading "Equity Offering" for additional information regarding the equity offering.
We believe that our existing balances of cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and amounts expected to be available under our Credit Facility (or a replacement facility, to the extent the expiration of the Credit Facility occurs in February 2022) will provide us with sufficient financial resources to meet cash requirements for operations, working capital, and capital expenditures for at least the next twelve months from the issuance date of these financial statements.
Should we require more capital than what is generated by operations, we could engage in additional sales or other monetization of certain fixed assets and real estate, additional cost reductions, or elect to raise capital in the U.S. through debt or additional equity issuances. These alternatives may not be available to us on reasonable terms or at all, and could result in higher effective tax rates, increased interest expense, and/or dilution of earnings.
The continued spread of COVID-19 has led to disruption and volatility in the global capital markets, which, depending on future developments, could impact our capital resources in the future. If we need to raise additional capital to support operations, we may be unable to access capital markets and additional capital may only be available to us on terms that could be significantly detrimental to our existing stockholders and to our business.
Cash Flow
Operating Activities
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, operating activities provided cash of $11.2 million, primarily due to net income of $25.6 million and adjustments for non-cash charges, including depreciation and amortization expense of $4.1 million and stock-based compensation expense of $4.2 million, offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities (or working capital components, of $22.9 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of an increase in accounts receivable and contract assets of $5.3 million, inventory of $6.3 million and other assets of $1.5 million, and a decrease in accounts payable of $0.4 million and accrued expenses and other liabilities of $9.3 million.
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, operating activities used cash of $3.9 million, primarily due to net loss of $7.0 million, changes in operating assets and liabilities (or working capital components) of $3.8 million and gain on disposal of assets of $2.3 million, partially offset by adjustments for non-cash charges, including depreciation and amortization expense of $5.5 million, stock-based compensation expense of $3.5 million, issuance of restricted stock units of $0.4 million, product warranty provision of $0.4 million and bad debt provision of $0.2 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of an increase in accounts receivable and contract assets of $7.5 million, inventory of $1.2 million and other assets of $13.5 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable of $6.1 million and accrued expenses and other liabilities of $12.2 million.
Working Capital Components
Accounts Receivable We generally expect the level of accounts receivable at any given quarter end to reflect the level of sales in that quarter. Accounts receivable balances have fluctuated historically due to the timing of account collections, timing of product shipments, and/or change in customer credit terms.
Inventory We generally expect the level of inventory at any given quarter end to reflect the change in expectations of forecasted sales during the quarter. Inventory balances have fluctuated historically due to the timing of customer orders and product shipments, changes in internal forecasts related to customer demand, as well as adjustments related to excess and obsolete inventory.
Accounts Payable The fluctuation of accounts payable balances is primarily driven by changes in inventory purchases as well as changes related to the timing of actual payments to vendors.
Accrued Expenses The largest accrued expense typically relates to compensation. Historically, fluctuations of accrued expense accounts have primarily related to changes in the timing of actual compensation payments, receipt or application of advanced payments, adjustments to warranty accrual, and accruals related to professional fees.
Investing Activities
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, investing activities used cash of $3.8 million primarily from capital-related expenditures of $5.4 million partially offset by cash proceeds from the future sale of assets of $0.8 million and cash proceeds from the disposal of property, plant and equipment of $0.7 million.
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, investing activities provided cash of $10.9 million primarily from cash proceeds from the disposal of property, plant and equipment of $15.4 million partially offset by capital-related expenditures of $4.5 million. The $15.4 million of cash proceeds from the disposal of property, plant and equipment primarily consisted of net proceeds of $12.8 million in connection with the sale and leaseback of the Concord Real Property.
Financing Activities
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, financing activities provided cash of $33.7 million, primarily due to proceeds from issuance of employee stock purchase plan and equity awards of $0.8 million, proceeds from sale of common stock of $35.9 million offset by issuance costs of $2.8 million.
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, financing activities provided cash of $1.5 million, primarily due to $6.5 million of borrowings from the PPP Loan and proceeds from stock plan transactions of $0.6 million, partially offset by net payments related to borrowings from our bank Credit Facility of $5.5 million and tax withholding paid on behalf of employees for stock-based awards of $0.1 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Contractual obligations and commitments over the next five fiscal years are summarized in the table below and are presented as of September 30, 2021:
Interest payments are not included in the contractual obligations and commitments table above since they are insignificant to consolidated results of operations. The contractual obligations and commitments table above also excludes unrecognized tax benefits, because we are unable to reasonably estimate the period during which this obligation may be incurred, if at all. As of September 30, 2021, we had no unrecognized tax benefits.
Purchase Obligations
Purchase obligations represent an estimate of all open purchase orders and contractual obligations in the ordinary course of business for which we have not received the goods or services as of September 30, 2021. Although open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule and adjust requirements based on business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. The purchase obligations of
$21.5 million as of September 30, 2021, set forth above primarily relates to open purchase orders to our contract manufacturers, component suppliers, service partners, and other vendors, including capital expenditures related to facility renovations.
Asset Retirement Obligations
We have known conditional Asset Retirement Obligation ("ARO") conditions, such as certain asset decommissioning and restoration of rented facilities to be performed in the future. ARO includes assumptions related to renewal option periods where we expect to extend facility lease terms. Revisions in estimated liabilities can result from revisions of estimated inflation rates, escalating retirement costs, and changes in the estimated timing of settling the ARO. See Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to AROs.
Operating Lease Obligations
Operating leases include non-cancelable terms and exclude renewal option periods, property taxes, insurance and maintenance expenses on leased properties. See Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to operating lease obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements other than operating leases described above that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on consolidated financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.