ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes, and the other financial information included in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report.
Company Overview
We are a commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company engaged in the discovery, development, marketing and sale of innovative treatments and therapies, primarily for rare and orphan diseases. On July 7, 2017, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, approved our lead product, Endari® (prescription-grade L-glutamine oral powder), to reduce the severe complications of sickle cell disease (“SCD”) in adult and pediatric patients five years of age and older. Endari® has received Orphan Drug designation from the FDA and Orphan Medical designation from the European Commission, which designations afford marketing exclusivity for Endari® for a seven-year period in the U.S. and ten-year period in the European Union, respectively, following marketing approval.
We commenced commercialization of Endari® in the U.S. in January 2018 in collaboration with a contract sales organization. Effective January 2020, we have relied upon our in-house commercial sales team. Endari® is reimbursable by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and every state provides coverage for Endari® for outpatient prescriptions to all eligible Medicaid enrollees within their state Medicaid programs. Endari® is also reimbursable by many commercial payors. We have distribution agreements in place with the nation’s leading distributors as well as physician group purchasing organizations and pharmacy benefits managers, making Endari® available at selected pharmacies nationwide.
Until we began marketing and selling Endari® in the U.S. in early 2018, we had minimal revenues and relied upon funding from sales of equity securities and debt financings and loans, including loans from related parties to fund our business and operations. As of December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit was $225.3 million, and we had cash and cash equivalents of $2.5 million. We expect net revenues to increase as we expand our commercialization of Endari® in the U.S. and expand or commence early access programs and eventual marketing and commercialization abroad.
Until we can generate sufficient net revenues, our future cash requirements are expected to be financed through public or private equity or debt financings, loans or corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements. While our operating loss declined significantly to $32,000 in 2020 compared to $4.5 million in 2019, we are unable to predict if or when we will become profitable.
As reported in more detail in our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on July 22, 2019, as amended by our Form 8-K/A filed on August 14, 2019, on July 17, 2019, we completed our merger transaction with EMI Holding, Inc., formerly known as Emmaus Life Sciences, Inc. (“EMI”), in accordance with the terms of the Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization, dated as of January 4, 2019, among us, Athena Merger Subsidiary, Inc., and EMI, as amended by Amendment No. 1 thereto, dated as of May 10, 2019, which we refer to as the merger agreement. Pursuant to the merger agreement, Athena Merger Subsidiary, Inc. merged into EMI, with EMI surviving as our wholly owned subsidiary. On July 17, 2019, immediately after completion of the merger, we changed our name to “Emmaus Life Sciences, Inc.”
The merger was treated as a reverse recapitalization transaction under the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. For accounting purposes, EMI is considered to have acquired us. The merger is intended to qualify as a tax-free reorganization for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments, including those described below. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be
reasonable under the present circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of the Notes to Financial Statements included in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to assist you in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use in the preparation of our financial statements.
Financial Overview
Revenues, net
Since January 2018, we have generated net revenues primarily through the sale of Endari® as a treatment for SCD.
Net revenues from Endari® sales are recognized upon transfer to our distributors and specialty pharmacy providers. Distributors resell our products to other pharmacy and specialty pharmacy providers, health care providers, hospitals, and clinics. In addition to agreements with these distributors, we have entered into contractual arrangements with specialty pharmacy providers, in-office dispensing providers, physician group purchasing organizations, pharmacy benefits managers and government entities that provide for government-mandated or privately negotiated rebates, chargebacks and discounts with respect to the purchase of our products. These various discounts, rebates, and chargebacks are referred to as “variable consideration.” Revenue from product sales is recorded net of variable consideration.
Under the Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, the Company recognizes revenue when its customers obtain control of the Company's product, which typically occurs on delivery. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that the Company expects to receive in exchange for the product, or transaction price. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with customers within the scope of ASC 606, the Company performs the following: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the Company’s performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies the relevant performance obligations.
Revenue from product sales is recorded at the transaction price, net of estimates for variable consideration consisting of sales discounts, returns, government rebates, chargebacks and commercial discounts. Variable consideration is estimated using the expected-value amount method, which is the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible transaction prices. Actual variable consideration may differ from the Company's estimates. If actual results vary from the Company's estimates, the Company adjusts the variable consideration in the period such variances become known, which would affect net revenues in that period. The following are our significant categories of variable consideration:
Sales Discounts: We provide our customers prompt payment and from time to time offer additional discounts to encourage bulk orders to generate needed working capital. Sales attributable to one-time discounts offered by us increased in 2020 over 2019 and may adversely affect sales in subsequent periods.
Product Returns: We offer our distributors a right to return product principally based upon (i) overstocks, (ii) inactive product or non-moving product due to market conditions, and (iii) expired product. Product return allowances are estimated and recorded at the time of sale.
Government Rebates: We are subject to discount obligations under state Medicaid programs and the Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage gap program. We estimate Medicaid and Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage gap rebates based upon a range of possible outcomes that are probability-weighted for the estimated payor mix. These reserves are recorded in the same period the related revenues are recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenues and the establishment of a current liability that is included as accounts payable and accrued expenses on our balance sheet. Our liability for these rebates consists primarily of estimates of claims expected to be received in future periods related to recognized revenues.
Chargebacks and Discounts: Chargebacks for fees and discounts represent the estimated obligations resulting from contractual commitments to sell products to certain specialty pharmacy providers, in-office dispensing providers, group purchasing organizations, and government entities at prices lower than the list prices charged to distributors. The distributors charge us for the difference between what they pay for the products and our contracted selling price to these specialty pharmacy providers, in-office dispensing providers, group purchasing organizations, and government entities. In addition, we have contractual agreements with pharmacy benefit managers who charge us for rebates and administrative fee in connection with
the utilization of product. These reserves are established in the same period that the related revenues are recognized, resulting in a reduction of revenues. Chargeback amounts are generally determined at the time of resale of product by our distributors.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of expenses for raw materials, packaging, shipping and distribution of Endari®.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of expenditures for new products and technologies consisting primarily of fees paid to contract research organizations (“CRO”) that conduct clinical trials of our product candidates, payroll-related expenses, study site payments, consultant fees and activities related to regulatory filings, manufacturing development costs and other related costs. The costs of later stage clinical studies such as Phase 2 and 3 trials are generally higher than those of earlier studies. This is primarily due to the larger size, expanded scope, patient related healthcare and regulatory compliance costs, and generally longer duration of later stage clinical studies.
Our contracts with CROs are generally based on time and materials expended, whereas study site agreements are generally based on costs per patient as well as other pass-through costs, including start-up costs and institutional review board fees. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation and vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones.
Future research and development expenses will depend on any new product candidates or technologies that we may introduce into our research and development pipeline. In addition, we cannot predict which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree, if any, such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Due to the inherently unpredictable nature of the drug approval process and the interpretation of the regulatory requirements, we are unable to estimate the amount of costs of obtaining regulatory approval of Endari® outside of the U.S. or the development of our other preclinical and clinical programs. Clinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations and can vary widely. These and other risks and uncertainties relating to product development are described in this Annual Report under the headings “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business” and “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Regulatory Oversight of our Business and Compliance with Law.”
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense consists principally of salaries and related employee costs, including share-based compensation for our directors, executive officers and employees. Other general and administrative expense includes facility costs, patent filing costs, and professional fees and expenses for legal, consulting, auditing and tax services. Inflation has not had a material impact on our general and administrative expense over the past two years.
Selling Expenses
Selling expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel involved in the launch, promotion, sales and marketing of our products. Other selling cost include advertising, third party consulting costs, the cost of contracted and in-house sales personnel and travel-related costs. We expect selling expenses to increase as we acquire additional sales personnel to support the commercialization of Endari® in the U.S. and abroad.
Environmental Expenses
The cost of compliance with environmental laws has not been material over the past two years and any such costs are included in general and administrative costs.
Inventories
Inventories consist of raw materials, finished goods and work-in-process and are valued on a first-in, first-out basis and at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Substantially all raw materials purchased during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were supplied by one vendor.
Notes Payable, Convertible Notes Payable and Warrants
From time to time, we obtain financing in the form of notes payable or promissory notes with detachable warrants, some of which are convertible into shares of our common stock and some of which are issued to related parties. We analyze all of the terms of our notes payable and promissory notes issued with warrants to determine the appropriate accounting treatment, including determining whether conversion features are required to be bifurcated and treated as a discount, allocation of fair value of the issuance to the debt instrument, detachable stock purchase warrant, and any beneficial conversion features, and the applicable classification of the notes payable and warrants as debt, derivative liabilities, equity or temporary equity (i.e., mezzanine capital).
We allocate the proceeds from the issuance of debt instruments with detachable stock purchase warrants to the two elements based on the relative fair values of the debt instruments without the warrants and of the warrants themselves at the time of issuance. We account for the portion of the proceeds allocated to warrants in additional paid-in capital and the remaining proceeds are allocated to the debt instruments. The allocation to warrants results in a discount to notes payable which is amortized using the effective interest method to interest expense over the expected term of the note. We also include the intrinsic value of the embedded conversion feature of convertible debentures and promissory notes in the discount to notes payable, which is amortized and charged to interest expense over the expected term of the debentures and promissory notes.
We also estimate the total value of any beneficial conversion feature and accompanying warrants in allocating debt proceeds. The proceeds allocated to the beneficial conversion feature are determined by taking the estimated fair value of shares issuable under the convertible debentures and promissory notes less the fair value of the number of shares that would be issued if the conversion rate equaled the fair value of our common stock as of the date of issuance. In situations where the debt includes both a beneficial conversion feature and a warrant, the proceeds are allocated to the warrants and beneficial conversion feature based on the pro-rata fair value. We used the Binomial Monte-Carlo Cliquet (aka Ratchet) Option Pricing Model option pricing model to determine the fair value of our warrants prior to the Merger and Black-Scholes after the Merger.
Notes payable to related parties, interest expense and accrued interest to related parties are separately identified in our consolidated financial statements. We also disclose significant terms of all transactions with related parties.
Share-based Compensation
We recognize compensation expense for share-based compensation awards during the service term of the recipients of the awards. The fair value of share-based awards is calculated using the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing model. The Black-Scholes-Merton model requires subjective assumptions regarding future stock price volatility and expected time to exercise, which greatly affect the calculated values. The expected term of awards granted is calculated using the simplified method allowed under the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) Staff Accounting Bulletin Nos. 107 and 110. The risk-free rate used to value an award is based on the U.S. Treasury rate as of the date of the award that corresponds to the vesting period of the award. Until July 2019, as the accounting acquirer in the Merger, our common stock was not publicly traded and we lacked company specific historical and implied volatility information for our common stock. Therefore, the expected volatility was based on the historical volatility of the common stock of comparable publicly traded companies.
Fair Value Measurements
We define fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date in accordance with ASC 820. We measure fair value under a framework that provides a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are described as follows:
Level 1: Inputs to the valuation methodology are unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
Level 2: Inputs to the valuation methodology include:
•
Quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets;
•
Quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets;
•
Inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability; and
•
Inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data by correlation or other means.
If the asset or liability has a specified (contractual) term, the Level 2 input must be observable for substantially the full term of the asset or liability.
Level 3: Inputs to the valuation methodology that are unobservable and significant to the fair value measurement.
An asset’s or liability’s fair value measurement level within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of any input that is significant to the fair value measurement. Valuation techniques used need to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. The fair value of marketable securities is determined based upon quoted prices on nationally recognized securities exchanges and are classified as Level 1 investments at December 31, 2019. The fair value of our debt instruments is not materially different from their carrying values as presented. The fair value of our convertible debt instruments was determined based on Level 2 inputs. The carrying value of the debt was discounted based on allocating proceeds to other financial instruments within the arrangement as discussed in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements.
Certain of our outstanding warrants contain net cash settlement provision and, consequently, are accounted for as liabilities that are remeasured at fair value on a recurring basis using Level 3 inputs. The Level 3 inputs in the valuation of warrants include expected term and expected volatility.
Marketable Securities
Marketable securities are recorded at fair value using the quoted market prices and changes in fair value are recorded as net realized gains or losses in comprehensive income. We monitor these investments for impairment and make appropriate reductions in carrying values as necessary.
Financial Highlights
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Income (Loss). Net income was $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a net loss of $54.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $55.9 million, or 102%. The increase in net income was primarily a $50.9 million increase in other income, and a $5.2 million decrease in operating expenses, as discussed below. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $225.3 million. Our net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 included approximately $2.3 million of losses attributable to our equity interest in EJ Holdings, a variable interest entity, or VIE. Our independent registered public accounting firm was unable to obtain audited financial statements or other audit support for such losses as described in Note 5 to Notes to Financial Statements included in this Annual Report. As a result, their audit report included in this Annual Report contains a qualification in this regard. The losses attributable to our equity interest in EJ Holdings for the year ended December 31, 2019 were insignificant.
Revenues, Net. Net revenues increased by $0.4 million, or 2% to $23.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Substantially all net revenues were attributable to Endari® sales. The increase was due to higher volume sales of Endari® in 2020 partially offset by a higher level of price discounts related to large volume orders in 2020 than in 2019. We expect net revenues to increase as we expand commercialization of Endari® in the U.S. and abroad.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold increased by $1.2 million, or 105% to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 as net revenues increased and we established a reserve relating to Endari® inventory with a shelf-life less than two years.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased by $0.2 million, or10%, to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to an increase in
expenses related to our Pilot/Phase 1 diverticulosis study. We expect our research and development costs to increase as the study progresses and as we undertake additional studies.
Selling Expenses. Selling expenses decreased by $2.1 million, or 30%, to $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of $4.2 million in contract sales organization fees and $0.5 million in other marketing activities including consulting expenses, public relations, and sponsorships for Endari® partially offset by an increase of $2.7 million in in-house sales team compensation as we have relied on our in-house commercial team for marketing and sales of Endari® in the US since January 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expense decreased $3.3 million, or 20%, to $13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of $3.0 million in stock compensation expense, including $2.4 million of one-time expenses attributable to stock option modifications relating to the merger transaction in 2019. We expect on-going general and administrative expenses to remain substantially the same for the foreseeable future.
Other Income and Expense. Total other income increased by $50.9 million, or 101%, to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to total other expenses of $50.2 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $21.6 million decrease in interest expense in 2020, a net gain on investment in marketable securities of $7.6 million in 2020 compared to net loss of $21.9 million in 2019 and a $2.1 million increase in interest and other income.
Seasonality
There may be seasonal variations in our Endari® sales due to factors such as year-end holidays, severe winter weather conditions in certain regions of the U.S., seasonal conditions that may affect medical practices and provider activity, including influenza or the recent Covid-19 outbreaks that may inhibit patients from seeking treatment for their SCD or filling or refilling prescriptions for Endari® and possibly other factors relating to the timing of patient deductibles and co-insurance limits.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation and changing prices have had a significant impact on our results of operations.
COVID-19
We do not believe that the COVID-19 pandemic and related governmental response have had a significant impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Although we realized net income of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, the majority of net income was driven by non-operating activities. We anticipate that we will incur net losses for the foreseeable future until we can generate increased net revenues from Endari® sales. Based on anticipated future revenues and operating expenses, cash and cash equivalents of $2.5 million as of December 31, 2020, and the remaining net proceeds from the recent sale of convertible promissory notes, we believe our working capital is sufficient to meet our needs through at least the second quarter of 2022. If future revenues are less than anticipated or we incur more expenses than we anticipate, we may not have sufficient operating capital for our business without curtailing certain operations or raising additional capital. Except as described below, we have no understanding or arrangements with respect to future financings, and there can be no assurance of the availability of such capital on terms acceptable to us or at all.
On February 28, 2020, we entered into a Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“LPC”), pursuant to which we may elect to sell to LPC up to $25,000,000 in shares of our common stock, subject to certain limitations and conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement from time to time over the 36-month term of the Purchase Agreement. As of the date of filing of this Quarterly Report, we are out of compliance with certain terms and conditions of the Purchase Agreement and unable to utilize the Purchase Agreement. We intend to seek to bring the Company into compliance or seek an appropriate waiver from LPC to regain our ability to utilize the Purchase Agreement, but there can be no assurance when or whether we may be able to do so.
Effective February 22, 2021, our subsidiary, Emmaus Medical, Inc., or Emmaus Medical, entered into a purchase and sale agreement with Prestige Capital Finance, LLC, or Prestige Capital, pursuant to which Emmaus Medical may offer and sell to Prestige Capital from time to time eligible accounts receivable in exchange for Prestige Capital’s down payment, or advance, to Emmaus Medical of 70% (subject to increase to 75%) of the face amount of the accounts receivable, subject to a $7,500,000 cap on advances at any time. The balance of the face amount of the accounts receivable will be reserved by Prestige Capital and
paid to Emmaus Medical, less discount fees of Prestige Capital ranging from 2.25% to 7.25% of the face amount, as and when Prestige Capital collects the entire face amount of the accounts receivable. In March 2021, we completed our first transaction under the purchase and sale agreement.
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities decreased by $2.1 million, or 45.8% to $ 2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to decrease in loss from operations from $4.5 million to $32,000 which was partially offset by increases in non-cash expenses included in the loss from operations.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities increased by $7.0 million, or 469%, to a positive $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from a negative $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to $35.6 million of proceeds from the sale of Telcon shares partially offset by a decrease of $26.1 million of purchase of a Telcon convertible bond and $4.0 million of additional loans made to EJ Holding, our equity method investee.
Net cash from financing activities
Net cash from financing activities decreased by $6.2 million, or 160%, to a negative $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from a positive $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily as a result of a $8.4 million decrease in cash proceeds from the issuance of common stock and a $1.8 million decrease in cash used for repayment of convertible notes.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements in the periods presented.