ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes, and the other financial information included in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report.
Overview of Restatement
As previously disclosed in the company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on July 8, 2020, the board of directors of the company, based on the recommendation of the audit committee and in consultation with management and the company’s predecessor independent public accounting firm, concluded that, because of errors identified in the previously issued financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2018 and the quarterly periods ended June 30, 2019 and September 30, 2019, the company would restate the previously issued financial statements.
The restated financial statements correct the following errors:
1.
Warrants issued by EMI in October 2018 and accounted for as equity should have been treated as derivative liabilities and accounted for at fair value with changes in fair value recorded in earnings. This error resulted in $7.8 million, $8.6 million, and $7.5 million understatements of the fair value of warrant derivative liabilities as of June 30, 2019, March 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively. It also resulted in understatements of stockholder’s deficit of $5.6 million as of September 30, 2019 and $9.7 million as of June 30, 2019, March 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018. This error also resulted in $0.2 million and $1.0 million understatements of net loss for the six months and three months ended June 30, and March 31, 2019, respectively, and in a $2.4 million overstatement of net loss for the year ended December 31, 2018. In connection with the completion of our merger transaction with EMI on July 17, 2019, the exercise price of the warrants was adjusted and the warrants were reclassified to equity.
2.
EMI’s interest in EJ Holdings, which was consolidated as a Variable Interest Entity, should have been accounted for based upon the equity method. This error is resulted in $13.2 million and $0.2 million overstatements of cash and other current assets, respectively, and a $13.6 million understatement of the equity method investment as of December 31, 2018. The error also resulted in a $0.2 million overstatement of loss from operations and a $0.1 million overstatement of loss before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2018.
3.
Fair value of cashless warrants exercised in September 2018 upon expiration of warrants should have been recorded in additional paid-in capital. The error resulted in $18.3 million of an overstatement of change in fair value of warrant derivative liabilities and an understatement of additional paid-in cash for the year ended December 31, 2018.
4.
Other adjustments consist of the following:
Period adjustments of variable considerations resulted in $1,4 million and $436,000 understatements of revenue and accounts receivable and $945,000 overstatement of accounts payable as of December 31, 2018 and $1.3 million overstatement of revenue as of September 30, 2019.
An error in accounting for on the financing of insurance premium resulted in $141,000 and $598,000 understatements of prepaid expenses and current liabilities as of December 31, 2018 and September 30, 2019, respectively.
Adjustments of the stock modification accounting resulted in $52,000 understatements of additional paid-in capital and general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2018 and an overstatement of general and administrative expenses for the nine months ended September 30, 2019.
An error in the accounting for conversion feature of securities resulted in $172,000 and $249,000 understatements of additional paid-in capital and interest expenses, respectively and $543,000 and $466,000 overstatements of loss on debt extinguishment and change in fair value of embedded conversion option, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2018.
An error in the classification of shipping cost and royalty expenses resulted in a $229,000 understatement of cost of sales and $80,000 and $141,000 overstatements of selling cost and general and administrative expense, respectively for the year ended December 31, 2019. The error also resulted in a $71,000 understatement of cost of sales and $11,000 and $60,000 overstatements of selling cost and general and administrative expense.
An error in the debt modification accounting resulted in a $1.1 million understatement of additional paid-in capital as of September 30, 2019. The error also resulted in $320,000 overstatements of loss on debt extinguishment for the three months and nine months ended September 30, 2019 and a $1.3 million understatement of interest expense for nine months ended September 30, 2019.
An error in the GPB warrant liability classification resulted in a $91,000 understatement of warrant derivative liabilities and a $776,000 overstatement of additional paid-in capital as of December 31, 2019. The error also resulted in a $685,000 understatement of change in fair value of warrant derivative liabilities for the three months and the nine months ended September 30, 2019.
Company Overview
We are a commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company engaged in the discovery, development, marketing and sale of innovative treatments and therapies, primarily for rare and orphan diseases. On July 7, 2017, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, approved our lead product, Endari® (prescription-grade L-glutamine oral powder), to reduce the severe complications of sickle cell disease (“SCD”) in adult and pediatric patients five years of age and older. Endari® has received Orphan Drug designation from the FDA and Orphan Medical designation from the European Commission, which designations afford marketing exclusivity for Endari® for a seven-year period in the U.S. and ten-year period in the European Union, respectively, following marketing approval.
We commenced commercialization of Endari® in the U.S. in January 2018 in collaboration with a contract sales organization. Effective January 2020, we have relied upon our in-house commercial sales team. Endari® is reimbursable by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and every state provides coverage for Endari® for outpatient prescriptions to all eligible Medicaid enrollees within their state Medicaid programs. We have distribution agreements in place with the nation’s leading distributors as well as physician group purchasing organizations and pharmacy benefits managers, making Endari® available at selected pharmacies nationwide.
Until we began marketing and selling Endari® in the U.S. in early 2018, we had minimal revenues and relied upon funding from sales of equity securities and debt financings and loans, including loans from related parties to fund our business and operations. As of December 31, 2019, our accumulated deficit was $226.2 million and we had cash and cash equivalents of $1.8 million. We expect net revenues to increase as we expand our commercialization of Endari® in the U.S. and expand or commence early access programs and eventual marketing and commercialization abroad.
Until we can generate sufficient net revenues, our future cash requirements are expected to be financed through public or private equity or debt financings, loans or corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements. We are unable to predict if or when we will become profitable.
As reported in more detail in our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on July 22, 2019, as amended by our Form 8-K/A filed on August 14, 2019, on July 17, 2019, we completed our merger transaction with EMI Holding, Inc., formerly known as Emmaus Life Sciences, Inc. (“EMI”), in accordance with the terms of the Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization, dated as of January 4, 2019, among us, Athena Merger Subsidiary, Inc., and EMI, as amended by Amendment No. 1 thereto, dated as of May 10, 2019, which we refer to as the merger agreement. Pursuant to the merger agreement, Athena Merger Subsidiary, Inc. merged into EMI, with EMI surviving as our wholly owned subsidiary. On July 17, 2019, immediately after completion of the merger, we changed our name to “Emmaus Life Sciences, Inc.”
The merger was treated as a reverse recapitalization transaction under the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. For accounting purposes, EMI is considered to have acquired us. The merger is intended to qualify as a tax-free reorganization for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments, including those described below. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the present circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of the Notes to Financial Statements included in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to assist you in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use in the preparation of our financial statements.
Financial Overview
Revenues, net
Since January 2018, we have generated net revenues primarily through the sale of Endari® as a treatment for SCD.
Net revenues from Endari® sales are recognized upon transfer to our distributors and specialty pharmacy providers. Distributors resell our products to other pharmacy and specialty pharmacy providers, health care providers, hospitals, and clinics. In addition to agreements with these distributors, we enter into contractual arrangements with specialty pharmacy providers, in-office dispensing providers, physician group purchasing organizations, pharmacy benefits managers and government entities that provide for government-mandated or privately negotiated rebates, chargebacks and discounts with respect to the purchase of our products. These various discounts, rebates, and chargebacks are referred to as “variable consideration.” Revenue from product sales is recorded net of variable consideration.
Under the Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, the Company recognizes revenue when its customers obtain control of the Company's product, which typically occurs on delivery. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that the Company expects to receive in exchange for the product, or transaction price. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with customers within the scope of ASC 606, the Company performs the following 5 steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the Company’s performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies the relevant performance obligations.
Revenue from product sales is recorded at the transaction price, net of estimates for variable consideration consisting of sales discounts, returns, government rebates, chargebacks and commercial discounts. Variable consideration is estimated using the expected-value amount method, which is the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible transaction prices. Actual variable consideration may differ from the Company's estimates. If actual results vary from the Company's estimates, the Company adjusts the variable consideration in the period such variances becomes known, which would affect net revenues in that period. The following are our significant categories of variable consideration:
Sales Discounts: We provide our customers prompt payment and large order discounts and from time to time offer additional discounts that are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the period the revenue is recognized. Sales attributable to one-time discounts offered by us increased in 2019 and may adversely affect sales in subsequent periods.
Product Returns: We offer our distributors a right to return product principally based upon (i) overstocks, (ii) inactive product or non-moving product due to market conditions, and (iii) expired product. Product return allowances are estimated and recorded at the time of sale.
Government Rebates: We are subject to discount obligations under state Medicaid programs and the Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage gap program. We estimate Medicaid and Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage gap rebates based upon a range of possible outcomes that are probability-weighted for the estimated payor mix. These reserves are recorded in the same period the related revenues are recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenues and the establishment of a current liability that is included as accounts payable and accrued expenses on our balance sheet. Our liability for these rebates consists primarily of estimates of claims expected to be received in future periods related to recognized revenues.
Chargebacks and Discounts: Chargebacks for fees and discounts represent the estimated obligations resulting from contractual commitments to sell products to certain specialty pharmacy providers, in-office dispensing providers, group purchasing organizations, and government entities at prices lower than the list prices charged to distributors. The distributors charge us for the difference between what they pay for the products and our contracted selling price to these specialty pharmacy providers, in-office dispensing providers, group purchasing organizations, and government entities. In addition, we have contractual agreements with pharmacy benefit managers who charge us for rebates and administrative fee in connection with the utilization of product. These reserves are established in the same period that the related revenues are recognized, resulting in a reduction of revenues. Chargeback amounts are generally determined at the time of resale of product by our distributors.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of raw materials, packaging, shipping and distribution of Endari®.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs consist of expenditures for new products and technologies consisting primarily of fees paid to contract research organizations (“CRO”) that conduct clinical trials of our product candidates, payroll-related expenses, study site payments, consultant fees and activities related to regulatory filings, manufacturing development costs and other related supplies. The costs of later stage clinical studies such as Phase 2 and 3 trials are generally higher than those of earlier studies. This is primarily due to the larger size, expanded scope, patient related healthcare and regulatory compliance costs, and generally longer duration of later stage clinical studies.
Our contracts with CROs are generally based on time and materials expended, whereas study site agreements are generally based on costs per patient as well as other pass-through costs, including start-up costs and institutional review board fees. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation and vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones.
Future research and development expenses will depend on any new product candidates or technologies that we may introduce into our research and development pipeline. In addition, we cannot predict which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree, if any, such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Due to the inherently unpredictable nature of the drug approval process and the interpretation of the regulatory requirements, we are unable to estimate the amount of costs of obtaining regulatory approval of Endari® outside of the U.S. or the development of our other preclinical and clinical programs. Clinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations and can vary widely. These and other risks and uncertainties relating to product development are described in this Annual Report under the headings “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business” and “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Regulatory Oversight of our Business and Compliance with Law.”
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense consists principally of salaries and related costs, including share-based compensation for our directors and executive officers, of our employees, including our in-house commercialization team. Other general and administrative expense includes facility costs, patent filing costs, and professional fees and expenses for legal, consulting, auditing and tax services. Inflation has not had a material impact on our general and administrative expense over the past two years.
Selling Expenses
Selling expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel involved in the launch, promotion, sales and marketing of our products. Other selling cost include advertising, third party consulting costs, the cost of contracted and in-house sales personnel and travel-related costs. We expect selling expenses to increase as we acquire additional sales and administrative personnel to support the commercialization of Endari® in the U.S. and abroad.
Environmental Expenses
The cost of compliance with environmental laws has not been material over the past two years and any such costs are included in general and administrative costs.
Inventories
Inventories consist of raw material, finished goods and work-in-process and are valued on a first-in, first-out basis and at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Substantially all raw materials purchased during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were supplied by one vendor.
Notes Payable, Convertible Notes Payable and Warrants
From time to time, we obtain financing in the form of notes payable and/or notes with detachable warrants, some of which are convertible into shares of our common stock and some of which are issued to related parties. We analyze all of the terms of our convertible debentures and promissory notes and debentures and promissory notes issued with warrants to determine the appropriate accounting treatment, including determining whether conversion features are required to be bifurcated and treated as a discount, allocation of fair value of the issuance to the debt instrument, detachable stock purchase warrant, and any beneficial conversion features, and the applicable classification of the convertible debentures and promissory and warrants as debt, derivative liabilities, equity or temporary equity (i.e., mezzanine capital).
We allocate the proceeds from the issuance of debt instruments with detachable stock purchase warrants to the two elements based on the relative fair values of the debt instruments without the warrants and of the warrants themselves at the time of issuance. We account for the portion of the proceeds allocated to warrants in additional paid-in capital and the remaining proceeds are allocated to the debt instruments. The allocation to warrants results in a discount to notes payable which is amortized using the effective interest method to interest expense over the expected term of the note. We also include the intrinsic value of the embedded conversion feature of convertible debentures and promissory notes in the discount to notes payable, which is amortized and charged to interest expense over the expected term of the debentures and promissory notes.
We also estimate the total value of any beneficial conversion feature and accompanying warrants in allocating debt proceeds. The proceeds allocated to the beneficial conversion feature are determined by taking the estimated fair value of shares issuable under the convertible debentures and promissory notes less the fair value of the number of shares that would be issued if the conversion rate equaled the fair value of our common stock as of the date of issuance. In situations where the debt includes both a beneficial conversion feature and a warrant, the proceeds are allocated to the warrants and beneficial conversion feature based on the pro-rata fair value. We used the Binomial Monte-Carlo Cliquet (aka Ratchet) Option Pricing Model option pricing model to determine the fair value of our warrants prior to the Merger and Black-Scholes after the Merger.
Notes payable to related parties, interest expense and accrued interest to related parties are separately identified in our consolidated financial statements. We also disclose significant terms of all transactions with related parties.
Share-based Compensation
We recognize compensation expense for share-based compensation awards during the service term of the recipients of the awards. The fair value of share-based awards is calculated using the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing model. The Black-Scholes-Merton model requires subjective assumptions regarding future stock price volatility and expected time to exercise, which greatly affect the calculated values. The expected term of awards granted is calculated using the simplified method allowed under the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) Staff Accounting Bulletin Nos. 107 and 110. The risk-free rate used to value an award is based on the U.S. Treasury rate as of the date of the award that corresponds to the vesting period of the award. Until July 2019, our common stock was not publicly traded and we lacked company specific historical and implied volatility information for our common stock. Therefore, the expected volatility was based on the historical volatility of the common stock of comparable publicly traded companies.
Fair Value Measurements
We define fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We measure fair value under a framework that provides a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are described as follows:
Level 1: Inputs to the valuation methodology are unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
Level 2: Inputs to the valuation methodology include:
•
Quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets;
•
Quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets;
•
Inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability; and
•
Inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data by correlation or other means.
If the asset or liability has a specified (contractual) term, the Level 2 input must be observable for substantially the full term of the asset or liability.
Level 3: Inputs to the valuation methodology that are unobservable and significant to the fair value measurement.
The asset’s or liability’s fair value measurement level within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of any input that is significant to the fair value measurement. Valuation techniques used need to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. The fair value of marketable securities is determined based upon quoted prices on nationally recognized securities exchanges and are classified as Level 1 investments at December 31, 2019 and 2018. The fair value of our debt instruments is not materially different from their carrying values as presented. The fair value of our convertible debt instruments was determined based on Level 2 inputs. The carrying value of the debt was discounted based on allocating proceeds to other financial instruments within the arrangement as discussed in Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements.
Certain of our outstanding warrants contain net cash settlement provision and, consequently, are accounted for as liabilities that are remeasured at fair value on a recurring basis using Level 3 inputs. The Level 3 inputs in the valuation of warrants include expected term and expected volatility.
Marketable Securities
Marketable securities are recorded at fair value using the quoted market prices and changes in fair value are recorded as net realized gains or losses in comprehensive income. We monitor these investments for impairment and make appropriate reductions in carrying values as necessary.
Financial Highlights
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Net Loss. Net loss was $54.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $72.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, representing a decrease of $17.7 million, or 24.4%. The decrease in net loss was primarily a result of a $6.3 million increase in net revenue and a $13.9 million decrease in other expenses partially offset by a $2.3 million increase in operating expenses, as discussed below. As of December 31, 2019, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $226.2 million. We anticipate that our net loss will narrow in the foreseeable future.
Revenues, Net. Net revenues increased by $6.3 million, or 38% to $22.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. Substantially all net revenues were attributable to Endari® sales. We afforded customers a higher level of price discounts related to large volume orders in 2019 than in 2018. This resulted in an offset to the growth in net revenues compared to the higher growth in gross sales and boxes of Endari® sold in 2019. We expect Endari® revenues to increase as we expand our commercialization efforts in the U.S. and abroad.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold increased by $0.1 million, or 10% to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 as net revenues increased. Cost of goods sold consist primarily of costs for raw materials, packaging, shipping and distribution of Endari®.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased by $0.5 million, or 27%, to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. This increase was primarily due to an increase in expenses related to our Pilot/Phase 1 diverticulosis study. We expect our research and development costs to increase as the study progresses and as we undertake additional studies.
Selling Expenses. Selling expenses increased $2.2 million, or 45%, to $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $1.5 million in contract sales organization (CSO) fees for Endari® and $0.7 million in salaries and other marketing activities including public relations, sales meetings and sponsorships. We anticipate that our selling expenses will continue to increase as we expand Endari® marketing and sales activities both in the U.S. and outside the U.S. In January 2020, we terminated the relationship with our CSO and established our in-house sales force.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense decreased $0.5 million, or 3%, to $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. General and administrative expense includes share-based compensation expenses, professional fees, office rent and payroll expenses. Of the $17.0 million in total general and administrative expenses in 2019, $2.4 million were one-time expenses attributable to stock option and warrant modifications relating to the merger transaction. We expect on-going general and administrative expenses to remain substantially the same for the foreseeable future.
Other Income and Expense. Total other expense decreased by $13.9 million, or 21.7%, to $50.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily due to by a reduction in net loss on investment in marketable securities of $22.5 million and a decrease in loss on debt extinguishment of $2.3 million, which were partially offset by an increase in interest expense of $4.8 million and $3.3 million in note conversion expense related to the convertible notes converted in connection with the Merger.
Seasonality
There may be seasonal variations in our Endari® sales due to factors such as year-end holidays, severe winter weather conditions in certain regions of the U.S., seasonal conditions that may affect medical practices and provider activity, including influenza or the recent Covid-19 outbreaks that may inhibit patients from seeking treatment for their SCD or filling or refilling prescriptions for Endari® and possibly other factors relating to the timing of patient deductibles and co-insurance limits.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation and changing prices have had a significant impact on our results of operations.
COVID-19
We do not believe that the COVID-19 pandemic and related governmental response have had a significant impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Based on our losses to date, anticipated future net revenues and operating expenses, debt repayment obligations, funding commitment to EJ Holdings and cash and cash equivalents balance of $1.8 million as of December 31, 2019, we do not have sufficient operating capital for our business without raising additional capital. While we look to expand our commercialization of Endari® in the U.S. and expand or commence early access programs and eventual marketing and commercialization abroad, there is no assurance that our net revenues will increase in the future.
We continue to incur expenses for the expanded commercialization of Endari®, research costs for our pilot study of our prescription grade L-glutamine oral powder in the treatment of diverticulosis and CAOMECS technology and expenses relating to EJ Holdings’ startup and operation of its Ube, Japan manufacturing facility. We have previously relied on private equity offerings, debt financings, and loans, including loans from related parties and other investors as discussed below. As of December 31, 2019, we had outstanding consolidated notes payable in an aggregate principal amount of $17.1 million, consisting of $3.9 million of non-convertible promissory notes and $13.2 million of senior secured convertible debentures and convertible notes. All $17.1 million aggregate principal amount of notes payable outstanding as of December 31, 2019 was either due on demand or was to become due and payable within the next twelve months. Subsequent to December 31, 2019, our outstanding senior secured convertible debentures were amended and restated to extend the maturity date to August 31, 2021 subject to monthly redemption payments under the convertible debentures, and the maturity date of an outstanding convertible promissory note in the principal amount of $3.0 million as of December 31, 2019 was extended to June 15, 2023. The notes payable bear interest at annual rates ranging from 10% to 12%. The net proceeds of the notes were used for working capital purposes.
Until we can generate sufficient revenue, our future cash requirements are expected to be financed through public or private equity or debt offerings, loans or corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements or other financing arrangements. We have no current understanding or arrangements with respect to future financings, and there can be no assurance that we can
raise needed capital on terms acceptable to us (or at all). Due to the uncertainty of our ability to meet our current and future operating and capital expenses, there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2019, the company issued shares of common stock as follows:
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $4.5 million in 2019 related to net loss of $54.8 million adjusted for non-cash items of $50.0 million primarily related to the amortization of discount on notes payable and convertible notes payable, net losses on investment in marketable securities, loss on debt settlement, shared-based compensation and fair value of replacement equity award, and notes conversion expenses.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $5.9 million, or 80%, to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $7.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily due to $13.3 million used to fund the purchase by EJ Holdings, Inc. of the manufacturing plant in Ube, Japan in 2018, which was partially offset by $6.2 million decrease of cash proceeds from sales of marketable securities and $1.6 million of transaction costs relating to the merger transaction.
Net cash from financing activities
Net cash from financing activities increased by $9.6 million, or 168%, to a positive $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from a negative $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily as a result of a $7.3 million increase in cash proceeds from the issuance of common stock and a $14.7 million decrease in repayment of convertible notes partially offset by a $17.6 million decrease of cash proceeds from the issuance of convertible debentures and convertible note.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements in the periods presented.