Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is designed to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of Company’s management. This MD&A is divided into four main sections:
•Overview
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Policies
The following MD&A should be read together with Item 6. “Selected Financial Data”, Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8. of this Form 10-K. The MD&A includes forward-looking statements. For a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results referred to in these forward-looking statements, see “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
Please see Part I, Item 1. “Business” for a discussion of Colfax’s objectives and methodologies for delivering shareholder value.
Colfax conducts its operations through two operating segments: Fabrication Technology and Medical Technology.
•Fabrication Technology - a leading global supplier of consumable products and equipment for use in the cutting, joining and automated welding, as well as gas control equipment, providing a wide range of products with innovative technologies to solve challenges in a wide range of industries.
•Medical Technology - a leader in orthopedic solutions, providing devices, software and services spanning the full continuum of patient care, from injury prevention to joint replacement to rehabilitation.
Certain amounts not allocated to the two reportable segments and intersegment eliminations are reported under the heading “Corporate and other.”
We have a global footprint, with production facilities in Europe, North America, South America, Asia, Australia and Africa. We serve a global customer base across multiple markets through a combination of direct sales and third-party distribution channels. Our customer base is highly diversified in the medical and industrial end markets.
Integral to our operations is CBS, our business management system. CBS is our culture and includes our values and behaviors, a comprehensive set of tools, and repeatable, teachable processes that we use to drive continuous improvement and create superior value for our customers, shareholders and associates. We believe that our management team’s access to, and experience in, the application of the CBS methodology is one of our primary competitive strengths.
Outlook
We believe that we are well positioned to grow our businesses organically over the long term by enhancing our product offerings and expanding our customer base. Our Medical Technology segment orthopedic business enjoys sustainable secular drivers such as aging populations that require increasing levels of medical care that should contribute to reduced cyclicality of our Company. In addition, the shift to greater outpatient surgeries at ambulatory surgical centers (ASCs) is expected to benefit our rehabilitation and recovery business as patients require proper bracing and other support during recoveries. We have seen an acceleration of shifting to ASCs allowing for increased opportunity to sell to these centers in the future. Our Fabrication Technology business mix is well balanced between sales in emerging markets and developed nations, and equipment and consumables. We intend to continue to utilize our strong global presence and worldwide network of salespeople and distributors to capitalize on growth opportunities by selling regionally-developed and/or marketed products and solutions throughout our served markets. Our geographic and end market diversity helps mitigate the effects from cyclical industrial market exposures. Given this balance, management does not use indices other than general economic trends and business initiatives to predict the overall outlook for the Company. Instead, our individual businesses monitor key competitors and customers, including to the extent possible their sales, to gauge relative performance and outlook for the future.
We face a number of challenges and opportunities, including the successful integration of acquired businesses, application and expansion of our CBS tools to improve business performance, and rationalization of assets and costs.
We expect strategic acquisitions to contribute to our growth. We believe that the extensive experience of our leadership team in acquiring and effectively integrating acquisition targets should enable us to capitalize on future opportunities.
The discussion that follows includes a comparison of our results of operations, liquidity and capital resources for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For a comparison of the Company’s results of operations, liquidity and capital resources for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Results of Operations
The following discussion of Results of Operations addresses the comparison of the periods presented. Our management evaluates the operating results of each of its reportable segments based upon Net sales, Segment operating income, which represents Operating income before Restructuring and other related charges and European Union Medical Devices Regulation (“MDR”) and other costs, and Adjusted EBITA as defined in the “Non-GAAP Measures” section.
Items Affecting Comparability of Reported Results
The comparability of our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020 to the comparable 2019 period is affected by the following additional significant items:
Recent Developments
In December 2019, a novel coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”) was first reported in China. On March 11, 2020, due to worldwide spread of the virus, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. The COVID-19 global pandemic has resulted in a widespread health crisis, and the resulting impact on governments, businesses and individuals and actions taken by them in response to the situation have resulted in widespread economic disruptions, significantly affecting broader economies, financial markets, and overall demand for our products.
In an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees, we have taken actions to adopt social distancing policies at our locations around the world, including working from home, reducing the number of people in our sites at any one time, and suspending or restricting employee travel. In an effort to contain COVID-19 or slow its spread, governments around the world enacted measures in 2020, including periodically closing businesses not deemed “essential,” isolating residents to their homes, limiting access to healthcare, curtailing activities including sporting events, and practicing social distancing.
We implemented a broad range of temporary actions to mitigate the effects of lower sales levels including temporarily reducing salaries, furloughing and laying-off employees, significantly curtailing discretionary expenses, re-phasing of capital expenditures, reducing supplier purchase levels and / or prices, adjusting working capital practices and other measures.
As reflected in the discussions that follow, the pandemic and actions taken in response to it have had a variety of impacts on our results of operations during 2020. The most severe financial impact occurred in the second quarter, resulting in 31.8% lower sales than the second quarter of 2019. Sales began to recover in the latter part of the second quarter and through the third and fourth quarters. Third quarter sales improved to a 4.8% decrease as compared to the third quarter of 2019 while fourth quarter sales decreased 3.9% as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 on an equivalent sales-per-day basis and another 2.9% due to fewer selling days in 2020. The surge in COVID-19 cases in the fourth quarter contributed to certain jurisdictions putting further restrictions into place.
We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from international and domestic authorities, including national and local public health authorities, and may take additional actions based on their recommendations. In these circumstances, there may be developments outside our control that require us to further adjust our operations. As such, given the dynamic nature of this situation, we cannot reasonably estimate the full impacts of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows in the future.
Please see Part I. Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Form 10-K for further discussion of the Company’s risks relating to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Acquisitions
We complement our organic growth plans with acquisitions and other investments. Acquisitions can significantly affect our reported results, and we report the change in our Net sales between periods both from existing and acquired businesses. The change in Net sales due to acquisitions for the periods presented in this filing represents the incremental sales as a result of acquisitions. On February 22, 2019, we completed the acquisition of DJO, creating a new growth platform in the higher-margin orthopedic solutions market.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we completed five acquisitions in our Medical Technology segment for total consideration, net of cash received, of $67.5 million, subject to certain purchase price adjustments. This includes the acquisition of LiteCure LLC, a U.S. leader in high-powered laser rehab products for human and veterinary medical applications, in the fourth quarter for cash consideration of $39.6 million.
Global Operations
Our products and services are available worldwide. The manner in which our products and services are sold differs by region. During 2020, approximately 59% of our sales were shipped to locations outside of the U.S., mostly from locations outside the U.S. Accordingly, we are affected by market demand, economic and political factors in countries throughout the world. Our ability to grow and our financial performance will be affected by our ability to address a variety of challenges and opportunities that are a consequence of our global operations, including efficiently utilizing our global sales, manufacturing and distribution capabilities, participating in the expansion of market opportunities in emerging markets, successfully completing global acquisitions and engineering innovative new product applications for end users in a variety of geographic markets. However, we believe that our geographic, end market, customer and product diversification may limit the impact that any one country or economy could have on our consolidated results.
Foreign Currency Fluctuations
A significant portion of our Net sales, approximately 58% for 2020, is derived from operations outside the U.S., with the majority of those sales denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Because much of our manufacturing and employee costs are outside the U.S., a significant portion of our costs are also denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Changes in foreign exchange rates can impact our results of operations and are quantified when significant. For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, fluctuations in foreign currencies had unfavorable impacts on the change in Net sales of approximately 2% and affected Gross profit and Selling, general and administrative expenses by less than 2%.
Seasonality
Our European operations typically experience a slowdown during the July, August and December vacation seasons. Sales in our Medical Technology segment typically peak in the fourth quarter. However, the business impact caused by the COVID-19 pandemic may distort the effects of historical seasonality patterns.
Material Costs
Our Fabrication Technology segment results may be sensitive to cost changes in our raw materials. Our largest material purchases are for components and raw materials including steel, iron, copper and aluminum. Our principal raw materials and components for our Medical Technology segment are foam ethylene vinyl acetate, copolymer for our bracing and vascular products and cobalt chromium alloy, stainless steel alloys, titanium alloy and ultra high molecular weight polyethylene for our surgical implant products. Historically, we have been generally successful in passing raw material cost increases on to our customers in the form of higher prices. While we seek to take actions to manage this risk, future changes in component and raw material costs may adversely impact earnings.
Sales and Cost Mix
The gross profit margins within our Fabrication Technology segment vary in relation to the relative mix of many factors, including the type of product, the location in which the product is manufactured, the end market application for which the product is designed, and the percentage of total revenue represented by consumables, which often have higher margins than equipment. Gross profit margins within our Medical Technology segment vary primarily based on the type of product and distribution channel. Reconstructive products tend to have higher margins than the prevention and rehabilitation products.
The mix of sales was as follows for the periods presented:
Non-GAAP Measures
Adjusted EBITA
Adjusted EBITA, a non-GAAP performance measure, is included in this report because it is a key metric used by our management to assess our operating performance. Adjusted EBITA excludes from Net income from continuing operations the effect of restructuring and other related charges, MDR and other costs, acquisition-related intangible asset amortization and other non-cash charges, strategic transaction costs, and pension settlement loss, as well as related income tax expense (benefit) and interest expense, net. We also present Adjusted EBITA margin, which is subject to the same adjustments as Adjusted EBITA. Further, we present Adjusted EBITA (and Adjusted EBITA margin) on a segment basis, where we exclude the impact of restructuring and other related charges, MDR and other costs, acquisition-related intangible asset amortization and other non-cash charges, and strategic transaction costs from segment operating income. Adjusted EBITA assists Colfax management in comparing its operating performance over time because certain items may obscure underlying business trends and make comparisons of long-term performance difficult, as they are of a nature and/or size that occur with inconsistent frequency or relate to discrete restructuring plans and other initiatives that are fundamentally different from our ongoing productivity improvements. Colfax management also believes that presenting these measures allows investors to view its performance using the same measures that we use in evaluating our financial and business performance and trends.
Non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures to their most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures. The following tables set forth a reconciliation of Net income from continuing operations, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, to Adjusted EBITA.
(1) The year ended December 31, 2019 includes $0.8 million of debt extinguishment charges in the first quarter of 2019 related to financing for the DJO acquisition.
(2) Restructuring and other related charges includes $6.6 million and $8.5 million of expense classified as Cost of sales on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(3) Primarily related to costs specific to compliance with medical device reporting regulations and other requirements of the European Union Medical Device Regulation of 2017.
(4) Includes costs incurred for the acquisition of DJO.
(5) Includes amortization of acquired intangibles and fair value charges on acquired inventory.
The following tables set forth a reconciliation of operating income (loss), the most directly comparable financial statement measure, to Adjusted EBITA by segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(1) Restructuring and other related charges in the Medical Technology segment includes $6.6 million of expense classified as Cost of sales on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(2) Primarily related to costs specific to compliance with medical device reporting regulations and other requirements of the European Union Medical Device Regulation of 2017.
(3) Includes amortization of acquired intangibles and fair value charges on acquired inventory.
(1) Restructuring and other related charges in the Medical Technology segment includes $8.5 million of expense classified as Cost of sales on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(2) Strategic transaction costs in the Corporate and other segment includes costs incurred for the acquisition of DJO.
(3) Includes amortization of acquired intangibles and fair value charges on acquired inventory.
Total Company
Sales
Net sales from continuing operations decreased to $3.1 billion in 2020 from $3.3 billion in 2019. The following table presents the components of changes in our consolidated Net sales.
(1) Excludes the impact of foreign exchange rate fluctuations and acquisitions, thus providing a measure of growth due to factors such as price, product mix and volume.
(2) Represents the incremental sales from our acquisitions discussed previously, primarily driven by approximately two additional months of incremental reported sales compared to the corresponding prior year period as a result of the acquisition of DJO being completed on February 22, 2019.
(3) Represents the difference between prior year sales valued at the actual prior year foreign exchange rates and prior year sales valued at current year foreign exchange rates.
Net sales decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our Fabrication Technology segment decreased $218.4 million and our Medical Technology segment decreased $171.1 million for existing businesses, partially offset by a $199.5 million increase from approximately two additional months of acquisition sales in our Medical Technology segment, which represents the incremental reported sales compared to the corresponding prior year period as a result of the acquisition of DJO being completed on February 22, 2019, as well as an additional $7.1 million of sales from fourth quarter acquisitions in our Medical Technology segment. The strengthening of the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies caused a $73.8 million negative currency translation impact.
Operating Results
The following table summarizes our results from continuing operations for the comparable two-year period.
(1) Restructuring and other related charges includes $6.6 million and $8.5 million of expense classified as Cost of sales on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2) Primarily related to costs specific to compliance with medical device reporting regulations and other requirements of the European Union Medical Device Regulation of 2017.
(3) Includes costs incurred for the acquisition of DJO.
(4) Includes amortization of acquired intangibles and fair value charges on acquired inventory.
2020 Compared to 2019
Gross profit decreased $113.0 million during 2020 in comparison to 2019, primarily driven by lower sales volumes that resulted from the COVID-19 pandemic and $15.3 million of unfavorable currency translation effects, partly offset by temporary mitigating cost actions, new product initiatives, and the inclusion of $113.3 million from two additional months of Medical Technology segment sales and profit. Gross profit margins approximated the same level as 2019. Gross margins were impacted by lower sales volume related to COVID-19, offset by two additional months of higher-margin sales of our Medical Technology segment in 2020 and temporary cost reduction actions taken in response to the pandemic.
Selling, general and administrative expense decreased $44.7 million mainly due to a $58.2 million decrease in strategic transaction costs and temporary cost reductions that peaked in the second quarter, partially offset by two additional months of results of our Medical Technology segment. Restructuring and other related charges decreased by $28.7 million due to completing certain Medical Technology segment restructuring programs.
Interest expense, net decreased by $15.2 million, primarily attributable to lower interest rates and a lower debt balance.
The effective tax rate for Net income from continuing operations during 2020 was (10.4)%, which was lower than the 2020 U.S. federal statutory tax rate of 21% mainly due to the net impact of U.S. tax credits, a benefit from U.S. state tax losses, a discrete tax benefit associated with the filing of timely elected changes to U.S. Federal tax returns to credit rather than to deduct foreign taxes and release of valuation allowance on U.S. federal net operating losses. These favorable impacts were partially offset by the impact of additional U.S. tax on international operations, withholding taxes, and certain non-deductible expenses.
The effective tax rate for 2019 was 62.6%, which was higher than the 2019 U.S. federal statutory tax rate of 21% mainly due to taxation of foreign earnings, non-deductible transaction costs and unfavorable changes to the realization of deferred tax assets. These unfavorable adjustments were partially offset by lower effective tax rates of foreign jurisdictions, U.S. R&D and foreign tax credits, and the realization of deferred tax assets that previously had valuation allowances.
Net income from continuing operations increased in 2020 compared to 2019, largely due to decreases in strategic transaction and restructuring costs and the pension settlement loss incurred during 2019. These were offset by a decrease in Gross profit from COVID-19 impacts, mitigated by the reductions in Selling, general and administrative expense from our temporary cost reduction programs. Net income margin from continuing operations increased by 150 basis points for the same reasons that Net income from continuing operations increased.
The lower Adjusted EBITA was driven by COVID-19 impacts, partially offset by the inclusion of two additional months of results of our Medical Technology segment in 2020 and the reductions in Selling, general and administrative expense from our temporary cost reduction programs. Adjusted EBITA margin decreased by 250 basis points for largely the same reasons.
Business Segments
As discussed further above, we report results in two reportable segments: Fabrication Technology and Medical Technology.
Fabrication Technology
We formulate, develop, manufacture and supply consumable products and equipment, including cutting, joining, and automated welding products, as well as gas control equipment. Our fabrication technology products are marketed under several brand names, most notably ESAB, providing a wide range of products with innovative technologies to solve challenges in virtually any industry. ESAB’s comprehensive range of welding consumables includes electrodes, cored and solid wires, and fluxes using a wide range of specialty and other materials, and cutting consumables including electrodes, nozzles, shields and tips. ESAB’s fabrication technology equipment ranges from portable welding machines to large customized automated cutting and welding systems. ESAB also offers a range of digital software and solutions to help its customers increase their productivity, remotely monitor their welding operations and digitize their documentation. Products are sold into a wide range of end markets, including infrastructure, wind power, marine, medical / life sciences, pipelines, mobile/off-highway equipment, oil, gas, and mining.
The following table summarizes selected financial data for our Fabrication Technology segment:
Net sales in our Fabrication Technology segment decreased $296.9 million during 2020 compared to 2019 due to lower sales volumes related to COVID-19 and a $78.6 million unfavorable foreign currency translation impact. Despite the $113.7 million decrease in Gross profit due to lower sales, Gross profit margin was substantially maintained at the prior year level due to temporary cost reductions and restructuring benefits. Selling, general and administrative expense decreased in the period due to benefits from restructuring initiatives and temporary cost reduction programs. Lower sales levels related to COVID-19 resulted in a decline in Segment operating income, Adjusted EBITA, and related margins over the same period.
Medical Technology
We develop, manufacture and distribute high-quality medical devices and services across the continuum of patient care from injury prevention to joint replacement to rehabilitation after surgery, injury or from degenerative disease, enabling people to regain or maintain their natural motion. Our products are used by orthopedic specialists, spine surgeons, primary care physicians, pain management specialists, physical therapists, podiatrists, chiropractors, athletic trainers and other healthcare professionals. Our products primarily include orthopedic braces, rehabilitation devices, footwear, surgical implants, and bone growth stimulators.
The following table summarizes the selected financial data for our Medical Technology segment:
(1) Restructuring and other related charges includes $6.6 million and $8.5 million of expense classified as Cost of sales on the Company’s
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net sales increased for our Medical Technology segment during 2020 compared with 2019 due to $199.5 million from approximately two additional months of acquisition-related sales in 2020, partially offset by a decrease in sales volume related to COVID-19. Gross profit was consistent with 2019 and benefited early in the year from an additional two months of sales in 2020 and a $15.2 million decrease in inventory fair value charges. These gross profit increases were offset by COVID-19 volume declines as well as higher freight costs and production inefficiencies related to COVID-19. Gross profit margin declined primarily as a result of COVID-19 effects on sales volumes and supply chain inefficiencies. Selling, general and administrative expense also increased $72.8 million due to including two additional months of activity in results, partially offset by temporary expense reductions. Segment operating income, Adjusted EBITA, and related margins all declined as a result of the aforementioned factors. Restructuring and other related charges decreased by $27.3 million due to completing certain projects.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We finance our long-term capital and working capital requirements through a combination of cash flows from operating activities, various borrowings and the issuances of equity. We expect that our primary ongoing requirements for cash will be for working capital, funding of acquisitions, capital expenditures, restructuring, asbestos-related cash outflows, and debt service and required amortization of principal. We believe we could raise additional funds in the form of debt or equity if it was determined to be appropriate for strategic acquisitions or other corporate purposes.
Equity Capital
On February 12, 2018, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $100 million of our Common stock from time-to-time on the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. The Board of Directors increased the repurchase authorization by an additional $100 million on June 6, 2018, and again for an additional $100 million on July 19, 2018. There were $200.0 million repurchases made during the year ended December 31, 2018. There were no repurchases made in 2019 and 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining stock repurchase authorization provided by our Board of Directors was $100.0 million. The timing, amount, and method of shares repurchased is determined by management based on its evaluation of market conditions and other factors. There is no term associated with the remaining repurchase authorization.
Term Loan and Revolving Credit Facility
Our credit agreement (the “Credit Facility”) by and among the Company, as the borrower, certain U.S. subsidiaries of the Company, as guarantors, each of the lenders party thereto, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, Citizens Bank, N.A., as syndication agent, and the co-documentation agents named therein consists of a $975 million revolving credit facility (the “Revolver”) and a Term A-1 loan in an initial aggregate principal amount of $825 million (the “Term Loan”), each with a maturity date of December 6, 2024. The Revolver contains a $50 million swing line loan sub-facility. On May 1, 2020, the Company entered into an amendment to its Credit Facility (the “Amendment”). During the third quarter of 2020, the Company made a voluntary $40 million principal payment on the Term Loan. Refer to Note 10, “Debt” in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information regarding the Amendment.
As of December 31, 2020, we are in compliance with the covenants under the Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2020, the weighted-average interest rate of borrowings under the Credit Facility was 1.90%, excluding accretion of original issue discount and deferred financing fees, and there was $975 million available on the Revolver.
Euro Senior Notes
On April 19, 2017, we issued senior unsecured notes with an aggregate principal amount of €350 million (the “Euro Notes”). The Euro Notes are due in April 2025, have an interest rate of 3.25% and are guaranteed by certain of our domestic subsidiaries (the “Guarantees”). The proceeds from the Euro Notes offering were used to repay borrowings under our previous credit facilities totaling €283.5 million, as well as for general corporate purposes. The Euro Notes and the Guarantees have not been, and will not be, registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "Securities Act"), or the securities laws of any other jurisdiction.
2022 Tangible Equity Units
On January 11, 2019, we issued $460 million in tangible equity units. We offered 4 million of the 5.75% tangible equity units at the stated amount of $100 per unit and an option to purchase up to an additional 600,000 tangible equity units at the stated amount of $100 per unit, which was exercised in full at settlement. Total cash of $447.7 million was received upon closing, comprised of $377.8 million TEU prepaid stock purchase contracts and $69.9 million of TEU amortizing notes due January 2022. The proceeds were used to finance a portion of the purchase price for the DJO acquisition and for general corporate purposes. Refer to Note 14, “Equity” in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
2024 Notes and 2026 Notes
On February 5, 2019, CFX Escrow Corporation, an unaffiliated special purpose finance entity established to issue the notes and incorporated in the State of Delaware, issued two tranches of senior notes with aggregate principal amounts of $600 million (the “2024 Notes”) and $400 million (the “2026 Notes) to finance a portion of the DJO acquisition. The 2024 Notes are due on February 15, 2024 and have an interest rate of 6.0%. The 2026 Notes are due on February 15, 2026 and have an interest rate of 6.375%. Upon closing of the acquisition, we assumed all of CFX Escrow Corporation’s obligations under the 2024 Notes and 2026 Notes. Each tranche of notes is guaranteed by certain of our domestic subsidiaries.
Other Indebtedness
In addition, we are party to various bilateral credit facilities with a borrowing capacity of $195.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings under these facilities.
We are also party to letter of credit facilities with an aggregate capacity of $340.5 million. Total letters of credit of $76.4 million were outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
We believe that our sources of liquidity are adequate to fund our operations for the next twelve months.
Cash Flows
As of December 31, 2020, we had $101.1 million of Cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash, a decrease of $8.5 million from $109.6 million as of December 31, 2019. See Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Restricted Cash" for further information. The following table summarizes the change in Cash and cash equivalents during the periods indicated:
Cash used in operating activities related to the discontinued operations of the divested Air and Gas Handling business for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $9.4 million and $18.1 million, respectively. Cash used in investing activities related to the discontinued operations of the divested Air and Gas Handling business was $27.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash flows from operating activities can fluctuate significantly from period to period due to changes in working capital and the timing of payments for items such as pension funding, asbestos-related costs and restructuring program funding. Changes in significant operating cash flow items are discussed below.
•Net cash received or paid for asbestos-related costs, net of insurance proceeds, including the disposition of claims, defense costs and legal expenses related to litigation against our insurers, creates variability in our operating cash
flows. We had net cash outflows of $2.2 million and $3.2 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash outflows for 2020 and 2019 were net of $79.6 million and $59.8 million, respectively, of reimbursements from insurance companies on our asbestos insurance asset balances.
•Funding requirements of our defined benefit plans, including pension plans and other post-retirement benefit plans, can vary significantly from period to period due to changes in the fair value of plan assets and actuarial assumptions. For 2020 and 2019, cash contributions for defined benefit plans were $11.0 million and $11.7 million, respectively.
•During 2020 and 2019, cash payments of $39.2 million and $74.6 million, respectively, were made related to our restructuring initiatives.
•During 2020 and 2019, cash paid for strategic transaction costs were $5.1 million and $58.7 million, respectively.
•Year ended December 31, 2020 results include $52.3 million of inflows from working capital due to lower sales and operational improvements. Year ended December 31, 2019 results included a $83.1 million outflow, due to an increase in Net Sales, an estimated $40 million one-time effort to bring DJO suppliers into payment terms consistent with our normal practices, and the elimination of a DJO accounts receivable factoring program. We define working capital as Trade receivables, net and Inventories, net, both reduced by Accounts payable and customer advances and billings in excess of costs incurred.
Cash flows used in investing activities during 2020 includes $69.8 million of cash used for 5 acquisitions and three investments in our Medical Technology segment. Cash flows used by investing activities during 2019 included $3.2 billion of cash used for acquisitions and $1.6 billion in proceeds from the sale of the Air and Gas Handling business.
Cash flows provided by financing activities in 2019 included $1.1 billion of proceeds from borrowings, net and $377.8 million of proceeds from the issuance of tangible equity units.
Our Cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 include $50.3 million held in jurisdictions outside the U.S. Cash repatriation of non-U.S. cash into the U.S. may be subject to taxes, other local statutory restrictions and minority owner distributions.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our future contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
(1)Variable interest payments are estimated using a static rate of 1.90%.
(2)Excludes open purchase orders for goods or services that are provided on demand, the timing of which is not certain.
We have funding requirements associated with our pension and other post-retirement benefit plans as of December 31, 2020, which are estimated to be $6.9 million for the year ending December 31, 2021. Other long-term liabilities, such as those for asbestos and other legal claims, employee benefit plan obligations, deferred income taxes and liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits, are excluded from the above table since they are not contractually fixed as to timing and amount.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that provide liquidity, capital resources, market or credit risk support that expose us to any liability that is not reflected in our Consolidated Financial Statements at December 31, 2020 other than outstanding letters of credit of $76.4 million and unconditional purchase obligations with suppliers of $276.9 million.
The Company and its subsidiaries have in the past divested certain of its businesses and assets. In connection with these divestitures, certain representations, warranties and indemnities were made to purchasers to cover various risks or unknown liabilities. We cannot estimate the potential liability, if any, that may result from such representations, warranties and indemnities because they relate to unknown and unexpected contingencies; however, we do not believe that any such liabilities will have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity.
Critical Accounting Policies
The methods, estimates and judgments we use in applying our critical accounting policies have a significant impact on our results of operations and financial position. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based upon our historical experience, our evaluation of business and macroeconomic trends and information from other outside sources, as appropriate. Our experience and assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may vary from what our management anticipates and different assumptions or estimates about the future could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial position.
We believe the following accounting policies are the most critical in that they are important to the financial statements and they require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments in the preparation of the financial statements. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K.
Asbestos Liabilities and Insurance Assets
Certain subsidiaries are each one of many defendants in a large number of lawsuits that claim personal injury as a result of exposure to asbestos from products manufactured with components that are alleged to have contained asbestos. Such components were acquired from third-party suppliers and were not manufactured by any of our subsidiaries, nor were the subsidiaries producers or direct suppliers of asbestos. The manufactured products that are alleged to have contained asbestos generally were provided to meet the specifications of the subsidiaries’ customers, including the U.S. Navy.
We sold our Fluid Handling business in 2017, and pursuant to the purchase agreement, we retained the asbestos-related contingencies and insurance coverages. However, as we did not retain an interest in the ongoing operations of the business subject to the contingencies, we have classified asbestos-related activity in our Consolidated Statements of Operations as part of Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of taxes. See Note 4, “Discontinued Operations” for further information.
We have projected future asbestos-related liability costs with regard to pending and future unasserted claims based upon the Nicholson methodology. The Nicholson methodology is a standard approach used by experts and has been accepted by numerous courts. This methodology is based upon risk equations, exposed population estimates, mortality rates, and other demographic statistics. In applying the Nicholson methodology for each subsidiary we performed: (1) an analysis of the estimated population likely to have been exposed or claim to have been exposed to products manufactured by the subsidiaries based upon national studies undertaken of the population of workers believed to have been exposed to asbestos; (2) a review of epidemiological and demographic studies to estimate the number of potentially exposed people that would be likely to develop asbestos-related diseases in each year; (3) an analysis of the subsidiaries’ recent claims history to estimate likely filing rates for these diseases and (4) an analysis of the historical asbestos liability costs to develop average values, which vary by disease type, jurisdiction and the nature of claim, to determine an estimate of costs likely to be associated with currently pending and projected asbestos claims. Our projections, based upon the Nicholson methodology, estimate both claims and the estimated cash outflows related to the resolution of such claims for periods up to and including the endpoint of asbestos studies referred to in item (2) above. It is our policy to record a liability for asbestos-related liability costs for the longest period of time that we can reasonably estimate. Accordingly, no accrual has been recorded for any costs which may be paid after the next 15 years.
Projecting future asbestos-related liability costs is subject to numerous variables that are difficult to predict, including, among others, the number of claims that might be received, the type and severity of the disease alleged by each claimant, the latency period associated with asbestos exposure, dismissal rates, costs of medical treatment, the financial resources of other companies that are co-defendants in the claims, funds available in post-bankruptcy trusts, uncertainties surrounding the litigation process from jurisdiction to jurisdiction and from case to case, including fluctuations in the timing of court actions and rulings, and the impact of potential changes in legislative or judicial standards, including potential tort reform. Furthermore, any projections with respect to these variables are subject to even greater uncertainty as the projection period lengthens. These trend factors have both positive and negative effects on the dynamics of asbestos litigation in the tort system and the related best estimate of our asbestos liability, and these effects do not move in linear fashion but rather change over multiple year periods. Accordingly, we monitor these trend factors over time and periodically assess whether an alternative forecast period is appropriate. Taking these factors into account and the inherent uncertainties, we believe that we can reasonably estimate the asbestos-related liability for pending and future claims that will be resolved in the next 15 years and have recorded that liability as our best estimate. While it is reasonably possible that the subsidiaries will incur costs after this period, we do not believe the reasonably possible loss or range of reasonably possible loss is estimable at the current time. Accordingly, no accrual has been
recorded for any costs which may be paid after the next 15 years. Defense costs associated with asbestos-related liabilities as well as costs incurred related to litigation against the subsidiaries’ insurers are expensed as incurred.
We assessed the subsidiaries’ existing insurance arrangements and agreements, estimated the applicability of insurance coverage for existing and expected future claims, analyzed publicly available information bearing on the current creditworthiness and solvency of the various insurers, and employed such insurance allocation methodologies as we believed appropriate to ascertain the probable insurance recoveries for asbestos liabilities. The analysis took into account self-insurance retentions, policy exclusions, pending litigation, liability caps and gaps in coverage, existing and potential insolvencies of insurers as well as how legal and defense costs will be covered under the insurance policies.
Each subsidiary has separate insurance coverage acquired prior to our ownership of each independent entity. In our evaluation of the insurance asset, we use differing insurance allocation methodologies for each subsidiary based upon the applicable law pertaining to the affected subsidiary.
Management’s analyses are based on currently known facts and a number of assumptions. However, projecting future events, such as new claims to be filed each year, the average cost of resolving each claim, coverage issues among layers of insurers, the method in which losses will be allocated to the various insurance policies, interpretation of the effect on coverage of various policy terms and limits and their interrelationships, the continuing solvency of various insurance companies and collectability of claims tendered, the amount of remaining insurance available, as well as the numerous uncertainties inherent in asbestos litigation could cause the actual liabilities and insurance recoveries to be higher or lower than those projected or recorded which could materially affect our financial condition, results of operations or cash flow.
See Note 18, “Commitments and Contingencies” in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our asbestos liabilities and insurance assets.
Impairment of Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the costs in excess of the fair value of net assets acquired associated with our acquisitions. Indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of certain trade names.
We evaluate the recoverability of Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets annually or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change in the interim that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the asset below its carrying amount. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are considered to be impaired when the carrying value of a reporting unit or asset exceeds its value.
In the evaluation of Goodwill for impairment, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting entity is less than its carrying value. If we determine that it is more likely than not for a reporting unit’s fair value to be greater than its carrying value, a calculation of the fair value is not performed. If we determine that it is more likely than not for a reporting unit’s fair value to be less than its carrying value, a calculation of the fair value is performed and compared to the carrying value of that reporting unit. In certain instances, we may elect to forgo the qualitative assessment and proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, Goodwill of that reporting unit is impaired and an impairment loss is recorded equal to the excess of the carrying value over its fair value.
Generally, we measure fair value of reporting units based on a present value of future discounted cash flows and a market valuation approach. The discounted cash flow models indicate the fair value of the reporting units based on the present value of the cash flows that the reporting units are expected to generate in the future. Significant estimates in the discounted cash flow models include the weighted average cost of capital, revenue growth rates, long-term rate of growth, profitability of our business, tax rates, and working capital effects. The market valuation approach indicates the fair value of the business based on a comparison against certain market information. Significant estimates in the market approach model include identifying appropriate market multiples and assessing earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization.
Due to the sale of the Air and Gas Handling reporting unit in 2019 and the held for sale accounting treatment, we performed a quantitative analysis for impairment in the second quarter of 2019. Based on the purchase price and the carrying value of the net assets being sold, the Company recorded an impairment loss of $481 million in the second quarter of 2019, which is included in Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of taxes in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The impairment loss included a $449 million goodwill impairment charge and a $32 million valuation allowance charge on assets
held for sale relating to the initial estimated cost to sell the business. An accumulated other comprehensive loss of approximately $350 million associated with the Air and Gas Handling business was included in the determination of the goodwill impairment charge, which is mostly attributable to the recognition of cumulative foreign currency translation effects from the long-term strengthening of the U.S. Dollar. The Air and Gas Handling business sale was completed on September 30, 2019. Impairment charges related to the divested Air and Gas Handling business are recorded in Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of taxes on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. See Note 4, “Discontinued Operations” in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
A qualitative assessment of Goodwill was performed for the Fabrication Technology reporting unit for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, which indicated no impairment existed. Additionally, we performed a qualitative assessment of Goodwill for the Medical Technology reporting unit for the year ended December 31, 2019, which indicated no impairment existed.
Due to overall market declines as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, management decided to forgo the qualitative assessment and performed quantitative Goodwill impairment tests for both the Fabrication Technology and Medical Technology reporting units for the year ended December 31, 2020, which indicated no impairment existed. The carrying amount of Goodwill of the Fabrication Technology and Medical Technology reporting units for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.6 billion and $1.8 billion, respectively. We determined the fair value of each reporting unit by equally weighting a discounted cash flow approach and market valuation approach. The Fabrication Technology reporting unit quantitative impairment test resulted in a fair value that exceeded its carrying amount by approximately 50%. The Medical Technology reporting unit had a fair value that exceeded its carrying amount by approximately 12%. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit requires the application of judgment and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions which can be affected by changes in business climate, economic conditions, the competitive environment and other factors. We base these fair value estimates on assumptions our management believes to be reasonable but which are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Future changes in the judgment, assumptions and estimates could result in significantly different estimates of fair value in the future. An increase in discount rates, a reduction in projected cash flows or a combination of the two could lead to a reduction in the estimated fair values, which may result in impairment charges that could materially affect our financial statements in any given year. For sensitivity analysis, we estimated the fair value of the Medical Technology reporting unit if we increased the discount rate by 25 basis points or reduced the long-term revenue growth rate by 25 basis points, and the resulting excess fair value over carrying value decreased by 220 basis points and 160 basis points, respectively.
In the evaluation of indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying value. If we determine that it is more likely than not for the indefinite-lived intangible asset’s fair value to be greater than its carrying value, a calculation of the fair value is not performed. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the indefinite-lived intangible asset’s fair value is less than its carrying value, a calculation is performed and compared to the carrying value of the asset. If the carrying amount of the indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. We measure the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets using the “relief from royalty” method. Significant estimates in this approach include projected revenues and royalty and discount rates for each trade name evaluated.
A qualitative assessment was performed for the Fabrication Technology segment trade names for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, which indicated no impairment existed. For the year ended December 31, 2020, due to overall market declines as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we performed quantitative impairment tests on all indefinite-lived trade names within our Fabrication Technology segment, which indicated no impairment existed.
A sustained decline in our end-markets and geographic markets could increase the risk of impairments in future years. Actual results could differ from our estimates and projections, which would also affect the assessment of impairment. As of December 31, 2020, we have Goodwill of $3.3 billion and indefinite lived trade names of $212.0 million that are subject to at least annual review for impairment. See Note 9, “Goodwill and Intangible Assets” in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires that deferred tax assets and liabilities be recognized using enacted tax rates for the effect of temporary differences between the book and tax bases of recorded assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. In evaluating the need for a valuation allowance, we consider various factors, including the
expected level of future taxable income and available tax planning strategies. If actual results differ from the assumptions made in the evaluation of our valuation allowance, we record a change in valuation allowance through income tax expense in the period such determination is made.
Accounting Standards Codification 740, “Income Taxes” prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for a position taken in a tax return. Under this standard, we must presume the income tax position will be examined by a relevant tax authority and determine whether it is more likely than not that the income tax position will be sustained upon examination based on its technical merits. An income tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is then measured to determine the amount of the benefit to be recognized in the financial statements. Liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits are reviewed periodically and are adjusted as events occur that affect our estimates, such as the availability of new information, the lapsing of applicable statutes of limitations, the conclusion of tax audits and, if applicable, the conclusion of any court proceedings. To the extent we prevail in matters for which liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits have been established or are required to pay amounts in excess of our liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits, our effective income tax rate in a given period could be materially affected. We recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in the Income tax expense (benefit) in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Net liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits, including accrued interest and penalties, were $58.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and are included in Other liabilities or as a reduction to deferred tax assets in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheet.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Tax Act”) was signed into law making significant changes to the Internal Revenue Code which included how the U.S. imposes income tax on multinational corporations. Coinciding with the Tax Act enactment, the SEC issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 (“SAB 118”) to address the application of U.S. GAAP in situations when a registrant does not have the necessary information available, prepared, or analyzed (including computations) in reasonable detail to complete the accounting for certain income tax effects of the Tax Act. SAB 118 allows registrants to include a provisional amount to account for the implications of the Tax Act where a reasonable estimate can be made and requires the completion of the accounting no later than one year from the date of enactment of the Tax Act or December 22, 2018. We filed our 2017 U.S. income tax return in the fourth quarter of 2018, which changed our tax basis in temporary differences and Transition Tax estimated as of December 31, 2017, resulting in an adjustment to the tax provision to the re-measurement amount recorded in the financial statements. As a result of this tax filing, we reduced our provisional amount by $10.8 million and $0.7 million for Transition Tax and the remeasurement of U.S. deferred taxes respectively for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue in accordance with Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” which we adopted on January 1, 2018, using the full retrospective method. We recognize revenue when control of promised goods or services is transferred to the customer. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring the goods or services. The nature of our contracts gives rise to certain types of variable consideration, including rebates and other discounts. We include estimated amounts of variable consideration in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable there will not be a significant reversal of revenue. Estimates are based on historical or anticipated performance and represent our best judgment at the time. Any estimates are evaluated on a quarterly basis until the uncertainty is resolved. Additionally, related to sales of our medical device products and services, we maintain provisions for estimated contractual allowances for reimbursement amounts from certain third-party payers based on negotiated contracts, historical experience for non-contracted payers, and the impact of new contract terms or modifications of existing arrangements with these customers. We report these allowances as a reduction to net sales.
We provide a variety of products and services to our customers. Most of our contracts consist of a single, distinct performance obligation or promise to transfer goods or services to a customer. For contracts that include multiple performance obligations, we allocate the total transaction price to each performance obligation using our best estimate of the standalone selling price of each identified performance obligation.
A majority of the revenue we recognize relates to contracts with customers for standard or off-the-shelf products. As control typically transfers to the customer upon shipment of the product in these circumstances, revenue is generally recognized at that point in time. For service contracts, we recognize revenue ratably over the period of performance as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the services provided.
Any recognized revenues in excess of customer billings are recorded as a component of Trade receivables. Billings to customers in excess of recognized revenues are recorded as a component of Accrued liabilities. Each contract is evaluated
individually to determine the net asset or net liability position. Substantially all of our revenue is recognized at a point in time, and revenue recognition and billing typically occur simultaneously.
The period of benefit for our incremental costs of obtaining a contract would generally have less than a one-year duration; therefore, we apply the practical expedient available and expense costs to obtain a contract when incurred.
Trade receivables are presented net of an allowance for credit losses. The Company adopted ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments as of January 1, 2020. The estimate of current expected credit losses on trade receivables considers historical credit loss information that is adjusted for current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The allowance for credit losses was $37.7 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $36.0 million as of January 1, 2020, following the adoption of the standard.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For detailed information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements and the expected impact on our financial statements, see Note 3, “Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.