Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations and involves risks and uncertainties. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “intend,” “potential” or “continue” or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. Such statements, include but are not limited to statements regarding our expectations as to future financial performance, expense levels, liquidity sources, the capabilities and performance of our technology and products and planned changes, timing of new product releases, our business strategies, including anticipated trends, growth and developments in markets in which we target, the anticipated market adoption of our current and future products, performance in operations, including component supply management, product quality and customer service, risks related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the anticipated benefits and risks relating to the transaction with SunPower Corporation. Our actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Overview and 2020 Highlights
We are a global energy technology company. We deliver smart, easy-to-use solutions that manage solar generation, storage and communication on one single platform. We revolutionized the solar industry with our microinverter technology and we produce a fully integrated solar-plus-storage solution. To date, we have shipped more than 32 million microinverters, and approximately 1.4 million Enphase residential and commercial systems have been deployed in more than 130 countries.
We sell our solutions primarily to distributors who resell them to solar installers. We also sell directly to large installers, OEMs, strategic partners and homeowners. Our revenue in the fourth quarter of 2019 and first quarter of 2020 was positively impacted by the scheduled phase-down of the investment tax credit for solar projects under Section 48(a) (the “ITC”) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”).
The Renewable Energy and Job Creation Act of 2008 provided a 30% federal tax credit for residential and commercial solar installations through December 31, 2019, which was reduced to a tax credit of 26% for any solar energy system that began construction during 2020 through December 31, 2022, and 22% thereafter to December 31, 2023 before being reduced to 10% for commercial installations and 0% for residential installations beginning on January 1, 2024. As a result, several of our customers explored opportunities to purchase products in 2019 to take advantage of safe harbor guidance from the IRS published in June 2018, allowing them to preserve the historical 30% investment tax credit for solar equipment purchased in 2019 for solar projects that are completed after December 31, 2019. Safe harbor prepayments from customers in the fourth quarter of 2019 resulted in $44.5 million of revenue recognized in the first quarter of 2020 when we delivered the product.
On March 9, 2020, we issued $320.0 million aggregate principal amount of our Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 (the “Notes due 2025”) in a private placement. The Notes due 2025 are general unsecured obligations and bear interest at a rate of 0.25% per year, payable semi-annually on March 1 and September 1 of each year, beginning on September 1, 2020. The Notes due 2025 will mature on March 1, 2025, unless earlier repurchased by us or converted at the option of the holders. Further information relating to the Notes due 2025 may be found in Note 11, “Debt,” of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and below under the section titled “- Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 55
On March 26, 2020, the Office of the United States Trade Representative (the “USTR”) announced certain exclusion requests related to tariffs on Chinese imported microinverter products that fit the dimensions and weight limits within a Section 301 Tariff exclusion under U.S. note 20(ss)(40) to subchapter III of chapter 99 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States (the “Tariff Exclusion”). The Tariff Exclusion applies to covered products under the China Section 301 Tariff Actions (“Section 301 Tariffs”) taken by the USTR exported from China to the United States from September 24, 2018 until August 7, 2020. Accordingly, we sought refunds totaling approximately $38.9 million plus approximately $0.6 million accrued interest on tariffs previously paid from September 24, 2018 to March 31, 2020 for certain microinverters that qualify for the Tariff Exclusion. The refund request was subject to review and approval by the U.S. Customs and Border Protection; therefore, we assessed that the probable loss recovery for the year ended December 31, 2020 is equal to the approved refund requests available to us prior to issuance of the financial statements on February 12, 2021.
As of December 31, 2020, we have received $24.8 million of tariff refunds and accrued for the remaining $14.7 million tariff refunds that were approved, however, not yet received on or before December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $38.9 million as a reduction to cost of revenues in our consolidated statements of operations as the approved refunds relate to paid tariffs previously recorded to cost of revenues; therefore, we recorded the corresponding approved tariff refunds as credits to cost of revenues in the current period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded the $0.6 million accrued interest as interest income in our consolidated statement of operations. The tariff refund receivable of $14.7 million is recorded as a reduction of accounts payable to Flex Ltd. and affiliates (“Flex”), our manufacturing partner and the importer of record who will first receive the tariff refunds, on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
The Tariff Exclusion expired on August 7, 2020 and those microinverter products now are subject to tariffs. We continue to pay Section 301 Tariffs on our storage and communication products and other accessories imported from China which are not subject to the Tariff Exclusion.
In December 2020, holders exchanged $43.9 million in aggregate principal amount of the Notes due 2024, the principal amount of which was repaid in cash. Of the $43.9 million in aggregate principal amount, $38.5 million in aggregate principal amount was settled pursuant to an exchange agreement entered into in December 2020 with certain holders of Notes due 2024. We also issued approximately 1.9 million shares of our common stock to the holders in December 2020 for the conversion value in excess of the principal amount of the Notes due 2024, which were fully offset by shares received from our exercise of the associated note hedging arrangements. Refer to Note 11. Debt, of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information. In connection with the settlement of the Notes due 2024, we entered into partial unwind agreements to unwind number of warrants exercisable under our note hedging arrangements and to issue approximately 2.1 million warrants on a net basis, resulting in a net issuance of approximately 1.9 million shares of our common stock in connection with the exchange of the Notes due 2024.
Impact of COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continues to cause disruptions and uncertainties, including in the core markets in which we operate. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly curtailed the movement of people, goods and services and had a notable impact on general economic conditions including but not limited to the temporary closures of many businesses, “shelter in place” orders and other governmental regulations, and reduced consumer spending. The most significant near-term impacts of COVID-19 on our financial performance are a decline in sales orders as future residential and commercial system owners are canceling sales meetings with system installation professionals or postponing system installations. As the purchase of new solar energy management solutions declines as part of the impact of COVID-19 on consumer spending, many businesses through which we distribute our products are working at limited operational capacity. The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our future operational and financial performance will depend on various future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, impact on our employees, impact on our customers, effect on our sales cycles or costs, and effect on our supply chain and vendors, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted, but which could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations or financial condition. Further information relating to the risks and uncertainties related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may be found in Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 56
Components of Consolidated Statements of Operations
Net Revenues
We primarily generate net revenues from sales of our microinverter solutions and related accessories, which include our storage systems, our Envoy communications gateway and Enlighten cloud-based monitoring service as well as other accessories.
Our revenue is affected by changes in the volume and average selling prices of our solutions and related accessories, supply and demand, sales incentives, and competitive product offerings. Our revenue growth is dependent on our ability to compete effectively in the marketplace by remaining cost competitive, developing and introducing new products that meet the changing technology and performance requirements of our customers, the diversification and expansion of our revenue base, and our ability to market our products in a manner that increases awareness for microinverter technology and differentiates us in the marketplace.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of revenues is comprised primarily of product costs, warranty, manufacturing personnel and logistics costs, freight costs, depreciation and amortization of test equipment and hosting services costs. Our product costs are impacted by technological innovations, such as advances in semiconductor integration and new product introductions, economies of scale resulting in lower component costs, and improvements in production processes and automation. Certain costs, primarily personnel and depreciation and amortization of test equipment, are not directly affected by sales volume.
We outsource our manufacturing to third-party contract manufacturers and generally negotiate product pricing with them on a quarterly basis. We believe our contract manufacturing partners have sufficient production capacity to meet the anticipated demand for our products for the foreseeable future. However, shortages in the supply of certain key raw materials could adversely affect our ability to meet customer demand for our products. We contract with third parties, including one of our contract manufacturers, to serve as our logistics providers by warehousing and delivering our products in the U.S., Europe and Asia.
Gross profit may vary from quarter to quarter and is primarily affected by our average selling prices, product cost, product mix, customer mix, tariff refunds, warranty costs and sales volume fluctuations resulting from seasonality.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing, general and administrative and restructuring expenses. Personnel-related costs are the most significant component of each of these expense categories other than restructuring expense and include salaries, benefits, payroll taxes, sales commissions, incentive compensation and stock-based compensation.
Research and development expense include personnel-related expenses, third-party design and development costs, testing and evaluation costs, depreciation expense and other indirect costs. Research and development employees are primarily engaged in the design and development of power electronics, semiconductors, powerline communications, networking and software functionality, and storage. We devote substantial resources to research and development programs that focus on enhancements to, and cost efficiencies in, our existing products and timely development of new products that utilize technological innovation to drive down product costs, improve functionality, and enhance reliability. We intend to continue to invest appropriate resources in our research and development efforts because we believe they are critical to maintaining our competitive position.
Sales and marketing expense include personnel-related expenses, travel, trade shows, marketing, customer support and other indirect costs. We expect to continue to make the necessary investments to enable us to execute our strategy to increase our market penetration geographically and enter into new markets by expanding our customer base of distributors, large installers, OEMs and strategic partners. We currently offer solutions targeting the residential and commercial markets in the U.S., Canada, Mexico, Central American markets, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, India and certain other Asian markets. We expect to continue to expand the geographic reach of our product offerings and explore new sales channels in addressable markets in the future.
General and administrative expense include personnel-related expenses for our executive, finance, human resources, information technology and legal organizations, facilities costs, and fees for professional services. Fees for professional services consist primarily of outside legal, accounting and information technology consulting costs.
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 57
Restructuring charges are the net charges resulting from restructuring initiatives implemented in 2018 through 2019 (the “2018 Plan”) to improve operational performance and reduce overall operating expenses. Under the 2018 Plan, costs included in restructuring primarily consisted of employee severance and one-time benefits, workforce reorganization charges, non-cash charges related to impairment of property and equipment, and the establishment of lease loss reserves. See Note 10. “Restructuring,” of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net primarily consists of interest expense and fees under our convertible notes and term loans, non-cash interest expense related to the accretion of debt discount and amortization of deferred financing costs, and non-cash charge recognized for the change in fair value of our convertible notes embedded derivative and warrants. Other expense, net also includes interest income on our cash balance, accrued interest on tariffs previously paid and approved for refund, and gains or losses upon conversion of foreign currency transactions into U.S. dollars.
Income Tax Benefit (Provision)
We are subject to income taxes in the countries where we sell our products. Historically, we have primarily been subject to taxation in the U.S. because we have sold the majority of our products to customers in the U.S. As we have expanded the sale of products to customers outside the U.S., we have become subject to taxation based on the foreign statutory rates in the countries where these sales took place. As sales in foreign jurisdictions increase in the future, our effective tax rate may fluctuate accordingly. We regularly assess the ability to realize deferred tax assets based on the weight of all available evidence, including such factors as the history of recent earnings and expected future taxable income on a jurisdiction by jurisdiction basis. During the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2019, after considering these factors, we determined that the positive evidence overcame any negative evidence, primarily due to cumulative income in recent years, and the expectation of sustained profitability in future periods and concluded that it was more likely than not that the US federal and state deferred tax assets were realizable. As a result, we released the valuation allowance against all of the U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2019.
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 58
Summary Consolidated Statements of Operations
The following table sets forth a summary of our consolidated statements of operations for the periods presented (in thousands):
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 59
Results of Operations
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Revenues
Net revenues increased by 24% or $150.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the 11% increase in microinverter unit volume shipped primarily as a result of business growth in the U.S., higher microinverter units shipped in the first quarter of 2020 as our customers took advantage of safe harbor guidance from the IRS and shipments of our Enphase Encharge storage systems to customers in North America. We sold approximately 6.8 million microinverter units in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to approximately 6.2 million microinverter units in the same period in 2019.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of revenues increased by 6% or $25.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to higher volume of microinverter units sold and shipments of our Enphase Encharge storage systems primarily as a result of business growth in the U.S., as well as higher units shipped in the first quarter of 2020 as our customers took advantage of safe harbor guidance from the IRS, partially offset by the $38.9 million in refunds approved for tariffs mentioned above and a decrease in the unit cost of our products as a result of our cost reduction efforts.
Gross margin increased by 9.3 percentage points for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in gross margin was primarily attributable to the $38.9 million in refunds approved for tariffs mentioned above as well as our overall pricing and cost management efforts, including the transition of our contract manufacturing to Mexico to mitigate tariffs.
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 60
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased by 38% or $15.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to $13.6 million higher personnel-related expenses and $2.5 million of outside consulting, engineering services and equipment associated with the innovation and development, introduction and qualification of new products, partially offset by a $0.6 million reduction in travel expenditure as we implemented travel restrictions prohibiting all non-essential business travel. The increase in personnel-related expenses was primarily due to hiring employees in New Zealand, India and US, increasing total compensation costs. The amount of research and development expenses may fluctuate from period to period due to differing levels and stages of development activity.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by 44% or $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to $11.4 million of higher personnel-related expenses as a result of our efforts to improve customer experience by hiring additional employees to reduce the average call wait time for customers, as well as support our business growth in the U.S. and international expansion in Europe, and $5.5 million for a combination of higher marketing expenses, professional services, advertising costs and facilities costs to enable business growth, partially offset by $0.7 million reduction in travel expenditure as we implemented travel restrictions prohibiting all non-essential business travel and converting where possible our in-person sales, trainings and marketing events to virtual-only due to COVID-19.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased 31% or $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to $7.9 million of higher personnel-related expenses, $2.8 million of other operational, technological and facilities costs to support scalability of our business growth and $1.6 million of higher legal and professional services, partially offset by $0.4 million reduction in travel expenditures as we implemented travel restrictions prohibiting all non-essential business travel in response to COVID-19.
Restructuring Charges
We completed our 2018 restructuring plan in 2019, hence we incurred no restructuring expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020. Restructuring charges for 2019 primarily include $1.6 million in cash-based severance and related benefits and $1.1 million in non-cash charges for impaired assets, partially offset by a $0.1 million reduction in lease loss reserves due to adoption of ASC 842 Leases.
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 61
Other Expense, Net
** Not meaningful
Interest income of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased, as compared to $2.5 million in the same period in 2019, primarily due to significant decline in interest rates earned on cash balances, partially offset by a higher average cash balance earning interest in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 and approximately $0.6 million accrued interest on refunds for tariffs previously paid from September 24, 2018 to March 31, 2020 for certain microinverters that qualify for the Tariff Exclusion.
Interest expense of $21.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily includes $20.2 million related to the accretion of the debt discount and debt issuance cost as well as coupon interest incurred associated with our Notes due 2024 and Notes due 2025, $0.5 million of interest expense related to long-term financing receivable recorded as debt and interest expense of $0.2 million related to coupon interest incurred and amortization of debt issuance costs associated with our Notes due 2023. Interest expense of $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily includes $4.6 million related to the coupon interest incurred, debt discount and amortization of debt issuance costs with our Notes due 2024, interest expense of $2.7 million related to the repayment of our term loan, interest expense of $1.5 million related to coupon interest incurred and amortization of debt issuance costs associated with Notes due 2023, and $0.9 million of interest expense related to long-term financing receivable recorded as debt.
Other expense, net of $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to $3.0 million non-cash loss on settlement of $43.9 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes due 2024 and $0.5 million net loss related to foreign currency exchange and remeasurement. Other expense, net of $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily relates to the $6.0 million fees paid for the repurchase and exchange of our Notes due 2023, partially offset by $0.6 million net gain related to foreign currency exchange and remeasurement.
Change in fair value of derivatives of $44.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily includes the charge recognized for the change in fair value of our convertible notes embedded derivative and warrants of $47.6 million and $24.7 million, respectively. This charge is partially offset by a gain recognized for the change in fair value of our convertible notes hedge of $28.0 million. See Note 11, “Debt,” of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Income Tax Benefit (Provision)
The income tax benefit of $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased compared to the income tax benefit of $71.0 million in 2019, primarily due to the valuation allowance release for the year ended December 31, 2019, partially offset by excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation tax deduction for year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 15. “Income Taxes,” of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 62
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, we had $399.0 million in working capital, including cash and cash equivalents of $679.4 million, of which approximately $659.2 million were held in the U.S. Our cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of U.S. government money market mutual funds and both interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing deposits, with the remainder held in various foreign subsidiaries. We consider amounts held outside the U.S. to be accessible and have provided for the estimated U.S. income tax liability associated with our foreign earnings. However, our liquidity may be negatively impacted if sales decline significantly for an extended period due to the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. While we have experienced delays in collections from certain customers due to COVID-19, we believe we will be able to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months. Further, the extent to which the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and our precautionary measures in response thereto impact our business and liquidity will depend on future developments, which are uncertain and cannot be precisely predicted at this time.
Convertible Notes
Notes due 2023. As of December 31, 2020, we had $5.0 million aggregate principal amount of our Notes due 2023 outstanding. The Notes due 2023 are general unsecured obligations and bear interest at a rate of 4.00% per year, payable semi-annually on February 1 and August 1 of each year. The Notes due 2023 will mature on August 1, 2023, unless earlier repurchased by us or converted at the option of the holders.
Notes due 2024. As of December 31, 2020, we had $88.1 million aggregate principal amount of our Notes due 2024 outstanding. The Notes due 2024 are general unsecured obligations and bear interest at a rate of 1.0% per year, payable semi-annually on June 1 and December 1 of each year. The Notes due 2024 will mature on June 1, 2024, unless earlier repurchased by us or converted at the option of the holders at a conversion price of $20.50 per share.
The Notes due 2024 may be converted on any day prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding December 1, 2023, in multiples of $1,000 principal amount, at the option of the holder only under any of the following circumstances: (1) during any calendar quarter commencing after the calendar quarter ending on September 30, 2019 (and only during such calendar quarter), if the last reported sale price of the our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter is greater than or equal to $26.6513 (130% of the conversion price) on each applicable trading day; (2) during the five business day period after any five consecutive trading day period (the “measurement period”) in which the “trading price” (as defined in the relevant indenture) per $1,000 principal amount of notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of the our common stock and the conversion rate on each such trading day; or (3) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events. Upon conversion of any of the notes, we will pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of common stock or a combination of cash and common stock, at our election.
From April 1, 2020 through March 31, 2021, the Notes due 2024 may be converted because the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on March 31, 2020, June, 30, 2020, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020 was greater than or equal to $26.6513 on each applicable trading day. Upon conversion of any of the notes, we will pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of common stock or a combination of cash and common stock, at our election.
In connection with the offering of the Notes due 2024, we entered into privately-negotiated convertible note hedge transactions in order to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of the Notes due 2024. Also, concurrently with the offering of the Notes due 2024, we entered into privately-negotiated warrant transactions whereby we issued warrants to effectively increase the overall conversion price of Notes due 2024 from $20.5010 to $25.2320.
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 63
From January 1, 2021 through February 12, 2021, we’ve received the request for conversion of approximately $61.5 million in principal amount of our Notes due 2024, of which we have elected to settle the aggregate principal amount of the Notes due 2024 in a combination of cash and any excess in shares of our common stock in accordance with the applicable indenture. Such conversion will be settled in March 2021. We may purchase shares under the convertible note hedge to the extent shares of our common stock are issued for the additional conversion amount due over the principal amount. From January 1, 2021 through February 12, 2021, we had not purchased any shares under the convertible note hedge and the warrants had not been exercised and remain outstanding. If we receive additional request for conversion from the holders of the Notes due 2024 to exercise their right to convert the debt to equity, we have asserted our intent and ability to settle the remaining $26.6 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes due 2024 in cash.
Notes due 2025. As of December 31, 2020, we had $320.0 million aggregate principal amount of our Notes due 2025 outstanding. The Notes due 2025 are general unsecured obligations and bear interest at a rate of 0.25% per year, payable semi-annually on March 1 and September 1 of each year, beginning on September 1, 2020. The Notes due 2025 will mature on March 1, 2025, unless earlier repurchased by us or converted at the option of the holders at a conversion price of $81.54 per share.
The Notes due 2025 may be converted on any day prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding September 1, 2024, in multiples of $1,000 principal amount, at the option of the holder only under any of the following circumstances: (1) during any calendar quarter commencing after the calendar quarter ending on June 30, 2020 (and only during such calendar quarter), if the last reported sale price of the our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter is greater than or equal to $106.00 (130% of the conversion price) on each applicable trading day; (2) during the five business day period after any five consecutive trading day period (the “measurement period”) in which the “trading price” (as defined in the relevant indenture) per $1,000 principal amount of notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of the our common stock and the conversion rate on each such trading day; or (3) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events. On and after September 1, 2024 until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date of March 1, 2025, holders may convert their notes at any time, regardless of the foregoing circumstances. Upon the occurrence of a fundamental change (as defined in the relevant indenture), holders may require the Company to repurchase all or a portion of their Notes due 2025 for cash at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be repurchased plus any accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date.
From January 1, 2021 through March 31, 2021, the Notes due 2025 may be converted because the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on December 31, 2020 was greater than or equal to $106.00 on each applicable trading day. Upon conversion of any of the notes, we will pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of common stock or a combination of cash and common stock, at our election.
In connection with the offering of the Notes due 2025, we entered into privately-negotiated convertible note hedge transactions in order to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of the Notes due 2025. The total cost of the convertible note hedge transactions was approximately $89.1 million. Also, concurrently with the offering of the Notes due 2025, we entered into privately-negotiated warrant transactions whereby we issued warrants to acquire shares of our common stock at a strike price of $106.94 rather than the Notes due 2025 conversion price of $81.54. We received approximately $71.6 million from the sale of the warrants.
As of February 12, 2021, the Notes due 2025 were not converted into equity, therefore, we had not purchased any shares under the convertible note hedge and the warrants had not been exercised and remain outstanding. If holders of the Notes due 2025 are able to convert the debt to equity, and exercise that right, we have asserted our intent and ability to settle the $320.0 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes due 2025 in cash.
Cash from operations could be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the effects of COVID-19 and other risks detailed in the ‘risk factor’ section in Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that our cash flow from operations with existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced products, the costs to acquire or invest in complementary businesses and technologies, the costs to ensure access to adequate manufacturing capacity, the continuing market acceptance of our products and
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 64
macroeconomic events such as the impacts from COVID-19. We may also choose to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results, and financial condition may be adversely affected.
Stock Repurchase Program
In April 2020, our board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to $200.0 million of our common stock, exclusive of brokerage commissions. Purchases will be completed from time to time in the open market or through structured repurchase agreements with third parties. Such purchases are expected to continue through March 2022 unless otherwise extended or shortened by our board of directors. The timing and amount of repurchases will depend on a variety of factors, including the price of our common stock compared to the intrinsic value, alternative investment opportunities, corporate and regulatory requirements and market conditions. As of December 31, 2020, we have not repurchased any shares under this repurchase program.
Cash Flows. The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities consist of our net income adjusted for certain non-cash reconciling items, such as stock-based compensation expense, change in the fair value of derivatives, deferred income tax benefit, loss on conversion of Notes due 2024, depreciation and amortization, and changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $77.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in our gross profit as a result of increased revenue, $24.8 million cash received of the total tariff refund request of $39.5 million, partially offset by higher operating expenses as we continue to invest in the long-term growth of our business and also by $3.1 million cash repayment deemed as an amount paid for settlement of $43.9 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes due 2024 accreted debt discount. For more detail on tariff refund request, refer Note 12. “Contingencies” in “Commitments and Contingencies,” of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020 net cash used in investing activities was primarily from $20.6 million used in purchases of test and assembly equipment to expand our supply capacity, related facility improvements and information technology enhancements, and capitalized costs related to internal-use software and $5.0 million payment related to the acquisition of equity investment in a private company.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was primarily used in purchases of test and assembly equipment to expand our supply capacity, related facility improvements and information technology enhancements, and capitalized costs related to internal-use software.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities of $191.7 million was primarily from $312.4 million net proceeds from the issuance of our Notes due 2025, $71.6 million from sale of warrants related to our Notes due 2025, $8.4 million net proceeds from employee stock option exercises and issuance of common stock under our employee stock incentive program, partially offset by $89.1 million purchase of convertible note bond hedge related to our Notes due 2025, $68.3 million payment of employee withholding taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards, $40.7 million settlement of $43.9 million in aggregate principal amount of the Notes due 2024 and $2.6 million of repayment on sale of long-term financing receivables.
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 65
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities of $65.9 million was primarily from $127.4 million net proceeds from the issuance of our Notes due 2024, $29.8 million from sale of warrants, $5.0 million net proceeds from employee stock option exercises and issuance of common stock under our employee stock incentive program, partially offset by $45.9 million repayment of our term loan and long-term financing receivable recorded as debt, $36.3 million purchase of bond hedges related to our Notes due 2024, $6.0 million fee paid to repurchase and exchange $60.0 million of Notes due 2023 and $8.2 million payment of employee withholding taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our outstanding contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Reflects the request for conversion of approximately $61.5 million in principal amount of our Notes due 2024 received through issuance of the financial statements on February 12, 2021, of which we have elected to settle the aggregate principal amount of the Notes due 2024 in a combination of cash and any excess in shares of our common stock in accordance with the applicable indenture. Such conversion will be settled in March 2021.
(2)Purchase obligations include amounts related to component inventory that our primary contract manufacturers procure on our behalf in accordance with our production forecast as well as other inventory related purchase commitments. The timing of purchases in future periods could differ materially from estimates presented above due to fluctuations in demand requirements related to varying sales levels as well as changes in economic conditions.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related notes requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
We have based our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates due to risks and uncertainties, including uncertainty in the current economic environment due to the global impact of COVID-19. As of the date of issuance of these financial statements, we are not aware of any specific event or circumstance that would require us to update our estimates, judgments or revise the carrying value of our assets or liabilities. For a description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2. “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the consolidated financial statements. We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 66
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from sales of our solutions, which include microinverter units and related accessories, an Envoy communications gateway, the cloud-based Enlighten monitoring service, and storage solutions to distributors, large installers, OEMs and strategic partners.
On January 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) No. 606, “Revenue Recognition” (“ASC 606” or “Topic 606”) and applied the modified retrospective method to all contracts that were not completed as of January 1, 2018. The most significant impacts upon adoption of Topic 606 were how we account for revenue related to our Envoy communications device and related Enlighten service and the timing of when certain sales incentives are recognized. The full consideration for these products represents a single performance obligation and is deferred and recognized over the estimated service period.
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services are transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that is expected to be received in exchange for those goods or services. We generate all of our revenues from contracts with our customers. A description of principal activities from which we generate revenues are as follows.
•Products Delivered at a Point in Time. We sell our products to customers in accordance with the terms of the related customer contracts. We generate revenues from sales of our solutions, which include microinverter units and related accessories, an Envoy communications gateway and Enlighten service, communications accessories and storage solutions to distributors, large installers, OEMs and strategic partners. Microinverter units, microinverter accessories, and storage solutions are delivered to customers at a point in time, and we recognize revenue for these products when we transfer control of the product to the customer, which is generally upon shipment.
•Products Delivered Over Time. The sale of an Envoy communications gateway includes our Enlighten cloud-based monitoring service. The full consideration for these products represents a single performance obligation and is deferred at the sale date and recognized over the estimated service period of 6 years. We also sell certain communication accessories that contain a service performance obligation to be delivered over time. The revenue from these products is recognized over the related service period, which is typically 5 or 12 years.
When we sell a product with more than one performance obligation, such as our IQ Combiner which includes both hardware and Envoy, the total consideration is allocated to these performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices. We previously sold Envoy communications device to certain customers under a long-term financing arrangement. Under this financing arrangement, we net the unbilled receivables against deferred revenue.
We record certain contra revenue promotions as variable consideration and recognizes these promotions at the time the related revenue is recorded.
We record upfront contract acquisition costs, such as sales commissions, to be capitalized and amortized over the estimated life of the asset. For contracts that have a duration of less than one year, we follow the Topic 606 practical expedient and expense these costs when incurred. Commissions related to our sale of monitoring hardware and service are capitalized and amortized over the period of the associated revenue.
See Note 3. “Revenue Recognition,” of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to revenue recognition.
Inventory
Inventory is valued at the lower of cost or market. Market is current replacement cost (by purchase or by reproduction, dependent on the type of inventory). In cases where market exceeds net realizable value (i.e., estimated selling price less reasonably predictable costs of completion and disposal), inventories are stated at net realizable value. Market is not considered to be less than net realizable value reduced by an allowance for an approximately normal profit margin. We determine cost on a first-in first-out basis. Certain factors could affect the realizable value of its inventory, including customer demand and market conditions. Management assesses the valuation on a quarterly basis and writes down the value for any excess and obsolete inventory based upon expected demand, anticipated sales price, effect of new product introductions, product obsolescence, customer concentrations, product merchantability and other factors. Inventory write-downs are equal to the difference between the cost of inventories and market.
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 67
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of a financial instrument is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The carrying amounts of our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash, accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued liabilities approximate fair value because of the short maturity of those instruments. Equity investments with readily determinable fair value are carried at fair value based on quoted market prices or estimated based on market conditions and risks existing at each balance sheet date. Equity investments without readily determinable fair value are measured at cost less impairment, and are adjusted for observable price changes in orderly transactions for an identical or similar investment of the same issuer.
Convertible Note Derivatives
In March 2020, we issued $320 million aggregate principal amount of 0.25% convertible notes due 2025. Concurrently with the issuance of Notes due 2025, we entered into privately-negotiated convertible note hedge and warrant transactions which in combination are intended to reduce the potential dilution from the conversion of the Notes due 2025. We could not elect to issue the shares of common stock upon settlement of Notes due 2025 or convertible note hedge or warrant transactions due to insufficient authorized share capital. As a result, the embedded conversion option and warrants were accounted for as a derivative liabilities and convertible notes hedge as derivative asset and a gain (or loss) was reported in other expense, net in our consolidated statement of operations to the extent the valuation changed from the date of issuance of Notes due 2025. On May 20, 2020, at our annual meeting of stockholders, the stockholders approved an amendment to its certificate of incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of the our common stock. As a result, we are now be able to settle the Notes due 2025, convertible notes hedge and warrants through payment or delivery, as the case may be, of cash, shares of its common stock or a combination thereof, at our election. Accordingly, on May 20, 2020, the embedded derivative liability, convertible notes hedge and warrants liability were remeasured at a fair value and were then reclassified to additional paid-in-capital in our condensed consolidated balance sheet in the second quarter of 2020 and are no longer remeasured as long as they continue to meet the conditions for equity classification. As of December 31, 2020, we do not have any convertible note derivatives. Note 8. “Debt” of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Warranty Obligations
Microinverters and Other Products Sold Through December 31, 2013
Our warranty accrual provides for the replacement of microinverter units or other products that fail during the product’s warranty term (15 years for first and second generation microinverters and up to 25 years for subsequent generation microinverters). On a quarterly basis, we employ a consistent, systematic and rational methodology to assess the adequacy of our warranty liability. This assessment includes updating all key estimates and assumptions for each generation of product, based on historical results, trends and the most current data available as of the filing date. The key estimates and assumptions used in the warranty liability are thoroughly reviewed by management on a quarterly basis. The key estimates used by us to estimate our warranty liability are: (1) the number of units expected to fail over time (i.e., failure rate); (2) the number of failed units expected to result in warranty claims over time (i.e., claim rate); and (3) the per unit cost of replacement units, including outbound shipping and limited labor costs, expected to be incurred to replace failed units over time (i.e., replacement cost).
Estimated Failure Rates - Our Quality and Reliability department has primary responsibility to determine the estimated failure rates for each generation of microinverter. To establish initial failure rate estimates for each generation of microinverter, our quality engineers use a combination of industry standard Mean Time Between Failure (“MTFB”) estimates for individual components contained in that generation of microinverters, third party data collected on similar equipment deployed in outdoor environments similar to those in which our microinverters are installed, and rigorous long term reliability and accelerated life cycle testing which simulates the service life of the microinverter in a short period of time. As units are deployed into operating environments, we continue to monitor product performance through our Enlighten monitoring platform. It typically takes three to nine months between the date of sale and date of end-user installation. Consequently, our ability to monitor actual failures of units sold similarly lags by three to nine months. When a microinverter fails and is returned, we perform diagnostic root cause failure analysis to understand and isolate the underlying mechanism(s) causing the failure. We then use the results of this analysis (combined with the actual, cumulative performance data collected on those units prior to failure through Enlighten) to draw conclusions with respect to how or if the identified failure mechanism(s) will impact the remaining units deployed in the installed base.
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 68
Estimated Claim Rates - Warranty claim rate estimates are based upon observed historical trends and assumptions with respect to expected customer behavior over the warranty period. As the vast majority of our microinverters have been sold to end users for residential applications, we believe that warranty claim rates will be affected by changes over time in residential home ownership because we expect that subsequent homeowners are less likely to file claims than the homeowners who originally purchase the microinverters.
Estimated Replacement Costs - Three factors are considered in our analysis of estimated replacement cost: (1) the estimated cost of replacement microinverters; (2) the estimated cost to ship replacement microinverters to end users; and (3) the estimated labor reimbursement expected to be paid to third party installers performing replacement services for the end user. Because our warranty provides for the replacement of defective microinverters over long periods of time (typically between 15 and 25 years, depending on the generation of product purchased), the estimated per unit cost of current and future product generations is considered in the estimated replacement cost. Estimated costs to ship replacement units are based on observable, market-based shipping costs paid by us to third party freight carriers. We have a separate program that allows third-party installers to claim fixed-dollar reimbursements for labor costs they incur to replace failed microinverter units for a limited time from the date of original installation. Included in our estimated replacement cost is an analysis of the number of fixed-dollar labor reimbursements expected to be claimed by third party installers over the limited offering period.
In addition to the key estimates noted above, we also compare actual warranty results to expected results and evaluate any significant differences. We may make additional adjustments to the warranty provision based on performance trends or other qualitative factors. If actual failure rates, claim rates, or replacement costs differ from our estimates in future periods, changes to these estimates may be required, resulting in increases or decreases in our warranty obligations. Such increases or decreases could be material.
Fair Value Option for Microinverters and Other Products Sold Since January 1, 2014
Our warranty obligations related to microinverters sold since January 1, 2014 provide us the right, but not the requirement, to assign our warranty obligations to a third-party. Under ASC 825, “Financial Instruments” (also referred to as the “fair value option”), an entity may choose to elect the fair value option for such warranties at the time it first recognizes the eligible item. We made an irrevocable election to account for all eligible warranty obligations associated with microinverters sold since January 1, 2014 at fair value. This election was made to reflect the underlying economics of the time value of money for an obligation that will be settled over an extended period of up to 25 years.
We estimate the fair value of warranty obligations by calculating the warranty obligations in the same manner as for sales prior to January 1, 2014 and applying an expected present value technique to that result. The expected present value technique, an income approach, converts future amounts into a single current discounted amount. In addition to the key estimates of failure rates, claim rates and replacement costs, we used certain inputs that are unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement. Such additional assumptions included compensation comprised of a profit element and risk premium required of a market participant to assume the obligation and a discount rate based on our credit-adjusted risk-free rate. See Note 9. “Fair Value Measurements,” of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Commitments and Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we are subject to loss contingencies and loss recoveries, such as legal proceedings and claims arising out of our business as well as tariff refunds. An accrual for a loss contingency or loss recovery is recognized when it is probable and the amount of loss or recovery can be reasonably estimated. See Note 12. “Commitments and Contingencies,” of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Enphase Energy, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 69
Business Combinations
Assets acquired and liabilities assumed as part of a business acquisition are generally recorded at their fair value at the date of acquisition. The excess of purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Determining fair value of identifiable assets, particularly intangibles, and liabilities acquired also requires the Company to make estimates, which are based on all available information and in some cases assumptions with respect to the timing and amount of future revenues and expenses associated with an asset. Accounting for business acquisitions requires the Company to make judgments as to whether a purchase transaction is a multiple element contract, meaning that it includes other transaction components. This judgment and determination affect the amount of consideration paid that is allocable to assets and liabilities acquired in the business purchase transaction.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets include patents and other purchased intangible assets. Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized on a straight-line basis, with estimated useful lives ranging from 3 to 9 years. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually and are also tested for impairment between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired. Intangible assets with finite lives are tested for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset (asset group) may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying amount of an asset exceeds the estimated undiscounted cash flows used in determining the fair value of the asset. The amount of the impairment loss to be recorded is calculated by the excess of the asset’s carrying value over its fair value. Fair value is generally determined using a discounted cash flow analysis. There was no impairment of intangible assets in any of the years presented.
Income Taxes
We record income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and amounts recognized for income tax purposes. In estimating future tax consequences, generally all expected future events other than enactments or changes in the tax law or rates are considered. Valuation allowances are provided when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
We assess the realizability of the deferred tax assets to determine release of valuation allowance as necessary. In the event we determine that it is more likely than not that we would be able to realize deferred tax assets in the future in excess of our net recorded amount, an adjustment to the valuation allowance for the deferred tax asset would increase income in the period such determination was made. Likewise, should it be determined that additional amounts of the net deferred tax asset will not be realized in the future, an adjustment to increase the deferred tax asset valuation allowance will be charged to income in the period such determination is made.
We operate in various tax jurisdictions and is subject to audit by various tax authorities. We follow accounting for uncertainty in income taxes which requires that the tax effects of a position be recognized only if it is “more likely than not” to be sustained based solely on its technical merits as of the reporting date. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating its tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and which may not accurately anticipate actual outcomes.