ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion provides information regarding the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and our financial condition, liquidity and capital resources as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our historical consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which contain further detailed information, as well as the Risk Factors and the Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements included above.
OVERVIEW
The Company, through its subsidiary, Heat Waves Hot Oil Service, LLC ("Heat Waves"), provides a range of oil field services to the domestic onshore oil and gas industry through two segments: 1) Production services, which include hot oiling and acidizing, and 2) Completion and other services, which includes frac water heating. The Company owns and operates a fleet of approximately 338 specialized trucks, trailers, frac tanks and other well-site related equipment and serves customers in several major domestic oil and gas areas, including the DJ Basin/Niobrara area in Colorado and Wyoming, the Bakken area in North Dakota, the San Juan Basin in northwestern New Mexico, the Marcellus and Utica Shale areas in Pennsylvania and Ohio, the Jonah area, Green River and Powder River Basins in Wyoming and the Eagle Ford Shale in Texas.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Summary
Revenues for 2020 decreased by approximately $27.3 million, or 64%, from the comparable period last year due to weakness in domestic oil and gas activity levels driven by lower commodity prices, related pricing pressures, the broader impact of the OPEC+ supply cuts and the COVID-19 pandemic which began in March 2020, as well as above average temperatures in Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, and eastern Ohio during our busy season in the first quarter of 2020.
Segment profits for 2020 decreased by approximately $9.9 million or 118%, to a loss of approximately $1.5 million from a profit of approximately $8.4 million in 2019 due to the reasons noted above. Selling, general, & administrative expenses, excluding severance and transition costs and acquisition-related expenses, decreased by approximately $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, due primarily to the implementation of several cost-cutting initiatives in response to the negative impacts to our business and revenues relating to the COVID-19 pandemic and decreases in oil prices, partially offset by the impact of approximately $301,000 of severance compensation due to the acceleration of vesting and additional restricted stock awards in connection with a separation agreement with the Company's former CEO during the second quarter of 2020. In 2020, the resignations of corporate staff, including our former Chief Executive Officer, resulted in severance and transition costs of approximately $145,000. In 2019, the resignation of our Chief Financial Officer resulted in severance and transition costs of approximately $83,000. Interest expense for 2020 decreased by approximately $1.1 million primarily due to the cessation of recording interest expense after the troubled debt restructuring of our Credit Facility during the third quarter of 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred a net loss of approximately $2.5 million, or $0.60 per share, compared to a net loss of $7.7 million, or $2.06 per share, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $5.2 million improvement in the net loss was primarily due to an $11.9 million gain on restructuring of the Credit Facility and the decrease in interest expense, partially offset by the decrease in segment profits.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a loss of approximately $5.7 million compared to approximately $2.8 million in earnings during 2019. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP number, and for a reconciliation to GAAP, see "Adjusted EBITDA" below.
Industry Overview
During 2020, West Texas Intermediate ("WTI") crude oil price averaged approximately $39.68 per barrel, versus an average of approximately $56.05 per barrel in 2019. The North American rig count declined to 351 rigs in operation as of December 31, 2020, compared to 805 rigs in operation at the same time a year ago. Despite the lower oil price environment and reduced rig count, we have grown our customer base and allocated resources to the most active basins. We are focused on increasing utilization levels and optimizing the deployment of our equipment and workforce while maintaining high standards for service quality and safe operations. We compete on the basis of the quality, breadth of our service offerings, and price.
The United States operational rig count bottomed out at approximately 244 in the fall of 2020 and increased to approximately 351 as of December 31, 2020 compared to approximately 805 as of December 31, 2019, which translated into decreased activity for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019.
Beginning in early March of 2020, the market experienced a precipitous decline in oil prices in response to oil demand concerns due to the economic impacts of the COVID-19 virus and anticipated increases in supply from Russia and OPEC, particularly Saudi Arabia. We expect that our customers will reduce activity during this period of commodity price weakness and will also seek price reductions for our services.
Segment Overview
Enservco’s reportable business segments are Production Services and Completion and Other Services. These segments have been selected based on management’s resource allocation and performance assessment in making decisions regarding the Company.
The following is a description of the segments.
Production Services: This segment utilizes a fleet of hot oil trucks and acidizing units to provide maintenance services to the domestic oil and gas industry. These services include hot oil services and acidizing services.
Completion and Other Services: This segment utilizes a fleet of frac water heating units to provide frac water heating services and related support services to the domestic oil and gas industry. These services also include other services, which consists primarily of hauling and transport of materials for customers.
Unallocated and other includes general overhead expenses and assets associated with managing all reportable operating segments which have not been allocated to a specific segment.
Segment Results
The following tables set forth revenue from operations and segment profits for our business segments for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Production Services:
For 2020, production service revenue decreased by approximately $7.0 million, or 48%, to $7.7 million. This decrease was primarily attributable to decreased activity levels related to an industry-wide downturn, which was the result of lower commodity prices and the impacts of COVID-19.
Hot oil revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $5.2 million, or 42%, to $7.3 million compared to $12.4 million in 2019. These year-over-year declines were primarily driven by reduced activity due to the industry-wide downturn.
Acidizing revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $1.8 million, or 80%, to $444,000 compared to $2.3 million in 2019. These year-over-year declines were primarily due to the industry-side downturn discussed above. The Company continues to pursue customers and partner with chemical suppliers to develop new cost-effective acid programs in seeking to expand our acidizing services across our service areas.
Segment profits for our Production services decreased $1.8 million, or 162%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by reduced activity due to the industry-wide downturn discussed above.
Completion and Other Services:
Completion and other revenues, which consisted primarily of frac water heating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased 72% to $8.0 million compared to $28.3 million in 2019 primarily due to the aforementioned industry-wide downturn, as well as above average temperatures in Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, and Eastern Ohio in the first quarter of 2020.
Segment profits for our Completion and other services decreased $8.1 million, or 111%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by reduced activity due to the industry-wide downturn discussed above.
Geographic Areas:
The Company operates in three geographically diverse regions of the United States. The following table sets forth revenue from operations for the Company’s three geographic regions during the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Notes to tables:
(1)
Includes the D-J Basin/Niobrara field (northeastern Colorado and southeastern Wyoming), the San Juan Basin (southeastern Colorado and Northeastern New Mexico), the Powder River and Green River Basins (northeastern and southwestern Wyoming), the Bakken area (western North Dakota and eastern Montana).
(2)
Includes the Scoop/Stack Shale in Oklahoma during 2019 and the first quarter of 2020, and the Eagle Ford Shale in Southern Texas.
(3)
Consists of the southern region of the Marcellus Shale formation (southwestern Pennsylvania and northern West Virginia) and the Utica Shale formation (eastern Ohio).
Production segment revenue in the Rocky Mountain Region decreased $3.8 million, or 59%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year primarily due to a decrease in acidizing and hot oiling activity in the D-J Basin and a decrease in hot oiling activity in the Bakken Basin. Completion and other segment revenues in the Rocky Mountain Region decreased by approximately $14.9 million, or 69%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 due to a decline in frac heating activity and demand for our services.
Production segment revenues in the Central USA region decreased approximately $2.9 million, or 39%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to less acidizing and hot oiling activity in the Eagle Ford Shale. Completion and other segment revenues in the Central USA region decreased by $3.1 million, or 97%, due to a decline in frac heating activity, above average temperatures in Oklahoma in the first quarter of 2020, and the closure of a facility.
Production segment revenues in the Eastern USA region $267,000, or 36%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to decreased hot oiling activity levels in the Marcellus and Utica Basins. Completion and other segment revenue in the Eastern USA region decreased by approximately $2.3 million, or 65%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year resulting from a decline in frac heating activity in addition to above average temperatures in Pennsylvania and eastern Ohio during the first quarter of 2020.
Historical Seasonality of Revenues
Because of the seasonality of our frac water heating business and, to a lesser extent, our hot oiling business, revenues generated during the cooler first and fourth quarters of our fiscal year, constitute our “heating season,” and are typically significantly higher than revenues during the second and third quarters of our fiscal year. In addition, the revenue mix of our service offerings changes outside our heating season as our Completion and other services (which includes frac water heating) typically decrease as a percentage of total revenues and our Production services increase as a percentage of total revenue. Thus, the revenues recognized in our quarterly financial statements in any given period are not indicative of the annual or quarterly revenues through the remainder of that fiscal year.
As an indication of this quarter-to-quarter seasonality, the Company generated revenues of $11.8 million, or 75%, of its 2020 revenues during the first and fourth quarters of 2020 compared to $3.9 million, or 25%, of 2020 revenues during the second and third quarters of 2020. In 2019, the Company generated revenues of $32.9 million, or 76%, of its 2019 revenues during the first and fourth quarters of 2019 compared to $10.1 million, or 24%, of 2019 revenues during the second and third quarters of 2019.
Direct Operating Expenses
Direct operating expenses, which include labor costs, propane, fuel, chemicals, truck repairs and maintenance, supplies, insurance, short-term rental costs and site overhead costs for our operating segments decreased by approximately $17.4 million or 50% during 2020 compared to 2019, resulting primarily from the decrease in revenue discussed above, partially offset by cost-cutting measures enacted by management and efficiencies from the consolidation of Adler operations into Heat Waves.
Sales, General and Administrative Expenses
Sales, general and administrative expenses decreased approximately $1.2 million, or 19%, to $5.0 million in 2020 compared to $6.2 million in 2019 primarily due to cost-cutting measures enacted by management which resulted in a decrease in payroll costs as a direct result of the reduction in the size of our management team and a decrease in general office expenses, partially offset by an increase in professional fees related to additional legal and accounting fees related to the refinance and restructuring of our Credit Facility as well as an increase in stock compensation expenses in connection with the resignation of our former Chief Executive Officer.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased approximately $410,000, or 7%, from 2019 primarily due to the disposal of assets.
Severance and Transition Costs
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized severance and transitions costs of approximately $145,000, primarily related to the departure of personnel including its former Chief Executive Officer. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized costs of approximately $83,000 related to the departure of its former Chief Financial Officer. As discussed above, the Company also recorded $301,000 in stock compensation expense during the second quarter of 2020 in connection with the separation agreement with our former Chief Executive Officer, which is included in sales, general and administrative expenses.
Loss from Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized a loss from operations of $12.7 million compared to a loss of $3.6 million for 2019. The increased loss of $9.1 million was primarily due to the industry-wide downturn described above, partially offset by cost-cutting measures enacted by management.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased approximately $1.1 million, or 40%, from 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the cessation of recording interest expense after the troubled debt restructuring of our Credit Facility during the third quarter of 2020.
Discontinued Operations
Loss from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $107,000, compared to a loss from discontinued operations of approximately $2.3 million, or a 95% improvement compared to 2019. Income from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a gain on disposal of equipment of approximately $71,000.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had recorded a full valuation allowance on a net deferred tax asset of $4.8 million. Our income tax provision of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, reduced the gross amount of the deferred tax asset and we reduced the valuation allowance by a like amount, which resulted in a net tax expense of approximately $12,000 in 2020, compared to $32,000 in 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA*
Management believes that, for the reasons set forth below, Adjusted EBITDA (a non-GAAP measure) is a valuable measurement of the Company's liquidity and performance and is consistent with the measurements offered by other companies in Enservco's industry.
The following table presents a reconciliation of our net income to Adjusted EBITDA for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
*Note: See below for discussion of the use of non-GAAP financial measurements.
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures: Non-GAAP results are presented only as a supplement to the financial statements and for use within management’s discussion and analysis based on U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The non-GAAP financial information is provided to enhance the reader's understanding of the Company’s financial performance, but no non-GAAP measure should be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Reconciliations of the most directly comparable GAAP measures to non-GAAP measures are provided herein.
EBITDA is defined as net income, before interest expense, income taxes, and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA excludes noncash stock-based compensation from EBITDA and, when appropriate, other items that management does not utilize in assessing the Company’s ongoing operating performance as set forth in the next paragraph. None of these non-GAAP financial measures are recognized terms under GAAP and do not purport to be an alternative to net income as an indicator of operating performance or any other GAAP measure.
All of the items included in the reconciliation from net income to EBITDA and from EBITDA to Adjusted EBITDA are either (i) non-cash items (e.g., depreciation, amortization of purchased intangibles, stock-based compensation, impairment losses, etc.) or (ii) items that management does not consider to be useful in assessing the Company’s ongoing operating performance (e.g., income taxes, gain or losses on sale of equipment, acquisition-related expenses, patent litigation and defense costs, severance and transition costs, the gain on settlement as discussed in Note 4 of the accompanying Notes to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, impairment loss, one-time software expenses, the expenses to consolidate former Adler facilities, other expense (income), EBITDA related to discontinued operations, etc.). In the case of the non-cash items, management believes that investors can better assess the company’s operating performance if the measures are presented without such items because, unlike cash expenses, these adjustments do not affect the Company’s ability to generate free cash flow or invest in its business.
We use, and we believe investors benefit from the presentation of, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in evaluating our operating performance because it provides us and our investors with an additional tool to compare our operating performance on a consistent basis by removing the impact of certain items that management believes do not directly reflect our core operations. We believe that EBITDA is useful to investors and other external users of our financial statements in evaluating our operating performance because EBITDA is widely used by investors to measure a company’s operating performance without regard to items such as interest expense, taxes, and depreciation and amortization, which can vary substantially from company to company depending upon accounting methods and book value of assets, capital structure and the method by which assets were acquired.
Because not all companies use identical calculations, the Company’s presentation of non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. However, these measures can still be useful in evaluating the Company’s performance against its peer companies because management believes the measures provide users with valuable insight into key components of GAAP financial disclosures.
Changes in Adjusted EBITDA*
Adjusted EBITDA from operations declined by approximately $8.5 million to a loss of $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to adjusted EBITDA of $2.8 million for 2019, primarily due the decline in segment profits described above, the $11.9 million reduction for the non-cash gain on the restructuring of our Credit Facility and the decreases in interest expense and depreciation and amortization as discussed above.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The following table summarizes our statements of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and (combined with the working capital table and discussion below) is important for understanding our liquidity (amounts in thousands):
The following table sets forth a summary of certain aspects of our balance sheet at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Overview
We have accomplished several capitalization initiatives in the past year that have positioned us into a much more favorable liquidity situation. We successfully completed two equity offerings during late 2020 and early 2021 that provided net proceeds of $12.5 million. Additionally, we entered into two amendments during the in late third quarter 2020 and the first quarter of 2021 that provided us with significant relief under our Credit Facility, including a $16.0 million principal reduction, and two extensions of the debt which now matures on October 15, 2022. Upon closing on our second equity offering, which closed on February 11, 2021, we made a $3.0 million principal payment on our Credit Facility.
We have relied on cash flow from operations and borrowings under the $1.0 million line of credit under our Credit Facility to satisfy our liquidity needs. Due to the funding from the two equity offerings and the restructuring and further extension of the Credit Facility, we have ample capital resources to fund operational requirements beyond the next twelve months. At December 31, 2020, in addition to cash of $1.5 million, we had $0.3 million available under the Credit Facility. Our capital requirements for 2021 are anticipated to include, but are not limited to, operating expenses, debt servicing, and capital expenditures, including maintenance of our existing fleet of assets. Under our Amended 2017 Credit Agreement, we are restricted to capital expenditures of $1.2 million during 2021.
Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, our available liquidity was $1.8 million which represented $1.5 million in our cash balance and $0.3 million availability on the line of credit under our 2017 Credit Facility. We utilize the line of credit under our 2017 Credit Facility to fund working capital requirements and investments, and during the year ended December 31, 2020, we repaid net cash borrowings from our various lines of credit of approximately $795,000 and additionally received $1.9 million in cash proceeds from the PPP Loan.
Working Capital
As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of approximately $306,000, compared to a working capital deficit of $33.4 million as of December 31, 2019. The $33.7 million increase in working capital was primarily attributable to; 1) the restructuring and subsequent extension of our 2017 Credit Agreement to October 15, 2022; 2) the cure of previous defaults under our 2017 Credit Agreement that allowed us to reclassify our subordinated debt with a shareholder to long-term debt; and 3) an increase in cash and cash equivalents and a decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, partially offset by an decrease in our accounts receivable, net balance as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019.
Deferred Tax Asset, net
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had recorded a valuation allowance to reduce its net deferred tax assets to zero.
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $4.4 million compared to cash provided by operating activities of $4.5 million during 2019. The $8.9 million decrease was primarily due to the decrease in cash flows related to the change in accounts payable balances during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, the non-cash impact on earnings of the gain on restructuring of our Credit Facility, partially offset by the increase in cash provided by the monetization of accounts receivable and the decrease in our net loss.
,
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.0 million compared to cash used in investing activities of $458,000 during 2019. The $1.5 million increase was primarily attributable to the decrease in purchases of property and equipment and increases in proceeds from the sale of assets and insurance settlements.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for year ended December 31, 2020 was $4.2 million compared to cash used in financing activities of $3.6 million for the year ended 2019. The $7.8 million increase was primarily due to net proceeds from stock issuances, proceeds from the PPP Loan and the impact during 2019 of our repayment of the Seller Subordinated Note related to the purchase of Adler.
Outlook
Over the past three years we have invested significantly in process improvement initiatives designed to make the Company operate more efficiently and take better advantage of our expanded fleet and national leadership position in frac water heating. We face a very difficult operating environment in 2021 with exploration and production companies significantly cutting back their drilling and completions plans and exerting significant pressure on us to reduce our prices for the services we provide. In order to position us in a more sustainable liquidity situation, we successfully completed two equity offerings during late 2020 and early 2021 that provided net proceeds of $12.5 million. Additionally, we entered into two amendments during the in late third quarter 2020 and the first quarter of 2021 that provided us with significant relief under our Credit Facility, including a $16.0 million principal reduction, and two extensions of the debt which now matures on October 15, 2022. Upon closing on our second equity offering, which closed on February 11, 2021, we made a $3.0 million principal payment on our Credit Facility. Our business is heavily dependent on exploration and production activity levels, which fluctuate based on commodity prices, capital budgets and other factors. Activity levels significantly declined throughout 2020 due to the depression of , commodity prices and the impacts of COVID-19. We continue to seek opportunities to expand our business operations through organic growth, including increasing the volume of current services offered to our new and existing customers. We will also continue to expand our customer relationships while maintaining an appropriate balance between recurring maintenance work and drilling and completion related services.
Capital Commitments and Obligations
Our capital obligations as of December 31, 2020 consist primarily the 2017 Credit Agreement which matures October 15, 2022. In addition, we also have scheduled principal payments under certain term loans, finance leases and operating leases. General terms and conditions for amounts due under these commitments and obligations are summarized in the notes to the financial statements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make a variety of estimates and assumptions that affect (i) the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, and (ii) the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods covered by the financial statements.
Our management routinely makes judgments and estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. As the number of variables and assumptions affecting the future resolution of the uncertainties increase, these judgments become even more subjective and complex. Although we believe that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable, actual results may differ significantly from these estimates. Changes in estimates and assumptions based upon actual results may have a material impact on our results of operation and/or financial condition. Our significant accounting policies are disclosed in Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
While all of the significant accounting estimates are important to the Company’s financial statements, the following accounting policies and the estimates derived there from have been identified as being critical.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated at the amounts billed to customers, net of an allowance for uncollectible accounts. The Company provides an allowance for uncollectable accounts based on a review of outstanding receivables, historical collection information and existing economic conditions. The allowance for uncollectible amounts is continually reviewed and adjusted to maintain the allowance at a level considered adequate to cover future losses. The allowance is management's best estimate of uncollectible amounts and is determined based on historical collection experience related to accounts receivable coupled with a review of the current status of existing receivables. The losses ultimately incurred could differ materially in the near term from the amounts estimated in determining the allowance.
Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews its long-lived assets, including property and equipment, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recovered. The Company looks primarily to the discounted future cash flows in its assessment of whether or not long-lived assets have been impaired.
Income Taxes
The Company recognizes deferred tax liabilities and assets based on the differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in future years. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities will be recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Deferred income taxes are classified as a net current or non-current asset or liability based on the classification of the related asset or liability for financial reporting purposes. A deferred tax asset or liability that is not related to an asset or liability for financial reporting is classified according to the expected reversal date. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to an amount that it believes is more likely than not expected to be realized.
The Company accounts for any uncertainty in income taxes by recognizing the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The Company measures the tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. The application of income tax law is inherently complex. Laws and regulations in this area are voluminous and are often ambiguous. As such, the Company is required to make many subjective assumptions and judgments regarding income tax exposures. Interpretations of and guidance surrounding income tax law and regulations change over time and may result in changes to the Company’s subjective assumptions and judgments which can materially affect amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheets and consolidated statements of income. The result of the reassessment of the Company’s tax positions did not have an impact on the consolidated financial statements.
Interest and penalties associated with tax positions are recorded in the period assessed as income tax expense. The Company files income tax returns in the United States and in the states in which it conducts its business operations. The Company’s United States federal income tax filings for tax years 2015 through 2019 remain open to examination. In general, the Company’s various state tax filings remain open for tax years 2015 to 2019.
Business Combinations
We utilize the purchase method to account for acquisitions of businesses and assets. The value of the purchase consideration takes into account the degree to which the consideration is objective and measurable such as cash consideration paid to a seller. Pursuant to purchase method accounting, we allocate the cost of the acquisition to assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on fair values as of the acquisition date. The purchase price allocations are based on appraisals, discounted cash flows, quoted market prices and estimates by management.
In estimating the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we make various assumptions. The most significant assumptions relate to the estimated fair values assigned to intangible assets. To estimate the fair values of these assets, we employed the income, market, or a cost approach, as appropriate. The income valuation method represents the present value of future cash flows over the life of the asset using: (i) discrete financial forecasts, which rely on management’s estimates of volumes, commodity prices, revenue and operating expenses; (ii) long-term growth rates; and (iii) appropriate discount rates. The market valuation method uses prices paid for a reasonably similar asset by other purchasers in the market, with adjustments relating to any differences between the assets. The cost valuation method is based on the replacement cost of a comparable asset at prices at the time of the acquisition reduced for depreciation of the asset.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the date of grant, based on the calculated fair value of the award as described below, and is recognized over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the equity grant.
The Company uses the Black-Scholes pricing model as a method for determining the estimated grant date fair value for all stock options awarded to employees, independent contractors, officers, and directors. The expected term of the options is based upon evaluation of historical and expected exercise behavior. The risk-free interest rate is based upon U.S. Treasury rates at the date of grant with maturity dates approximately equal to the expected life of the grant. Volatility is determined upon historical volatility of our stock and adjusted if future volatility is expected to vary from historical experience. The dividend yield is assumed to be none as we have not paid dividends nor do we anticipate paying any dividends in the foreseeable future.
The Company used the market-value of Company stock to determine the fair value of the performance-based restricted stock awards. The fair-value is updated quarterly based on actual forfeitures.
The Company used a Lattice model to determine the fair value of market-based restricted stock awards.