Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read along with the consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and the “Cautionary Statements” section of this Item 7 below. You should review Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Cautionary Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K and the portions of the Company’s Definitive Proxy Statement incorporated by reference in this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain “forward-looking statements.” The words “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “forecast,” “project,” “should,” “may,” “will,” “would” or the negative thereof and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements may include statements about the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operations and markets; future period guidance or projections; the Company’s performance relative to its markets, including the drivers of such performance; market and technology trends, including the duration and drivers of any growth trends and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on such trends; the development of new products and the success of their introductions; the focus of the Company’s engineering, research and development projects; the Company’s ability to execute on its business strategies, including with respect to the Company’s expansion of its manufacturing presence in Taiwan; the Company’s capital allocation strategy, which may be modified at any time for any reason, including share repurchases, dividends, debt repayments and potential acquisitions; the impact of the acquisitions the Company has made and commercial relationships the Company has established; future capital and other expenditures, including estimates thereof; the Company’s expected tax rate; the impact, financial or otherwise, of any organizational changes; the impact of accounting pronouncements; quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk; and other matters. These forward-looking statements are based on current management expectations and assumptions only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, are not guarantees of future performance and involve substantial risks and uncertainties that are difficult to predict and that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results expressed in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the risk factors and additional information described in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the caption “Risk Factors,” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in the Company’s other periodic filings. Except as required under the federal securities laws and the rules and regulations of the SEC, the Company undertakes no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements or information contained herein, which speak as of their respective dates.
Overview
This overview is not a complete discussion of the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations; it is intended merely to facilitate an understanding of the most salient aspects of its financial condition and operating performance and to provide a context for the detailed discussion and analysis that follows, and must be read in its entirety in order to fully understand the Company’s financial condition and results of operations.
The Company is a leading supplier of advanced materials and process solutions for the semiconductor and other high-technology industries. Our mission is to help our customers improve their productivity, performance and technology by providing solutions for the most advanced manufacturing environments. We leverage our unique breadth of capabilities to create mission-critical microcontamination control products, specialty chemicals and advanced materials handling solutions that maximize manufacturing yields, reduce manufacturing costs and enable higher device performance for our customers.
Our customized materials solutions enable the highest levels of performance essential to the manufacture of semiconductors. As our customers introduce more complex architectures and search for new materials with better electrical and structural properties to improve the performance of their devices, they rely on Entegris as a trusted partner to address these challenges. We understand these challenges and have solutions to address them, such as our advanced deposition materials, implant gases, formulated cleaning chemistries and selective etch chemistries. Our customers also require greater end-to-end materials purity and integrity in their manufacturing process that, when combined with smaller dimensions and more complex architectures, can be challenging to achieve. To enable the use of new metals and the further miniaturization of chips, and to maximize yield and increase long-term device reliability, we provide products such as our advanced liquid and gas filtration and purification products that help to selectively remove new classes of contaminants throughout the semiconductor supply chain. In addition, to ensure purity levels are maintained across the entire supply chain, from bulk manufacturing, to transportation to and delivery through a fab, to application onto the wafer, we provide high-purity packaging and materials handling products.
Our business is organized and operated in three operating segments, which align with the key elements of the advanced semiconductor manufacturing ecosystem. The Specialty Chemicals and Engineered Materials, or SCEM, segment provides
high-performance and high-purity process chemistries, gases, and materials, and safe and efficient delivery systems to support semiconductor and other advanced manufacturing processes. The Microcontamination Control, or MC, segment offers solutions to filter and purify critical liquid chemistries and gases used in semiconductor manufacturing processes and other high-technology industries. The Advanced Materials Handling, or AMH, segment develops solutions to monitor, protect, transport, and deliver critical liquid chemistries, wafers and other substrates for a broad set of applications in the semiconductor industry, life sciences and other high-technology industries. While these segments have separate products and technical know-how, they share common business systems and processes, technology centers, and strategic and technology roadmaps. With the technology, capabilities and complementary product portfolios from these three segments, we are uniquely positioned to collaborate across divisions to create new, co-optimized and increasingly integrated solutions for our customers. For example, our SCEM segment offers a highly selective nitride etch chemistry, our MC segment provides a liquid filter that is specifically matched to that formulation and our AMH segment ensures the integrity of the product as it is moved to and through the fab environment.
Key operating factors Key factors which management believes have the largest impact on the overall results of operations of the Company include:
•Level of sales Since a significant portion of the Company’s product costs (except for raw materials, purchased components and direct labor) are largely fixed in the short-to-medium term, an increase or decrease in sales affects gross profits and overall profitability significantly. Also, increases or decreases in sales and operating profitability affect certain costs such as incentive compensation and commissions, which are highly variable in nature. The Company’s sales are subject to the effects of industry cyclicality, technological change, substantial competition, pricing pressures and foreign currency fluctuation.
•Variable margin on sales The Company’s variable margin on sales is determined by selling prices and the costs of manufacturing and raw materials. This is affected by a number of factors, which include the Company’s sales mix, purchase prices of raw material (especially polymers, membranes, stainless steel and purchased components), domestic and international competition, direct labor costs, and the efficiency of the Company’s production operations, among others.
•Fixed cost structure The Company’s operations include a number of large fixed or semi-fixed cost components, which include salaries, indirect labor and benefits, facility costs, lease expenses, and depreciation and amortization. It is not possible to vary these costs easily in the short term as volumes fluctuate. Accordingly, increases or decreases in sales volume can have a large effect on the usage and productivity of these cost components, resulting in a large impact on the Company’s profitability.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, governmental authorities have implemented and are continuing to implement numerous and constantly evolving measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, masking recommendations and mandates, limits on gatherings, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and business shutdowns. In some cases, governmental re-opening plans have been delayed or reversed due to spikes in the number of infections in the local area. We continue to monitor the situation regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, which remains fluid and uncertain, and to proactively manage and adapt our responses in collaboration with our employees, customers and suppliers. However, we are unable to accurately predict the full impact that COVID-19 may have on our business, results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows, which will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with accuracy, including, but not limited to, the duration and continued spread of the outbreak, its severity, potential additional waves of infection, the actions to mitigate the virus or its impact, the development, distribution, efficacy and acceptance of vaccines and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume.
Health and Safety
Commencing in the first quarter of 2020, we have taken, and continue to take, proactive, aggressive action to protect the health and safety of our employees, customers, partners and suppliers. We enacted rigorous safety measures, including social distancing protocols, encouraging employees who do not need to be physically present on the manufacturing floor or in a lab to perform their work to work from home, suspending non-essential travel, implementing temperature checks and other access controls at the entrances to our facilities, extensively and frequently disinfecting our workspaces and providing masks to employees who are physically present at our facilities. We expect to continue to implement these measures until the COVID-19 pandemic is adequately contained, and we may take further actions as government authorities require or recommend or as we determine to be in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners and suppliers. We expect that the pandemic may abate at different times in different regions, and accordingly our health and safety protocols may vary across regions.
Operations
We have important manufacturing operations in the United States, Japan, Korea, China, Malaysia, and Taiwan, all of which have been affected by the outbreak and have taken measures to try to contain it. Measures providing for business shutdowns have generally excluded certain essential services, and those essential services have commonly included critical infrastructure and the businesses that support that critical infrastructure. While all of our facilities currently remain operational, these measures have impacted and may further impact our workforce and operations, as well as those of our customers, suppliers and other third parties with which we do business. For example, in March 2020 the government of Malaysia issued an order that significantly reduced the number of employees who could be physically present to operate our Malaysian plant, which temporarily reduced the productivity of that plant. The government of Malaysia issued a similar order restricting movement throughout that country in January 2021, which has not impacted our operations as of the date of this filing but may do so in the future. Our Malaysian plant is operating at full capacity as of the date of this filing. In addition to reduced productivity, constraints and limits imposed on our operations may slow or diminish our research and development and customer qualification activities. During 2020, we experienced brief interruptions in operations at our sites in Hangzhou, China, San Luis Obispo, California and Bedford, Massachusetts and so far during 2021 we have experienced minor interruptions in operations at our site in San Luis Obispo, California and a brief construction delay to an expansion of our facility in Toronto, Canada. While governmental measures may be modified, extended or reimposed, we expect that, absent a significant surge in infections in the relevant local area or within our workforce or those of our suppliers, our manufacturing and research and development facilities will remain operational, largely at or near full capacity. In connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced limited absenteeism from employees who are required to be on-site to perform their jobs. We do not currently expect that our operations will be materially adversely affected by significant absenteeism. In addition, we have incurred incremental employee compensation related to the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, since April 2020, we have awarded certain of our employees who are required to physically report to a manufacturing facility in order to perform their jobs during the COVID-19 crisis with a special appreciation bonus for their efforts in sustaining our production continuity.
Supply
We have not yet experienced any significant impacts or interruptions to our supply chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, certain of our suppliers have faced difficulties maintaining operations in light of government-ordered restrictions, shelter-in-place mandates and outbreaks of infection within their workforces. As the pandemic continues, our suppliers may face challenges in maintaining their level of supply as a result of these or other factors. For example, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, during the first half of 2020, one of our critical valve suppliers was shut down and was unable to supply us with valves for certain of our gas purification products. In this instance we were able to procure this critical part from a second, pre-qualified source. Although we regularly monitor the financial health of companies in our supply chain, financial hardship on our suppliers or sub-suppliers caused by the COVID-19 pandemic could cause a disruption in our ability to obtain raw materials or components required to manufacture our products and thus require us to increase our safety stocks of certain raw materials or components, adversely affecting our operations. To mitigate the risk of potential supply interruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic, during 2020 and into 2021, we chose to increase certain inventory levels, causing us to hold more inventory than we might have otherwise maintained. We may decide to take similar actions going forward, which may result in increased charges for excess or obsolete inventory, which would have the effect of reducing our profitability. Additionally, restrictions or disruptions of transportation, such as reduced availability of air transport, port closures and increased border controls or closures, have resulted, in certain instances, in higher costs and delays, both on obtaining materials and shipping finished goods to customers. If these restrictions and disruptions continue, they could harm our profitability, make our products less competitive or cause our customers to seek alternative suppliers.
Demand
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly increased economic and demand uncertainty. During 2020, we saw strong demand from leading-edge customers associated with end-uses in servers and other data center applications. We believe that a portion of the orders that we received in 2020 may have been a result of customers increasing their inventory to reduce their exposure to risks of future supply disruptions, which could offset demand for our products in the future. We anticipate that the pandemic will continue to contribute to the current global economic slowdown, and it is possible that it could cause a global recession. In the event of a recession, demand for our products would decline and our business would be adversely affected.
Liquidity
Although there is uncertainty related to the anticipated impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our future results, we believe our business model, our current cash reserves and our balance sheet leave us well-positioned to manage our business through this crisis as we expect it to unfold. We have taken recent steps to strengthen our balance sheet. On April 30, 2020, we issued $400 million aggregate principal amount of 4.375% senior unsecured notes due April 15, 2028. We used a portion of the net proceeds of the offering to repay approximately $142 million of borrowings under our senior secured revolving facility due 2023, or the Revolving Facility, representing the entire aggregate principal amount outstanding thereunder. We also used a portion of the net proceeds of the offering to repay approximately $251 million of outstanding borrowings under our senior secured term loan facility, or the Term Loan Facility.
We have reviewed numerous potential scenarios in connection with the impact of COVID-19 on the global economy and the semiconductor industry. Based on our analysis, we believe our existing balances of domestic cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $268.1 million as of December 31, 2020, and our currently anticipated operating cash flows will be sufficient to meet our cash needs arising in the ordinary course of business for the next twelve months.
We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from international and domestic authorities, including federal, state and local public health authorities, and may take additional actions based on their recommendations and requirements or as we otherwise see fit to protect the health and safety of our employees, customers, partners and suppliers. In these circumstances, there may be developments outside our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. As such, given the dynamic nature of this situation, we cannot reasonably estimate the impacts that COVID-19 may have on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows in the future. See Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” for additional information regarding risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, including under the caption “The COVID-19 pandemic and ensuing governmental responses could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.”
Overall Summary of Financial Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Total net sales for 2020 were $1,859.3 million up $268.2 million, or 17%, from sales of $1,591.1 million for 2019.
Total net sales increased primarily as a result of an increase in overall demand for the Company’s products from semiconductor industry customers, particularly in the sale of liquid filtration, advanced deposition materials and other areas of increasing importance to our customers. Total net sales also reflected net sales associated with acquisitions of $43.1 million and favorable foreign currency translation effects of $8.0 million.
The Company’s gross profit increased by $138.1 million for 2020 to $849.7 million, up from $711.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Accordingly, the Company reported a 45.7% gross margin rate compared to 44.7% in 2019. The increases in gross profit and gross margin reflect higher factory utilization associated with stronger sales levels and a favorable sales mix.
The Company’s selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses decreased in 2020 by $19.7 million, mainly reflecting lower deal costs and costs of integration activities, partially offset by higher employee costs.
The Company’s engineering, research and development, or ER&D, expenses increased in 2020 by $14.9 million, mainly reflecting higher employee costs.
As a result of the aforementioned and other factors discussed below, net income for 2020 was $295.0 million, or $2.16 per diluted share, compared to net income of $254.9 million, or $1.87 per diluted share, in 2019.
On January 10, 2020, the Company acquired Sinmat, a chemical mechanical planarization slurry manufacturer. Sinmat reports into the Specialty Chemicals and Engineered Materials segment of the Company. The total purchase price of the acquisition was $75.6 million, net of cash acquired. The transaction is described in further detail in note 3 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
On July 10, 2020, the Company acquired Global Measurement Technologies Inc., an analytical instrument provider for critical processes in semiconductor production, and its manufacturing partner Clean Room Plastics, Inc. (together, GMTI), for a purchase price of $36.3 million in cash. GMTI will report into the Advanced Materials Handling segment of the Company. The transaction is described in further detail in note 3 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
During 2020, the Company’s operating activities provided cash flow of $446.7 million. Cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments were $580.9 million at December 31, 2020 compared with $351.9 million at December 31, 2019. The Company had long-term borrowings, including current maturities, of $1,085.8 million at December 31, 2020 compared with $936.5 million at December 31, 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon the Company’s consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the Company to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. At each balance sheet date, management evaluates its estimates, including, but not limited to, those related to long-lived assets (property, plant and equipment, and identified intangible assets), goodwill, income taxes and business combinations. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. If management made different judgments or utilized different estimates, this could result in material differences in the amount and timing of the Company’s results of operations for any period. In addition, actual results could be different from the Company’s current estimates, possibly resulting in increased future charges to earnings.
The critical accounting policies that are most significantly affected by estimates, assumptions and judgments used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements are discussed below.
Business Acquisitions
The Company accounts for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting which requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at the date of acquisition at their respective fair values. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as well as asset lives, can materially impact net income. Accordingly, for significant items the Company typically obtains assistance from a third-party valuation firm.
There are several methods that can be used to determine the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. For intangible assets, the Company normally utilizes the “income method.” This method starts with a forecast of all of the expected future net cash flows attributable to the subject intangible asset. These cash flows are then adjusted to present value by applying an appropriate discount rate that reflects the risk factors associated with the cash flow streams. Depending on the asset valued, the key assumptions included one or more of the following: (1) future revenue growth rates, (2) future gross margin, (3) future selling, general and administrative expense, (4) royalty rates, and (5) discount rates.
Estimating the useful life of an intangible asset also requires judgment. For example, different types of intangible assets will have different useful lives, influenced by the nature of the asset, competitive environment, and rate of change in the industry. Certain assets may even be considered to have indefinite useful lives. All of these judgments and estimates can significantly impact the determination of the amortization period of the intangible asset, and thus net income.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth the results of operations and the relationship between various components of operations, stated as a percent of net sales, for 2020 and 2019.
Net sales For 2020, net sales were $1,859.3 million, up $268.2 million, or 17%, from sales for 2019. An analysis of the factors underlying the increase in net sales is presented in the following table:
The Company’s net sales reflected an increase in overall demand for the Company’s products from semiconductor industry customers, particularly in the sale of liquid filtration, advanced deposition materials and other areas of increasing importance to our customers. Total net sales also reflected net sales associated with acquisitions of $43.1 million favorable foreign currency translation effects of $8.0 million, mainly due to the strengthening of the Japanese yen and Taiwanese dollar relative to the U.S. dollar.
Sales percentage on a geographic basis for 2020 and 2019 and the percentage increase (decrease) in sales for 2020 compared to sales for 2019 were as follows:
The increase in sales for North America and Taiwan was primarily driven by a general increase in demand for products in all three of the Company’s segments. The increase in sales from South Korea relates to higher sales of Advanced Materials Handling products of 10% and Specialty Chemicals and Engineered Materials products of 5%. The increase in sales from Japan relates to higher sales of Microcontamination Control products of 10% and Specialty Chemicals and Engineered Materials products of 8%. The increase in sales for China was primarily driven by a general increase in demand for products in all three of the Company’s segments and additional sales attributable to the acquisition of Anow in the third quarter of 2019. The increase in sales from Europe primarily relates to higher sales of Microcontamination Control products.
Demand drivers for the Company’s business primarily consist of semiconductor fab utilization and production (unit-driven) as well as capital spending for new or upgraded semiconductor fabrication equipment and facilities (capital-driven). The Company analyzes sales of its products by these two key drivers. Sales of unit-driven products represented 70% of total sales and sales of capital-driven products represented 30% of total sales in both 2020 and 2019.
Gross profit Gross profit for 2020 increased by $138.1 million to $849.7 million, an increase of 19% from $711.7 million for 2019. The gross margin rate for 2020 was 45.7% versus 44.7% for 2019. The increases in gross profit and gross margin reflect higher factory utilization associated with stronger sales levels and a favorable sales mix. The gross profit and gross margin figures include an incremental cost of sales charge of $0.6 million and $7.5 million, associated with the sale of inventory acquired in recent business acquisitions for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll and related expenses for the sales and administrative staff, professional fees (including accounting, legal and technology costs and expenses), and sales and marketing costs. SG&A expenses for 2020 decreased $19.7 million, or 7%, to $265.1 million from $284.8 million in 2019. SG&A expenses, as a percent of net sales, decreased to 14.3% from 17.9% a year earlier, reflecting primarily the decrease in deal and integration costs.
An analysis of the factors underlying the decrease in SG&A is presented in the following table:
Deal and transaction costs were $23.6 million lower in 2020 compared to the prior year, mainly due to the deal costs associated with the terminated Versum transaction.
Engineering, research and development expenses
Engineering, research and development expenses consist of expenses for the support of current product lines and the development of new products and manufacturing technologies. These expenses were $136.1 million in 2020 and $121.1 million in 2019. ER&D expenses as a percent of net sales decreased to 7.3% from 7.6% a year earlier, reflecting the increase in sales, partially offset by higher employee costs.
An analysis of the factors underlying the increase ER&D is presented in the following table:
The Company’s overall ER&D efforts will continue to focus on developing and improving its technology platforms for semiconductor and advanced processing applications and identifying and developing products for new applications, and the Company often works directly with its customers to address their particular needs. The Company expects ER&D costs to stay relatively stable as a percentage of net sales.
Amortization of intangible assets Amortization of intangible assets was $53.1 million in 2020 compared to $66.4 million for 2019. The decrease primarily reflects the elimination of amortization expense of $21.1 million for identifiable intangible assets acquired in acquisitions that became fully amortized in previous periods, partially offset by additional amortization expense of $8.2 million associated with recent acquisitions as discussed in note 3 to the consolidated financial statements.
Interest expense Interest expense was $48.6 million in 2020 and $47.0 million in 2019. Interest expense includes interest associated with debt outstanding and the amortization of debt issuance costs associated with such borrowings. The increase primarily reflects higher average debt levels in 2020, partially offset by the absence of a $1.6 million charge in 2019 related to the adjustment of the fair value of the fixed deferred payment owed to the sellers with respect to the Company’s acquisition of DSC, for which the Company entered into a settlement agreement in 2019 to accelerate a fixed deferred payment of $16.1 million. The Company adjusted the fair value of the fixed deferred payment from its fair value to the stated value resulting in the additional aforementioned charge.
Interest income Interest income was $0.8 million in 2020 and $4.7 million in 2019. The decrease reflects lower average interest rates.
Other income, net Other income, net, was $6.7 million in 2020 compared to other income, net, of $121.1 million in 2019.
In 2020, other income, net consisted mainly of foreign currency transaction gains of $9.8 million, partially offset by loss on debt extinguishment costs of $2.4 million associated with payments on the Term Loan Facility.
In 2019, other income, net consisted mainly of net proceeds received of $122.0 million resulting from the termination of the merger agreement with Versum (see note 9 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements).
Income tax expense The Company recorded income tax expense of $59.3 million in 2020 compared to income tax expense of $63.2 million in 2019. The Company’s effective tax rate was 16.7% in 2020 compared to an effective tax rate of 19.9% in 2019.
The decrease in the effective tax rate in 2020 from 2019 is primarily due to an increase in discrete benefits related to share-based compensation of $8.8 million and lower accrued withholding taxes on foreign earnings. Additionally, the benefit related to the federal R&D tax credit increased by $1.5 million. These decreases were partially offset by a valuation allowance on federal foreign tax credit carryforwards of $6.2 million. The 2019 tax rate included a discrete tax charge of $9.4 million related to the reversal of the dividend received deduction benefit recorded in 2018. This discrete charge was recorded based on the issuance of final regulations during the second quarter of 2019 and did not recur in 2020. The discrete charge was partially offset by a benefit of $5.3 million recorded in the third quarter of 2019 based on the filing of the federal tax return. Additionally, in the second quarter of 2019, the Company received a termination fee from Versum based on the termination of the merger agreement between the Company and Versum. As a result of the termination fee, the Company released a valuation allowance on federal capital loss carryforwards and recorded a discrete benefit of $2.9 million, which did not recur in 2020.
Net income Net income was $295.0 million, or $2.16 per diluted share, in 2020 compared to net income of $254.9 million, or $1.87 per diluted share, in 2019. The increase reflects the Company’s aforementioned operating results described in greater detail above.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures Information The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The Company also utilizes certain non-GAAP financial measures as a complement to financial measures provided in accordance with GAAP in order to better assess and reflect trends affecting the Company’s business and results of operations. See “Non-GAAP Information” included below in this section for additional detail, including the reconciliation of the Company’s non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
The Company’s non-GAAP financial measures include adjusted EBITDA and adjusted operating income, together with related percentage changes, and non-GAAP earnings per share, or EPS.
Adjusted EBITDA increased to $542.5 million in 2020, compared to $436.8 million in 2019. Adjusted EBITDA as a percent of net sales was 29.2% in 2020 compared to 27.5% in 2019. Adjusted operating income increased 27% to $459.0 million in 2020, compared to $361.8 million in 2019. Adjusted operating income as a percent of net sales was 24.7% in 2020 compared to 22.7% in 2019. Non-GAAP EPS increased 32% to $2.54 in 2020, compared to $1.93 in 2019. The increases in the adjusted EBITDA and adjusted operating income as a percentage of net sales reflects the increase in sales and gross profit.
Segment Analysis
The Company reports its financial performance based on three reporting segments. See note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the Company’s three segments.
The following table and discussion concern the results of operations of the Company’s three reportable segments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Specialty Chemicals and Engineered Materials (SCEM)
For 2020, SCEM net sales increased to $609.5 million, up 16% from $526.5 million in 2019. The sales increase was due to increased sales of advanced deposition materials, cleaning chemistries and advanced coatings, as well as additional sales of $25.6 million attributable to the acquisitions of Digital Specialty Chemicals Limited in the first quarter of 2019, MPD in the third quarter of 2019 and Sinmat in the first quarter of 2020.
SCEM reported a segment profit of $128.0 million for 2020, up 30% compared to a $98.3 million segment profit in 2019. The increase in the SCEM’s profit in 2020 was primarily due to higher sales levels and a $4.6 million reduction in cost of sales charges associated with the sale of inventory acquired in recent business acquisitions, partially offset by higher operating expenses by 6% mainly due to recent acquisitions and higher employee costs.
Microcontamination Control (MC)
For 2020, MC net sales increased to $742.2 million, up 17% from $633.7 million in 2019. The sales increase was due to improved sales of liquid filtration and gas filtration products, as well as additional sales of $11.0 million attributable to the acquisition of Anow in the third quarter of 2019, partially offset by decreased sales from bulk gas purification products.
MC reported a segment profit of $248.9 million for 2020, up 28% compared to a $194.4 million segment profit in 2019. The increase in MC’s profit in 2020 was primarily due to higher gross profit related to the increased sales volume and favorable product mix and a $2.6 million reduction in cost of sales charges associated with the sale of inventory acquired in recent
business acquisitions, partially offset by higher operating expenses of 10%, primarily due to higher compensations costs and the recent acquisition of Anow.
Advanced Materials Handling (AMH)
For 2020, AMH net sales increased 18% to $538.7 million from $458.3 million in 2019. This increase was mainly due to increased sales of high purity liquid containers, wafer handling products, fluid handling products and sensing and control products, as well as additional sales of $6.5 million attributable to the acquisition of GMTI in the third quarter of 2020.
AMH reported a segment profit of $111.0 million for 2020, up 48% compared to a $75.2 million segment profit in 2019. The increase in AMH’s profit in 2020 was primarily due to higher sales volume, favorable product mix and a 2% decrease in operating expenses, primarily due to lower spending and restructuring initiatives from the previous year.
Unallocated general and administrative expenses
Unallocated general and administrative expenses for 2020 totaled $39.4 million compared to $62.2 million for 2019. The $22.8 million decrease mainly reflects the decrease in deal and integration costs of $29.0 million noted in the discussion of SG&A above, offset partially by increased employee costs of $2.5 million, professional fees of $1.7 million and donation costs of $2.0 million.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2019 compared to year ended December 31, 2018
The following table sets forth the results of operations and the relationship between various components of operations, stated as a percent of net sales, for December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Net sales For 2019, net sales were $1,591.1 million, up $40.6 million, or 3%, from sales for 2018. An analysis of the factors underlying the increase in net sales is presented in the following table:
The Company’s sales increase was primarily due to sales associated with the Company’s recent acquisitions of $95.0 million, offset primarily by the absence of sales associated with a divestiture of an entity in 2018 and net unfavorable foreign currency
translation effects of $4.5 million, mainly due to the weakening of the Korean won, Euro and Taiwanese dollar relative to the U.S. dollar.
Sales percentage on a geographic basis for 2019 and 2018 and the percentage increase (decrease) in sales for 2019 compared to the sales for 2018 were as follows:
The increase in sales for North America and China was primarily driven by sales from acquisitions. The increase in sales from Taiwan was primarily driven from strong recovery from a major customer in 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease in sales from Europe relates to the absence of sales from the divestiture of a business in the fourth quarter of 2018. The decrease in sales from Southeast Asia relates to lower sales of specialty materials products.
Demand drivers for the Company’s business primarily consist of semiconductor fab utilization and production (unit-driven) as well as capital spending for new or upgraded semiconductor fabrication equipment and facilities (capital-driven). The Company analyzes sales of its products by these two key drivers. Sales of unit-driven products represented 70% of total sales and sales of capital-driven products represented 30% of total sales in both 2019 and 2018.
Gross profit Gross profit for 2019 decreased by $8.2 million, to $711.7 million, a decrease of 1% from $719.8 million for 2018. The gross margin rate for 2019 was 44.7% versus 46.4% for 2018. The gross profit and gross margin decrease reflects lower factory utilization associated with weaker sales levels and an unfavorable sales mix. The gross profit and gross margin figures include an incremental cost of sales charge of $7.5 million and $6.9 million, respectively, associated with the sale of inventory acquired in recent business acquisitions for 2019 and 2018 and $1.3 million and $0.5 million of restructuring charges for 2019 and 2018, respectively. Excluding those charges, the Company’s gross profit and gross margin for 2019 and 2018 were $720.5 million and $727.2 million, respectively, and 45.3% and 46.9%, respectively.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expense (SG&A) consists primarily of payroll and related expenses for the sales and administrative staff, professional fees (including accounting, legal and technology costs and expenses), and sales and marketing costs. SG&A expenses for 2019 increased $38.3 million, or 16%, to $284.8 million from $246.5 million in 2018. SG&A expenses, as a percent of net sales, increased to 17.9% from 15.9% a year earlier, reflecting primarily from the increase in deal and integration costs.
An analysis of the factors underlying the increase in SG&A is presented in the following table:
Engineering, research and development expenses
Engineering, research and development (ER&D) expenses consist of expenses for the support of current product lines and the development of new products and manufacturing technologies. These expenses were $121.1 million and $118.5 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively. ER&D expenses as a percent of net sales were 7.6% in both 2019 and 2018.
An analysis of the factors underlying the increase ER&D is presented in the following table:
The Company’s overall ER&D efforts will continue to focus on the support or extension of current product lines, the development of its technologies to create differentiated and high-value products for the most advanced and demanding semiconductor applications and leveraging its unique and diverse technology portfolio to develop innovative, integrated solutions for unmet customer needs. The Company expects ER&D costs to stay relatively stable as a percentage of net sales.
Amortization of intangible assets Amortization of intangible assets was $66.4 million in 2019 compared to $62.2 million for 2018. The increase reflects the additional amortization expense of $6.6 million associated with the Company’s recent 2019 and 2018 acquisitions as discussed in note 3 to the consolidated financial statements, offset primarily by the elimination of amortization expense of $2.0 million for identifiable developed technology and customer relationship assets acquired in the Poco acquisition.
Interest expense Interest expense was $47.0 million and $34.1 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively. Interest expense includes interest associated with debt outstanding and the amortization of debt issuance costs associated with such borrowings. The increase primarily reflects higher average debt levels in 2019 and a $1.6 million charge related the adjustment of the fair value of the fixed deferred payment owed to the sellers of its DSC acquisition. The Company entered into a settlement agreement to accelerate a fixed deferred payment of $16.1 million to no later than March 8, 2020. The Company adjusted the fair value of the fixed deferred payment from its fair value to the stated value resulting in the additional aforementioned charge.
Interest income Interest income was $4.7 million and $3.8 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase reflects higher average U.S. cash levels earning a higher rate of interest.
Other (income) expense, net Other income, net, was $121.1 million in 2019 compared to other expense, net, of $8.0 million in 2018.
In 2019, other income, net consisted mainly of net proceeds received of $122.0 million resulting from the termination of the merger agreement with Versum (see note 9 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements).
In 2018, other expense, net, included foreign currency transaction losses of $4.4 million, a loss of extinguishment of debt of $2.3 million associated with the redemption of the Company’s senior secured term loan facility due 2021 and asset-based revolving credit facility (see note 8 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements) and penalty charges of $1.1 million.
Income tax expense The Company recorded income tax expense of $63.2 million in 2019 compared to income tax expense of $13.7 million in 2018. The Company’s effective tax expense rate was 19.9% in 2019, compared to an effective tax rate of 5.4% in 2018.
The increase in the effective tax rate in 2019 from 2018 reflects several factors. The increase in the effective tax rate is primarily due to a $25.1 million benefit related to foreign tax credit generation and a $9.4 million benefit related to a dividends received deduction based on restructuring to simplify the legal entity structure in 2018 which did not recur in 2019. Additionally, the tax rate in 2019 includes a discrete tax charge of $9.4 million related to the reversal of the dividend received deduction benefit recorded in 2018. This discrete charge was recorded based on the issuance of final regulations during the second quarter of 2019. The discrete charge was partially offset by a benefit of $5.3 million recorded in the third quarter of 2019 based on the filing of the federal tax return. Additionally, in the second quarter 2019, the Company received a termination fee from Versum based on the termination of the Versum Merger Agreement. As a result of the termination fee, the Company released a valuation allowance on federal capital loss carryforwards and recorded a discrete benefit of $2.9 million.
Net income Net income was $254.9 million, or $1.87 per diluted share, in 2019 compared to net income of $240.8 million, or $1.69 per diluted share, in 2018. The increase reflects the Company’s aforementioned operating results described in greater detail above.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures Information The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). The Company also utilizes certain non-GAAP financial measures as a complement to financial measures provided in accordance with GAAP in order to better assess and reflect trends affecting the Company’s business and results of operations. See “Non-GAAP Information” included below in this section for additional detail, including the reconciliation of the Company’s non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
The Company’s non-GAAP financial measures are Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Operating Income, together with related percentage changes, and non-GAAP Earnings Per Share (EPS).
Adjusted EBITDA was flat at $436.8 million in 2019, compared to $436.1 million in 2018. Adjusted EBITDA, as a percent of net sales, was 27.5% in 2019 compared to 28.1% in 2018. Adjusted Operating Income decreased 2% to $361.8 million in 2019, compared to $371.0 million in 2018. Adjusted Operating Income, as a percent of net sales, was 22.7% in 2019 compared to 23.9% in 2018. Non-GAAP Earnings Per Share increased 2% to $1.93 in 2019, compared to $1.89 in 2018. The decline in the Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Operating Income as a percentage of net sales reflects the decrease in gross profit. In addition, Non-GAAP Earnings Per Share was positively affected by lower diluted weighted average shares outstanding from the stock repurchases during 2019.
Segment Analysis
The Company reports its financial performance based on three reporting segments. In the first quarter of 2019, the Company changed its definition of segment profit to include inter-segment sales. Prior quarter information has been recast to reflect the change in the Company’s definition of segment profit. See note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the Company’s three segments.
The following table and discussion concern the results of operations of the Company’s three reportable segments for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Specialty Chemicals and Engineered Materials (SCEM)
For 2019, SCEM net sales decreased to $526.5 million, down 1%, from $530.2 million in the comparable period last year. The sales decrease was mainly due to decreased sales of specialty materials, specialty gases and surface prep and integration products, partially offset by $10.9 million of sales from the acquisition of DSC in 2019, $16.7 million sales from the acquisition of MPD in the third quarter of 2019 and improved sales from advanced deposition products.
SCEM reported a segment profit of $98.3 million for 2019, down 23%, compared to a $127.1 million segment profit in the year-ago period. The decrease in the SCEM’s profit in 2019 was primarily due to decreased sales, an incremental cost of sales charge of $6.9 million associated with the sale of inventory acquired in recent business acquisitions, unfavorable product mix and higher operating expenses of 3% mainly due to higher employee costs and R&D spending.
Microcontamination Control (MC)
For 2019, MC net sales increased to $633.7 million, up 14%, from $553.8 million in the comparable period last year. The sales increase was due to the acquisition of SPG in the second quarter of 2018, which contributed an additional $61.3 million of sales, $5.1 million of sales from the acquisition of Anow in the third quarter of 2019, and improved sales from liquid chemistry filters for wet, etch and clean applications and photolithography products, partially offset by weakened sales from gas microcontamination products.
MC reported a segment profit of $194.4 million for 2019, up 17%, compared to a $166.9 million segment profit in the year-ago period. The increase in MC’s profit in 2019 reflects increased sales, partially offset by higher operating expenses of 8%, primarily due to higher employee costs, increased R&D spending and SPG operating infrastructure.
Advanced Materials Handling (AMH)
For 2019, AMH net sales decreased 7% to $458.3 million, from $493.4 million in 2018. This decrease was mainly due to decreased sales of fluid handling products, liquid packaging and dispense products, wafer and reticle handling products and wafer shipping products.
AMH reported a segment profit of $75.2 million for 2019, down 19% compared to a $92.3 million segment profit in the year-ago period. The decrease in the AMH’s profit in 2019 was primarily due to lower sales.
Unallocated general and administrative expenses
Unallocated general and administrative expenses for 2019 totaled $62.2 million compared to $31.4 million for 2018. The $30.8 million increase mainly reflects the deal and integration costs of $27.7 million in the discussion of SG&A above.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table presents selected data from the Company’s consolidated statements of operations for the eight quarters ended December 31, 2020. This unaudited information has been prepared on the same basis as the audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All adjustments that management considers necessary for the fair presentation of the unaudited information have been included in the quarters presented.
QUARTERLY STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS DATA
The Company’s quarterly results of operations have been, and will likely continue to be, subject to significant fluctuations due to a myriad of factors, many of which are beyond the Company’s control. The variability in sales and its corresponding effect on gross profit are generally the most important factors underlying the changes in the Company’s operating income and net income over the past eight quarters.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We consider the following when assessing our liquidity and capital resources:
The Company has historically financed its operations and capital requirements through cash flow from its operating activities,
long-term loans, lease financing and borrowings under domestic and international short-term lines of credit. Although there is
uncertainty related to the anticipated impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s future results, we believe our
business model, our current cash reserves and the recent steps we have taken to strengthen our balance sheet, such as our
issuance of $400 million aggregate principal amount of 4.375% senior unsecured notes due April 15, 2028 and related
repayments under the Revolving Facility and Term Loan Facility will help us to manage our business through the pandemic as we expect it to unfold. We have reviewed numerous potential scenarios in connection with the impact of COVID-19 on the global economy and the semiconductor industry. Based on our analysis, we believe our existing balances of domestic cash and cash equivalents and our currently anticipated operating cash flows will be sufficient to meet our cash needs arising in the ordinary course of business for the next twelve months. As the opportunity arises, we may seek to take advantage of opportunities to raise additional capital through additional debt financing or through public or private sales of securities. If in the future our available liquidity is not sufficient to meet the Company’s operating and debt service obligations as they come due, management would need to pursue alternative arrangements through additional equity or debt financing in order to meet
the Company’s cash requirements. There can be no assurance that any such financing would be available on commercially acceptable terms, or at all. In recent quarters, we have not experienced difficulty accessing the capital and credit markets;
however, future volatility in the capital and credit markets may increase costs associated with issuing debt instruments or affect
our ability to access those markets. In addition, it is possible that our ability to access the capital and credit markets could be
limited at a time when we would like, or need, to do so, which could have an adverse impact on our ability to refinance
maturing debt and/or react to changing economic and business conditions.
In summary, our cash flows for each period were as follows:
Operating activities
Cash provided by operating activities is net income adjusted for certain non-cash items and changes in assets and liabilities.
Compared to 2019, the $64.4 million increase in cash provided by operating activities in 2020 was primarily due to higher net income and changes in working capital. Changes in working capital for 2020 were driven by higher trade accounts receivables and notes receivable and inventory, offset by higher accounts payable and other accrued liabilities and income taxes. The change for trade accounts receivables and notes receivable was primarily due to increased sales activity compared to the prior year. The change for inventory is due to an increase in raw material purchases to mitigate potential supply chain issues related to COVID-19 and increased business activity. The change in accounts payable and accrued liabilities is primarily due to higher accrued bonuses in 2020 compared to 2019. The change for taxes was primarily driven by lower tax payments compared to the prior year.
Compared to 2018, the $69.7 million increase in cash provided by operating activities in 2019 was primarily due to higher net income, depreciation and changes in working capital. Depreciation expense increased due to higher levels of capital spending in prior years. Changes in working capital for 2019 were driven by income taxes and inventories, offset by accounts payable and other accrued liabilities. The change for taxes was primarily the result in 2018 tax credits that were utilized against a one time toll charge accrual recorded in 2017. The change for inventory is due to lower production activity in 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities is due to lower accrued bonuses in 2019 and lower payables due to timing of payments.
Investing activities
Investing cash flows consist primarily of capital expenditures, cash used for acquisitions and proceeds from sales of property and equipment.
The decrease in cash used in investing activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to lower cash paid for acquisitions. This was partially offset by increased acquisitions of property, plant and equipment.
The decrease in cash used in investing activities in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to lower cash paid on acquisitions. This was partially offset by increased acquisitions of property, plant and equipment and lower proceeds from sales of property, plant and equipment.
Acquisition of property and equipment totaled $131.8 million in 2020, which primarily reflected investments in equipment and tooling, compared to $112.4 million in 2019, which primarily reflected investments in equipment and tooling. Capital expenditures in 2020 generally reflected more normalized capital spending levels. The Company expects its capital expenditures in 2021 to be approximately $200.0 million for growth capacity investments. Of this amount approximately $40.0 million will be spent for the first stage of a three to five year, $200.0 million investment in our new facility in Taiwan. This new facility will ultimately support all three of our divisions.
In 2020, the Company acquired Sinmat and GMTI. The cash used to acquire Sinmat and GMTI was $111.9 million, net of cash acquired. The transactions are described in further detail in note 3 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In 2019, the Company acquired DSC, MPD and Anow. The cash used to acquire DSC, MPD and Anow was $277.4 million, net of cash acquired. The transactions are described in further detail in note 3 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Financing activities
Financing cash flows consist primarily of repurchases of common stock, payment of dividends to stockholders, issuance and repayment of short-term and long-term debt, and proceeds from the sale of shares of common stock through employee equity incentive plans.
In 2020, there was $22.1 million of cash provided by financing activities compared to $126.8 million cash used in financing activities in 2019. The change was primarily due to net long-term debt activity, which was a source of cash of $149.0 million in 2020 compared to a use of cash of $4.0 million in 2019, and a $35.8 million decrease of repurchases of the Company’s common stock, partially offset by a $16.1 million deferred acquisition payment related to our DSC acquisition, a $16.1 million increase in cash used to pay taxes for net share settlements of equity awards and a $4.0 million increase in payments for debt issuance costs. During 2020, we repurchased $44.6 million of common stock under our authorized common stock repurchase program, compared to $80.3 million in 2019. Our total dividend payments were $43.2 million in 2020 compared to $40.6 million in 2019. We have paid a cash dividend in each of the past 13 quarters. On January 13, 2021, the Company’s board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.08 per share of common stock, payable on February 17, 2021 to stockholders of record on January 27, 2021.
In 2019, there was $126.8 million of cash used in financing activities compared to $34.4 million cash provided by financing
activities in 2018. The change was primarily due to net long-term debt activity, which was a use of cash of $4.0 million in 2019
compared to a source of cash of $266.2 million in 2018, primarily offset by decreased repurchases of common stock.
During 2019, we repurchased $80.3 million of our common stock under our authorized common stock repurchase program,
compared to $173.8 million in 2018. Our total dividend payments were $40.6 million in 2019 compared to $39.6
million in 2018.
Other Liquidity and Capital Resources Considerations
On April 30, 2020, the Company issued $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.375% senior unsecured notes due April 15, 2028. The Company paid debt issuance costs of $4.0 million in connection with the issuance of the notes during 2020. The transaction is described in further detail in note 8 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
The Company’s Term Loan Facility matures on November 6, 2025 and bears an interest rate of 2.15% at December 31, 2020. During 2020, the Company made payments of $251.0 million on the Term Loan Facility and had losses on debt extinguishment of $2.4 million. As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate principal amount outstanding under the Term Loan Facility was $145.0 million.
The Company’s Revolving Facility provides for lending commitments in an aggregate principal amount of up to $300.0 million
maturing on November 6, 2023. The Revolving Facility bears interest at a rate per annum equal to, at the Company’s option,
either a base rate (such as prime rate) or LIBOR plus, in each case, an applicable margin. At December 31, 2020, there was no
balance outstanding under the Revolving Facility and we had undrawn outstanding letters of credit of $0.2 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we also had $550 million aggregate principal amount of 4.625% senior unsecured notes due February 10, 2026 outstanding.
Through December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all applicable financial covenants included in the terms of its credit facilities.
The Company also has lines of credit with one bank that provides for borrowings of Japanese yen for the Company’s Japanese subsidiary equivalent to an aggregate of approximately $9.7 million. There were no outstanding borrowings under these lines of credit at December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s sources of available funds were its cash and cash equivalents of $580.9 million, funds available under the Revolving Facility and international credit facilities and cash flows generated from operations. As of December 31, 2020, the amount of cash and cash equivalents held in certain of our foreign operations totaled approximately $312.8 million. We have accrued taxes on any earnings that are not indefinitely reinvested. We estimate that no material withholding taxes would be incurred if any indefinitely reinvested earnings were distributed.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a
material current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital
resources.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Recently adopted accounting pronouncements Refer to note 1 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for a discussion of accounting pronouncements implemented in 2020. Other than the adoption of ASU 2016-13, Financial
Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments and ASU 2018-14, Compensation - Retirement Benefits - Defined Benefit Plans - General (Topic 715-20): Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Defined Benefit Plans, there were no recently issued accounting pronouncements adopted in 2020.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements Refer to note 1 of the Company’s consolidated financial statements for a discussion of accounting pronouncements recently issued but not yet adopted.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the maturities of the Company’s significant financial obligations as of December 31, 2020:
1 Debt obligations are classified based on their stated maturity date, regardless of their classification on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
2 Interest projections on both variable and fixed rate long-term debt are based on interest rates effective as of December 31, 2020 and do not include $9.2 million for net unamortized discounts and debt issuance costs.
3 Capital purchase obligations represent commitments for the construction or purchase of property, plant and equipment. They were not recorded as liabilities on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020, as the Company had not yet received the related goods or taken title to the property.
4 Supply purchase obligations represent commitments, including take-or-pay contracts, that are not presented as capital purchase commitments above.
5 The Company had $17.4 million of total gross unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2020. The timing of any payments associated with these unrecognized tax benefits will depend on a number of factors. Accordingly, the Company cannot make reasonably reliable estimates of the amount and period of potential cash settlements, if any, with taxing authorities and are not included in the table above.
Non-GAAP Information The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with GAAP.
The Company also provides certain non-GAAP financial measures as a complement to financial measures provided in accordance with GAAP in order to better assess and reflect trends affecting the Company’s business and results of operations. These non-GAAP financial measures include adjusted EBITDA and adjusted operating income, together with related measures thereof, and non-GAAP earnings per share, as well as certain other supplemental non-GAAP financial measures included in the discussion of the Company’s financial results.
Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, is defined by the Company as net income before (1) income tax expense, (2) interest expense, (3) interest income, (4) other (income) expense, net, (5) charge for fair value write-up of acquired inventory sold, (6) deal costs, (7) integration costs, (8) severance and restructuring costs, (9) loss on sale of subsidiary, (10) amortization of intangible assets and (11) depreciation. Adjusted operating income, another non-GAAP financial measure, is defined by the Company as adjusted EBITDA exclusive of the depreciation addback noted above. The Company also utilizes non-GAAP financial measures whereby adjusted EBITDA and adjusted operating income are each divided by the Company’s net sales to derive adjusted EBITDA margin and adjusted operating margin, respectively.
Non-GAAP EPS, a non-GAAP financial measure, is defined by the Company as net income before (1) charge for fair value write-up of acquired inventory sold, (2) deal costs, (3) integration costs, (4) severance and restructuring costs, (5) loss on debt extinguishment and modification, (6) Versum termination fee, net, (7) loss on sale of subsidiary, (8) amortization of intangible assets, (9) the tax effect of those adjustments to net income and discrete tax items, (10) the tax effect of legal entity restructuring and (11) the tax effect of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, divided by diluted weighted average shares outstanding.
The Company provides supplemental non-GAAP financial measures to better understand and manage its business and believes these measures provide investors and analysts additional and meaningful information for the assessment of the Company’s ongoing results. Management also uses these non-GAAP measures to assist in the evaluation of the performance of its business segments and to make operating decisions.
Management believes the Company’s non-GAAP measures help indicate the Company’s baseline performance before certain gains, losses or other charges that may not be indicative of the Company’s business or future outlook and offer a useful view of business performance in that the measures provide a more consistent means of comparing performance. The Company believes the non-GAAP measures aid investors’ overall understanding of the Company’s results by providing a higher degree of transparency for such items and providing a level of disclosure that will help investors understand how management plans, measures and evaluates the Company’s business performance. Management believes that the inclusion of non-GAAP measures provides greater consistency in its financial reporting and facilitates investors’ understanding of the Company’s historical operating trends by providing an additional basis for comparisons to prior periods.
Management uses adjusted EBITDA and adjusted operating income to assist it in evaluations of the Company’s operating performance by excluding items that management does not consider as relevant in the results of its ongoing operations. Internally, these non-GAAP measures are used by management for planning and forecasting purposes, including the preparation of internal budgets; for allocating resources to enhance financial performance; for evaluating the effectiveness of operational strategies; and for evaluating the Company’s capacity to fund capital expenditures, secure financing and expand its business.
In addition, and as a consequence of the importance of these non-GAAP financial measures in managing its business, the Company’s board of directors uses non-GAAP financial measures in the evaluation process to determine management compensation.
The Company believes that certain analysts and investors use adjusted EBITDA, adjusted operating income and non-GAAP EPS as supplemental measures to evaluate the overall operating performance of firms in the Company’s industry. Additionally, lenders or potential lenders use adjusted EBITDA measures to evaluate the Company’s creditworthiness.
The presentation of non-GAAP financial measures is not meant to be considered in isolation, as a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures or information provided in accordance with GAAP. Management strongly encourages investors to review the Company’s consolidated financial statements in their entirety and to not rely on any single financial measure.
Management notes that the use of non-GAAP measures has limitations:
First, non-GAAP financial measures are not standardized. Accordingly, the methodology used to produce the Company’s non-GAAP financial measures is not computed under GAAP and may differ notably from the methodology used by other companies. For example, the Company’s non-GAAP measure of adjusted EBITDA may not be directly comparable to EBITDA or an adjusted EBITDA measure reported by other companies.
Second, the Company’s non-GAAP financial measures exclude items such as amortization and depreciation that are recurring. Amortization of intangibles and depreciation have been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense with an impact upon the Company’s results of operations, notwithstanding the lack of immediate impact upon cash flows.
Third, there is no assurance the Company will not have future restructuring activities, gains or losses on sale of equity investments, contingent consideration fair value adjustments or similar items and, therefore, may need to record additional charges (or credits) associated with such items, including the tax effects thereon. The exclusion of these items from the Company’s non-GAAP measures should not be construed as an implication that these costs are unusual, infrequent or non-recurring.
Management considers these limitations by providing specific information regarding the GAAP amounts excluded from these non-GAAP financial measures and evaluating these non-GAAP financial measures together with their most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. The calculations of adjusted EBITDA, adjusted operating income, and non-GAAP EPS, and reconciliations between these financial measures and their most directly comparable GAAP equivalents are presented below in the accompanying tables.
The reconciliation of GAAP measures to adjusted operating income and adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are presented below:
The reconciliation of GAAP measures to non-GAAP earnings per share for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are presented below:
1The tax effect of pre-tax adjustments to net income was calculated using the applicable marginal tax rate for each respective year.