Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this annual report. In addition to historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Factors that could cause such differences are discussed in the sections entitled “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors.” We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Executive Summary
We are a leading global provider of digital platform engineering and software development services offering specialized technological solutions to many of the world’s leading organizations.
Our customers depend on us to solve their complex technical challenges and rely on our expertise in core engineering, advanced technology, digital design and intelligent enterprise development. We continuously explore opportunities in new industries to expand our core industry client base in software and technology, financial services, business information and media, travel and consumer, and life sciences and healthcare. Our teams of developers, architects, consultants, strategists, engineers, designers, and product experts have the capabilities and skill sets to deliver business results.
Our global delivery model and centralized support functions, combined with the benefits of scale from the shared use of fixed-cost resources, enhance our productivity levels and enable us to better manage the efficiency of our global operations. As a result, we have created a delivery base whereby our applications, tools, methodologies and infrastructure allow us to seamlessly deliver services and solutions from our delivery centers to global customers across all geographies, further strengthening our relationships with them.
Through increased specialization in focused verticals and a continued emphasis on strategic partnerships, we are leveraging our roots in software engineering to grow as a recognized brand in software development and end-to-end digital transformation services for our customers.
Business Update Regarding COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to cause substantial global public health and economic challenges during the fourth quarter of 2020 and our employees, communities and business operations, as well as the global economy and financial markets all continue to be affected. We cannot accurately predict the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to directly and indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition. Future developments and actions to contain the public health and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the markets we serve are rapidly evolving and highly uncertain.
To the extent that the remainder of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) refers to a financial or performance metric that has been affected by a trend or activity, that reference is in addition to any impact of the COVID-19 pandemic disclosed in and supplemented by this section. The information contained in this section is accurate as of the date hereof, but may become outdated due to changing circumstances beyond our present awareness or control.
Our COVID-19 Pandemic Response
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have made the safety and well-being of our employees our top priority. As governments lift and re-impose restrictions on group gatherings, commercial operations, and travel, and as vaccines and therapeutics become available, we have applied those changing requirements to our business to maintain the health and safety of our employees and serve our customers consistent with appropriate public health considerations. Our business continuity plans are designed to ensure the safety and well-being of approximately 41,000 EPAM professionals while supporting the operations of hundreds of customers around the world.
Our Employees
The vast majority of our employees are able to productively and securely work from a remote location and our remaining personnel are providing services to us or our customers from our offices or our customers’ facilities. We therefore do not expect that COVID-19 related restrictions on group gatherings and non-essential businesses will have a material adverse effect on our ability to operate our business or productively deliver services to our customers, nor on our financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, or disclosure controls and procedures. With the increase in remote access to our systems and networks, we have accelerated some ongoing security initiatives and programs.
Many of the countries where our personnel regularly conduct business have extended or expanded restrictions on travel and immigration from other countries, including a suspension of most immigration and non-immigration visas issued by the United States. Further extensions or tightening of these travel and immigration restrictions may continue to impact our operations. However, we do not believe that the current travel and immigration restrictions will have a material adverse effect on our business or financial condition.
Our Customers
Our adaptive global delivery model enables us to deliver our services and solutions to our customers from remote locations, so we continue to provide our customers with the products, services, and solutions they seek to deliver their business results. We continually assess our customers’ current and future needs for EPAM personnel to work at their facilities and our global delivery centers, so that we can deploy resources safely and in accordance with COVID-19 mitigation efforts.
The prolonged deterioration of economic conditions for some of our customers could materially reduce our sales and profitability. Reduced demand from our customers and their customers, persistent financial distress in our customer base, and the continued volatility in macroeconomic conditions has and could continue to adversely impact revenues and decrease the collectability of our trade receivables. Any or all of these factors could negatively impact our results of operations. Depending on the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the timing and speed of economic recovery, reduced revenue growth relative to prior years could extend beyond the fourth quarter of 2020.
Our Community
EPAM supports the communities where we live and work and we assisted our global and local communities by providing solutions to transform the ways people live and work during the COVID-19 pandemic, including:
•EPAM Continuum introduced the GENTL™ Mask, an open source solution for manufacturers designed to address the supply shortage of protective masks that medical professionals need amid the coronavirus outbreak.
•EPAM used its implementation services to help Curogram scale its two-way texting and video chat telemedicine platform to help address the COVID-19 pandemic by enabling healthcare institutions to quickly deploy mass screening and testing services.
•EPAM developed COVID Resistance and COVID Resistance for Business, which are open source mobile applications that can be customized for specific countries or regions when used by governments and non-governmental organizations, or adapted by business for their digital contact-tracing needs so they can anonymously track COVID-19 exposure risk.
•EPAM Continuum introduced Guide Lines: Markings for Social Distancing, a toolkit for retailers and other business owners to adhere to physical distancing guidelines by creating visual cues with readily-available tools and materials to direct foot traffic.
•EPAM’s Made Real Lab released an open source design to accelerate the production of reusable face shields that do not require 3D printing and use commercially available materials.
•EPAM Continuum introduced an open source project for parents and children to build a timer to encourage healthy handwashing habits, teach electronics and creative prototyping skills, and basic coding skills.
•EPAM and the United Nations Children’s Fund/Europe and Central Asia Regional Office partnered to build a COVID-19 information chatbot app that was combined with EPAM’s COVID Resistance app to provide national authorities, public health institutions, social service agencies, families and individuals access to trusted information while promoting protective and preventive behaviors at the individual and community levels.
Moving Forward
We expect continued uncertainty around the impacts the pandemic will have on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. We actively monitor our business and the needs of our employees, customers, and communities to determine the appropriate actions to protect the health and safety of our employees and our ongoing operations. This includes actions informed by the requirements and recommendations of public health authorities. Economic and demand uncertainty in the current environment may impact our future results. We continue to monitor the demand for our services including the duration and degree to which we see declines or delays in new customer projects and payment for services performed. We continue to assess how the effects of COVID-19 on the economy may impact human capital allocation, revenues, profitability, and operating expenses.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read “Part II.