ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
For the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition, results of operations and related information for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, including applicable year-to-year comparisons, should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report. Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in the United States (“U.S.”).
Discussion and analysis of matters pertaining to the year ended December 31, 2018 and year-to-year comparisons between the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 are not included in this Form 10-K, but can be found under Part II, Item 7 of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 that was filed on February 28, 2020.
Key References Used in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Unless the context requires otherwise, references to “we,” “us” or “our” within this annual report are intended to mean the business and operations of Enterprise Products Partners L.P. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
References to the “Partnership” mean Enterprise Products Partners L.P. on a standalone basis.
References to “EPO” mean Enterprise Products Operating LLC, which is an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of the Partnership, and its consolidated subsidiaries, through which the Partnership conducts its business. We are managed by our general partner, Enterprise Products Holdings LLC (“Enterprise GP”), which is a wholly owned subsidiary of Dan Duncan LLC, a privately held Texas limited liability company.
The membership interests of Dan Duncan LLC are owned by a voting trust, the current trustees (“DD LLC Trustees”) of which are: (i) Randa Duncan Williams, who is also a director and Chairman of the Board of Directors (the “Board”) of Enterprise GP; (ii) Richard H. Bachmann, who is also a director and Vice Chairman of the Board of Enterprise GP; and (iii) W. Randall Fowler, who is also a director and the Co-Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer of Enterprise GP. Ms. Duncan Williams and Messrs. Bachmann and Fowler also currently serve as managers of Dan Duncan LLC.
References to “EPCO” mean Enterprise Products Company, a privately held Texas corporation, and its privately held affiliates. The outstanding voting capital stock of EPCO is owned by a voting trust, the current trustees (“EPCO Trustees”) of which are: (i) Ms. Duncan Williams, who serves as Chairman of EPCO; (ii) Mr. Bachmann, who serves as the President and Chief Executive Officer of EPCO; and (iii) Mr. Fowler, who serves as an Executive Vice President and the Chief Financial Officer of EPCO. Ms. Duncan Williams and Messrs. Bachmann and Fowler also currently serve as directors of EPCO.
We, Enterprise GP, EPCO and Dan Duncan LLC are affiliates under the collective common control of the DD LLC Trustees and the EPCO Trustees. EPCO, together with its privately held affiliates, owned approximately 32.2% of the Partnership’s common units outstanding and 30.2% of its Series A Cumulative Convertible Preferred Units (“preferred units”) outstanding at December 31, 2020.
As generally used in the energy industry and in this annual report, the acronyms below have the following meanings:
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
This annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 (our “annual report”) contains various forward-looking statements and information that are based on our beliefs and those of our general partner, as well as assumptions made by us and information currently available to us. When used in this document, words such as “anticipate,” “project,” “expect,” “plan,” “seek,” “goal,” “estimate,” “forecast,” “intend,” “could,” “should,” “would,” “will,” “believe,” “may,” “scheduled,” “potential” and similar expressions and statements regarding our plans and objectives for future operations are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Although we and our general partner believe that our expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements (including any forward-looking statements/expectations of third parties referenced in this annual report) are reasonable, neither we nor our general partner can give any assurances that such expectations will prove to be correct.
Forward-looking statements are subject to a variety of risks, uncertainties and assumptions as described in more detail under Part I, Item 1A of this annual report. If one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or if underlying assumptions prove incorrect, our actual results may vary materially from those anticipated, estimated, projected or expected. You should not put undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements in this annual report speak only as of the date hereof. Except as required by federal and state securities laws, we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or any other reason.
Overview of Business
We are a publicly traded Delaware limited partnership, the common units of which are listed on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) under the ticker symbol “EPD.” Our preferred units are not publicly traded. We were formed in April 1998 to own and operate certain natural gas liquids (“NGLs”) related businesses of EPCO and are a leading North American provider of midstream energy services to producers and consumers of natural gas, NGLs, crude oil, petrochemicals and refined products. We are owned by our limited partners (preferred and common unitholders) from an economic perspective. Enterprise GP, which owns a non-economic general partner interest in us, manages our Partnership. We conduct substantially all of our business operations through EPO and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Our fully integrated, midstream energy asset network (or “value chain”) links producers of natural gas, NGLs and crude oil from some of the largest supply basins in the United States (“U.S.”), Canada and the Gulf of Mexico with domestic consumers and international markets. Our midstream energy operations include:
• natural gas gathering, treating, processing, transportation and storage;
• NGL transportation, fractionation, storage, and marine terminals (including those used to export liquefied petroleum gases, or “LPG,” and ethane);
• crude oil gathering, transportation, storage, and marine terminals;
• propylene production facilities (including propane dehydrogenation (“PDH”) facilities), butane isomerization, octane enhancement, isobutane dehydrogenation (“iBDH”) and high purity isobutylene (“HPIB”) production facilities;
• petrochemical and refined products transportation, storage, and marine terminals (including those used to export ethylene and polymer grade propylene (“PGP”); and
• a marine transportation business that operates on key U.S. inland and intracoastal waterway systems.
The safe operation of our assets is a top priority. We are committed to protecting the environment and the health and safety of the public and those working on our behalf by conducting our business activities in a safe and environmentally responsible manner. For additional information, see “Environmental, Safety and Conservation” within the Regulatory Matters section of Part I, Items 1 and 2 of this annual report.
Like many publicly traded partnerships, we have no employees. All of our management, administrative and operating functions are performed by employees of EPCO pursuant to an administrative services agreement (the “ASA”) or by other service providers.
Each of our business segments benefits from the supporting role of our marketing activities. The main purpose of our marketing activities is to support the utilization and expansion of assets across our midstream energy asset network by increasing the volumes handled by such assets, which results in additional fee-based earnings for each business segment. In performing these support roles, our marketing activities also seek to participate in supply and demand opportunities as a supplemental source of gross operating margin, a non-generally accepted accounting principle (“non-GAAP”) financial measure, for us. The financial results of our marketing efforts fluctuate due to changes in volumes handled and overall market conditions, which are influenced by current and forward market prices for the products bought and sold.
Our financial position, results of operations and cash flows are subject to certain risks. For information regarding such risks, see “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A of this annual report.
Current Outlook
As noted previously, this annual report on Form 10-K, including this update to our outlook on business conditions, contains forward-looking statements that are based on our beliefs and those of our general partner, as well as assumptions made by us and information currently available to us, which includes forecast information published by third parties. See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information” within this Part II, Item 7 and “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A, for additional information. The following information presents our current views on key midstream energy supply and demand fundamentals. The third-party supply and demand forecasts cited in the following discussion, including our internal forecasts based on such information, remain subject to significant uncertainty because mitigation and reopening efforts related to COVID-19, emerging variants of COVID-19 and the introduction of approved vaccines and proven therapeutics continue to evolve.
All references to U.S. Energy Information Administration (“EIA”) forecasts and expectations are derived from its February 2021 Short-Term Energy Outlook (“February 2021 STEO”), which was published on February 9, 2021.
Changes in the supply of and demand for hydrocarbon products impacts both the volume of products that we sell and the level of services that we provide to customers, which in turn has a direct impact on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows. The continued global effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which began in the first quarter of 2020 and include the consequences of international COVID-19 containment measures (e.g., quarantines, travel restrictions, temporary business closures and similar protective actions), reduced near-term demand for hydrocarbon products by record amounts and created a significant oversupply situation. Also, in the early stages of the pandemic, disputes between members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (“OPEC”) and Russia (collectively, the “OPEC+” group) over crude oil production levels led to unprecedented volatility in global energy markets and a historic collapse in crude oil prices in April 2020. Although the OPEC+ group and other producers subsequently reached agreements to gradually reduce the oversupply of crude oil through production cuts, the downturn in the energy industry caused by lower demand and prices negatively impacted us, the producers we work with and our other customers to varying degrees.
Supply Side Observations
Ongoing production cuts within the OPEC+ group, along with market-driven cuts in U.S., Brazilian and Canadian supplies, continue to provide much-needed support for international energy markets in coping with the ongoing weakness in hydrocarbon demand attributable to the pandemic. In April 2020, the OPEC+ group resolved their production dispute by agreeing to reduce their combined crude oil production by 9.7 MMBPD in May and June 2020, 9.6 MMBPD in July 2020, 7.7 MMBPD from August through December 2020, and 5.8 MMBPD from January 2021 to April 2022. In December 2020, the OPEC+ group revised their post-2020 production curtailments in light of current market dynamics and agreed to reduce their combined crude oil production by 7.2 MMBPD beginning in January 2021. The group will also hold monthly meetings to sign off on production adjustments for the following month, which would be no more than a 0.5 MMBPD increase. In addition, Saudi Arabia, the world’s biggest oil exporter, said it would voluntarily reduce its production by 1.0 MMBPD in February and March in recognition of demand uncertainty related to the pandemic. The duration of market-driven production cuts by non-OPEC countries such as the U.S., Brazil and Canada will depend on supply and demand fundamentals. According to the February 2021 STEO, the EIA estimates that global production of petroleum and related liquids averaged 94.2 MMBPD in 2020, which represents a decline of 6.4 MMBPD when compared to 2019, and expects an average of 97.3 MMBPD in 2021 and 100.8 MMBPD in 2022.
As a result of the current business environment, most crude oil producers in North America have significantly reduced their drilling and completion of new wells compared to prior years. Baker Hughes reported that the total number of drilling rigs working in the continental U.S. (combined crude oil and natural gas rigs) declined from 805 at December 27, 2019 to 265 at June 26, 2020. The U.S. drilling rig count stood at 266 on October 2, 2020, but increased to 392 by February 5, 2021 due to strengthening energy fundamentals. In its February 2021 STEO, the EIA estimates that U.S. crude oil production averaged 11.3 MMBPD in 2020, which is down from an average of 12.3 MMBPD in 2019. According to the February 2021 STEO, the EIA expects U.S. crude oil production to decline to an average of 10.9 MMBPD in the second quarter of 2021 since near-term drilling and completion activity will not generate enough production to offset declines from existing wells. The EIA expects drilling activity to rise later in 2021, contributing to U.S. crude oil production returning to an average of 11.2 MMBPD in the fourth quarter of 2021 and 11.0 MBPD for 2021. The EIA forecasts U.S. crude oil production to average 11.5 MMBPD in 2022.
In its February 2021 STEO, the EIA estimates that U.S. natural gas production averaged 91.3 Bcf/d in 2020, which is down from an average of 93.1 Bcf/d in 2019. The EIA forecasts natural gas production to average 90.5 Bcf/d in 2021 and 91.0 Bcf/d in 2022. With the expected increase in U.S. crude oil production in late-2021, the EIA expects associated natural gas production from crude oil-directed wells to increase, especially in the Permian Basin region, and to average 90.5 Bcf/d in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Demand Side Observations
Across the globe, downstream demand for petroleum products such as gasoline and jet fuel has recovered from the lows of the second quarter of 2020, but remains depressed due to the effects of the pandemic and refiners have reduced their utilization rates in response. Many countries have eased their COVID-19 containment measures and central banks and governments have instituted fiscal measures in an effort to stimulate economic activity. As a result, hydrocarbon demand has started to recover; however, a continuation of this trend remains dependent on successful containment of the disease, the efficacy and distribution of approved vaccines on COVID-19 and its emerging variants, and proven therapeutics. In its February 2021 STEO, the EIA estimates that global demand for petroleum and related liquids averaged 92.3 MMBPD in 2020, and expects an average of 97.7 MMBPD in 2021 and 101.2 MMBPD in 2022. By contrast, the EIA estimates that global demand for petroleum and related liquids averaged 101.2 MMBPD in 2019 (pre-pandemic).
The decrease in hydrocarbon demand attributable to COVID-19 and the resulting oversupply situation caused a significant decrease in crude oil prices. Prior to the pandemic, crude oil prices for West Texas Intermediate (“WTI”) at Cushing, Oklahoma (as reported by the NYMEX) closed at $61.06 per barrel on December 31, 2019. By March 31, 2020, WTI prices closed at $20.48 per barrel and, notwithstanding the announced OPEC+ production cuts, closed at a record low of a negative $37.63 per barrel on April 20, 2020. As demand began to recover starting in the second quarter of 2020, WTI prices rebounded from the April lows and closed at $39.27 per barrel on June 30, 2020. At September 30, 2020, WTI prices closed at $40.22 per barrel. At December 31, 2020, WTI prices closed at $48.52 per barrel as supply and demand fundamentals strengthened. Prices continue to increase as we begin 2021, averaging $52.10 per barrel in January 2021.
In its February 2021 STEO, the EIA estimates that U.S. consumption of natural gas averaged 83.3 Bcf/d in 2020, which reflects a 2.2% decrease from the 2019 average of 85.2 Bcf/d. The EIA expects U.S. consumption of natural gas to decrease to an average of 81.7 Bcf/d in 2021 and 81.0 Bcf/d in 2022 due to rising natural gas prices, which are expected to negatively impact demand from the electric power sector. Natural gas prices, as measured by the NYMEX at Henry Hub and reported in the February 2021 STEO, averaged $2.03 per MMBtu in 2020 compared to an average of $2.57 per MMBtu in 2019. The EIA forecasts Henry Hub spot prices to increase to an average $2.95 per MMBtu in 2021 due to rising space heating demand and liquefied natural gas exports amid the overall decrease in U.S. natural gas production expected for 2021. The EIA expects Henry Hub spot prices to average $3.27 per MMBtu in 2022.
Enterprise Outlook
We believe that crude oil prices will continue to increase. Our view considers the record retrenchment in drilling and completion activities worldwide, including by U.S. producers in 2020, along with steep decline curves in shale basins that result in lower near-term production through mid-2021, and the expected continuing recovery of global hydrocarbon demand following the pandemic. However, in the interim, we believe the midstream industry will be challenged in its supply-side businesses and that challenges and opportunities will be different for each producing basin.
Although the current industry and business outlooks remain challenging, we believe that our integrated, diversified and fee-based business model, will enable us to successfully traverse this difficult period. The Partnership and its consolidated operations remain in a strong position, with our financial strength and operational flexibility demonstrated by the following:
• At December 31, 2020, we had $6.06 billion of consolidated liquidity, which was comprised of $5.0 billion of available borrowing capacity under EPO’s revolving credit facilities and $1.06 billion of unrestricted cash on hand. Our liquidity is supported by investment grade credit ratings on EPO’s long-term senior unsecured debt of BBB+, Baa1 and BBB+ from Standard and Poors, Moody’s and Fitch, respectively.
• EPO successfully issued $4.25 billion in principal amount of senior notes in 2020. Based on current conditions, we believe that we will have sufficient liquidity and/or access to debt capital markets to fund the remaining principal amount of senior notes maturing through 2021.
• In light of the current downturn in the domestic energy industry, we reevaluated our planned capital investments. Based on information currently available, we expect our total capital investments for 2021, net of contributions from joint venture partners, to approximate $2.1 billion, which reflects growth capital investments of $1.6 billion and sustaining capital expenditures of $440 million. In addition, we currently expect our growth capital investments in 2022 and 2023 for sanctioned projects to approximate $800 million and $400 million, respectively. These amounts do not include capital investments associated with our proposed deepwater offshore crude oil terminal (the Sea Port Oil Terminal or “SPOT”), which remains subject to governmental approvals. We currently anticipate receiving approval for SPOT as early as the third quarter of 2021; however, we can give no assurance as to whether the project will ultimately be approved or the timing of such decision.
• We continue to optimize our assets to provide incremental services to customers and to respond to market opportunities. As prices for certain NGLs, crude oil and refined products fell in 2020 due to collapsing demand for refined products as a result of the pandemic, our storage services provided valuable flexibility for our customers. In addition, our earnings from marketing activities in 2020 benefited from using uncontracted storage capacity to capture contango opportunities in NGLs, crude oil and refined products.
• Across all of our assets, we have contracted with a large number of quality customers in order to achieve customer diversification. In 2020, our top 200 largest customers represented 95.3% of consolidated revenues. Based on their respective year-end 2020 debt ratings, 81.4% of our top 200 customers were either investment grade rated or backed by letters of credit. Additionally, only 8.1% of our top 200 customer revenues were attributable to sub-investment grade or non-rated upstream producers.
In light of current events, we are closely monitoring the recoverability of our long-lived assets for potential impairment. We recognized a combined $890.6 million of non-cash asset impairment charges during the year ended December 31, 2020. If the adverse economic impacts of the pandemic persist for longer periods than currently expected, these developments could result in our recognition of additional non-cash impairment charges in the future.
Significant Recent Developments
Enterprise and Magellan to Develop Joint Houston Crude Oil Futures Contract
In January 2021, we and Magellan Midstream Partners, L.P (“Magellan”) announced that our affiliates had entered into an agreement to jointly develop a futures contract for the physical delivery of crude oil in the Houston, Texas area in response to market interest for a Houston-based index with greater scale, flow assurance and price transparency. The quality specifications will be consistent with WTI crude oil originating from the Permian Basin with delivery capabilities at either our ECHO terminal in Houston or Magellan’s East Houston terminal.
Ethylene Export Terminal Enters Full Service
In December 2020, our ethylene export terminal located at our Morgan’s Point facility on the Houston Ship Channel entered full service with the commissioning of a refrigerated storage tank capable of handling 66 million pounds of ethylene. The ethylene export terminal, which had been in limited service since December 2019, features two docks and a nameplate capacity to load 1 million tons of ethylene per year. Ethylene is the primary feedstock for a wide variety of consumer products, including cell phones and computer parts, food packaging, apparel, textiles and personal protective equipment. We own a 50% member interest in Enterprise Navigator Ethylene Terminal LLC, which owns the export facility.
Our ethylene system serves as an open market storage and trading hub for the ethylene industry by incorporating storage capacity, connections to multiple ethylene pipelines, and high-volume export capabilities. In support of our ethylene business, our Mont Belvieu storage operations include a high-capacity underground ethylene storage well having a storage capacity of 600 million pounds of ethylene. The storage well is connected to our Morgan’s Point ethylene export terminal and further to Bayport, Texas by a 27-mile pipeline.
Enterprise Joins The Alliance To End Plastic Waste
In December 2020, we became the first midstream company member of The Alliance to End Plastic Waste (the “Alliance”), which represents an international community of chief executive officers from across the plastic industry that are committed to addressing the global plastic waste challenge. Formed in 2019, the Alliance partners with a diverse and growing network of organizations, technical leaders, engineers and scientists, all dedicated to the goal of ending plastic waste. To achieve this goal, the Alliance focuses on four strategic areas - infrastructure, innovation, education and clean up - to unlock innovative solutions that will bring the world closer to the Alliance’s ambition of diverting millions of tons of plastic waste in more than 100 at-risk cities across the globe by 2025.
Expansion of Midland-to-ECHO System Enters Service
In July 2019, we announced a third expansion of our Midland-to-ECHO System comprised of a 36-inch pipeline extending from Midland, Texas to our Enterprise Crude Houston (“ECHO”) terminal, and further from ECHO to a third-party terminal in Webster, Texas (collectively, the “Midland-to-Webster pipeline”). We proportionately consolidate a 29% undivided interest in the Midland-to-Webster pipeline, which we refer to as the “Midland-to-ECHO 3” pipeline. In October 2020, we announced that the Midland-to-ECHO segment was placed into service. The ECHO-to-Webster segment was mechanically complete in December 2020. Once all facilities are placed into full commercial service, our maximum transportation capacity on the pipeline is expected to approximate 450 MBPD.
Amendments to Crude Oil Transportation Agreements; Cancellation of Midland-to-ECHO 4 Pipeline
In September 2020, we announced the amendment of certain crude oil transportation agreements and the related cancellation of the Midland-to-ECHO 4 pipeline. In general, the amendments provide for the reduction of near-term pipeline volume commitments in exchange for extending the term of the related transportation agreements and using existing pipeline infrastructure. Cancellation of the Midland-to-ECHO 4 pipeline reduced our growth capital investments by an aggregate $800 million over the years 2020 through 2022. As a result of the cancellation, we recorded an impairment charge of $42.2 million.
Execution of Long-Term PGP Sales Agreement in Support of PDH 2 Facility
In June 2020, we announced the execution of a long-term sales agreement with Marubeni Corporation to supply PGP from our second propane dehydrogenation plant (“PDH 2”), which is currently under construction at our Mont Belvieu complex. Marubeni Corporation is a major Japanese integrated trading and investment business conglomerate and the world’s largest olefins trader. PGP is a primary petrochemical that has global demand growth as a feedstock to manufacture consumer, medical and industrial products that improve the daily lives and protect the health of people around the world.
PDH 2 is expected to have the capacity to upgrade 35 MBPD of propane into 1.65 billion pounds per year (equivalent to 25 MBPD) of PGP and begin service in the second quarter of 2023. Once PDH 2 is placed into service and integrated with PDH 1 and our other propylene production facilities, we will have the capability to produce 11 billion pounds of propylene per year.
Selected Energy Commodity Price Data
The following table presents selected average index prices for natural gas and selected NGL and petrochemical products for the periods indicated:
(1)
Natural gas prices are based on Henry-Hub Inside FERC commercial index prices as reported by Platts, which is a division of McGraw Hill Financial, Inc.
(2)
NGL prices for ethane, propane, normal butane, isobutane and natural gasoline are based on Mont Belvieu Non-TET commercial index prices as reported by Oil Price Information Service.
(3)
Polymer grade propylene prices represent average contract pricing for such product as reported by IHS Chemical, a division of IHS Inc. (“IHS Chemical”). Refinery grade propylene (“RGP”) prices represent weighted-average spot prices for such product as reported by IHS Chemical.
(4)
The “Indicative Gas Processing Gross Spread” represents our generic estimate of the gross economic benefit from extracting NGLs from natural gas production based on certain pricing assumptions. Specifically, it is the amount by which the assumed economic value of a composite gallon of NGLs at Mont Belvieu, Texas exceeds the value of the equivalent amount of energy in natural gas at Henry Hub, Louisiana. Our estimate of the indicative spread does not consider the operating costs incurred by a natural gas processing facility to extract the NGLs nor the transportation and fractionation costs to deliver the NGLs to market. In addition, the actual gas processing spread earned at each plant is determined by regional pricing and extraction dynamics.
The weighted-average indicative market price for NGLs was $0.38 per gallon in 2020 versus $0.47 per gallon for 2019.
The following table presents selected average index prices for crude oil for the periods indicated:
(1)
WTI prices are based on commercial index prices at Cushing, Oklahoma as measured by the NYMEX.
(2)
Midland and Houston crude oil prices are based on commercial index prices as reported by Argus.
(3)
Light Louisiana Sweet (“LLS”) prices are based on commercial index prices as reported by Platts.
Fluctuations in our consolidated revenues and cost of sales amounts are explained in large part by changes in energy commodity prices. Energy commodity prices in 2020 fluctuated significantly due to the adverse economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and, with respect to crude oil prices in early 2020, the production dispute between Saudi Arabia and Russia. See “Current Outlook” within this Part II, Item 7 for information regarding these recent events.
A decrease in our consolidated marketing revenues due to lower energy commodity sales prices may not result in a decrease in gross operating margin or cash available for distribution, since our consolidated cost of sales amounts would also decrease due to comparable decreases in the purchase prices of the underlying energy commodities. The same type of correlation would be true in the case of higher energy commodity sales prices and purchase costs.
We attempt to mitigate commodity price exposure through our hedging activities and the use of fee-based arrangements. See Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report for information regarding our commodity hedging activities.
Income Statement Highlights
The following table summarizes the key components of our consolidated results of operations for the years indicated (dollars in millions):
Revenues
The following table presents each business segment’s contribution to consolidated revenues for the years indicated (dollars in millions):
Total revenues for 2020 decreased $5.59 billion when compared to 2019 primarily due to a net $5.15 billion decrease in marketing revenues. Revenues from the marketing of crude oil and natural gas decreased $4.14 billion year-to-year primarily due to lower average sales prices, which accounted for a $3.27 billion decrease, and lower sales volumes, which accounted for an additional $867.8 million decrease. Revenues from the marketing of NGLs decreased a net $1.96 billion year-to-year primarily due to lower average sales prices, which accounted for a $3.16 billion decrease, partially offset by the effects of higher sales volumes, which resulted in a $1.2 billion increase. Revenues from the marketing of petrochemicals and refined products increased a net $957.4 million year-to-year primarily due to higher sales volumes, which accounted for a $2.05 billion increase, partially offset by lower average sales prices, which resulted in a $1.1 billion decrease.
Revenues from midstream services for 2020 decreased $441.4 million when compared to 2019. Revenues from our natural gas processing facilities decreased $229.9 million year-to-year primarily due to lower market values for the equity NGLs we receive as non-cash consideration for processing services. Revenues from our Midland-to-ECHO 2 pipeline, which commenced limited service in February 2019 and full service in April 2019 and Midland-to-ECHO 3 pipeline, which commenced service in October 2020, increased a combined $49.6 million year-to-year. Revenues from our other pipeline assets decreased $179.8 million year-to-year primarily due to lower demand for crude oil, natural gas and refined products transportation services. Lastly, revenues from our Mont Belvieu-area NGL fractionators decreased $82.0 million year-to-year primarily due to lower fractionation fees.
For additional information regarding our revenues, see Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Operating costs and expenses
Total operating costs and expenses for 2020 decreased $4.69 billion when compared to 2019 primarily due to lower cost of sales. The cost of sales associated with our marketing of crude oil and natural gas decreased a combined $3.83 billion year-to-year primarily due to lower average purchase prices, which accounted for a $3.19 billion decrease, and lower sales volumes, which accounted for an additional $634.4 million decrease. The cost of sales associated with our marketing of NGLs decreased a net $2.25 billion year-to-year primarily due to lower average purchase prices, which accounted for a $3.22 billion decrease, partially offset by higher sales volumes, which accounted for a $970.7 million increase. The cost of sales associated with our marketing of petrochemicals and refined products increased a net $736.9 million year-to-year primarily due to higher sales volumes, which accounted for a $1.81 billion increase, partially offset by lower average purchase prices, which accounted for a $1.07 billion decrease.
Other operating costs and expenses for 2020 decreased $220.5 million year-to-year primarily due to lower maintenance, chemicals and power-related expenses, which accounted for a $282.2 million decrease, partially offset by higher ad valorem taxes and employee compensation costs, which accounted for a $50.2 million increase. Depreciation, amortization and accretion expense increased $113.2 million year-to-year primarily due to assets placed into full or limited service since the first quarter of 2019 (e.g., the iBDH plant, Mentone and Orla gas processing facilities, Fracs X and XI and the Enterprise Navigator ethylene terminal).
Non-cash asset impairment charges increased $757.9 million year-to-year primarily due to the recognition in 2020 of the full impairment of goodwill associated with our Natural Gas Pipelines & Services business segment, which accounted for $296.3 million of expense, the partial impairment of our marine transportation business, which accounted for $256.7 million of expense, and the partial impairment of natural gas gathering and processing assets in South Texas, which accounted for an additional $125.7 million of expense. For information regarding these charges, see Notes 2, 4 and 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
General and administrative costs
General and administrative costs for 2020 increased $7.9 million when compared to 2019 primarily due to higher professional services and employee compensation costs.
Equity in income of unconsolidated affiliates
Equity income from our unconsolidated affiliates for 2020 decreased $136.9 million when compared to 2019 primarily due to decreased earnings from our investments in crude oil pipelines.
Operating income
Operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $1.04 billion when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the previously described year-to-year changes in revenues, operating costs and expenses, general and administrative costs and equity in income of unconsolidated affiliates.
Interest expense
The following table presents the components of our consolidated interest expense for the years indicated (dollars in millions):
(1)
Amount presented for the year ended December 31, 2019 reflects an unrealized, mark-to-market loss of $94.9 million recognized in September 2019 in connection with the exercise of swaptions. Due to declining interest rates, the counterparties to the swaptions exercised their right to put us into ten forward-starting swaps in September 2019 having an aggregate notional value of $1.0 billion. Since the swaptions were not designated as hedging instruments and were subject to mark-to-market accounting, we incurred an unrealized, mark-to-market loss at inception of the forward-starting swaps that is reflected as an increase in interest expense in 2019. The ten forward-starting swaps resulting from the swaption exercise were designated as hedging instruments and qualified for cash flow hedge accounting.
(2)
We capitalize interest costs incurred on funds used to construct property, plant and equipment while the asset is in its construction phase. Capitalized interest amounts become part of the historical cost of an asset and are charged to earnings (as a component of depreciation expense) on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the asset once the asset enters its intended service. When capitalized interest is recorded, it reduces interest expense from what it would be otherwise. Capitalized interest amounts fluctuate based on the timing of when projects are placed into service, our capital investment levels and the interest rates charged on borrowings.
(3)
Primarily reflects facility commitment fees charged in connection with our revolving credit facilities and amortization of debt issuance costs.
Interest charged on debt principal outstanding, which is a key driver of interest expense, increased a net $79.0 million year-to-year primarily due to increased debt principal amounts outstanding during 2020, which accounted for a $109.2 million increase, partially offset by the effect of lower overall interest rates during 2020, which accounted for a $30.2 million decrease. Our weighted-average debt principal balance for 2020 was $29.91 billion compared to $27.41 billion for 2019. In general, our debt principal balances have increased over time due to the partial debt financing of our capital investments. For information regarding our debt obligations, see Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Change in fair value of Liquidity Option
On February 25, 2020, we received notice from Marquard & Bahls AG (“M&B”) of M&B’s election to exercise its rights (the “Liquidity Option”) under the Liquidity Option Agreement among the Partnership, OTA Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation previously named Oiltanking Holding Americas, Inc. (“OTA”), and M&B dated October 1, 2014 (the “Liquidity Option Agreement”). The Partnership settled its obligations under the Liquidity Option Agreement on March 5, 2020.
For the period in which the Liquidity Option was outstanding, we recognized non-cash expense in connection with accretion and changes in management estimates that affected the valuation of the Liquidity Option liability. Expense amounts attributable to changes in the fair value of the Liquidity Option were $2.3 million and $119.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The expense recognized for 2020 primarily reflects accretion expense for the period in which the Liquidity Option liability was outstanding before it was settled on March 5, 2020. The higher level of expense recognized in 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in the discount factor used in determining the present value of the liability.
For additional information regarding the exercise, see “Issuance of Common Units due to Settlement of Liquidity Option in March 2020” within the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Part II, Item 7. In addition, please refer to Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Income taxes
The following table presents the components of our consolidated benefit from (provision for) income taxes for the years indicated (dollars in millions):
On March 5, 2020, the Partnership settled its obligations under the Liquidity Option Agreement and indirectly assumed the deferred tax liability of OTA, which reflects OTA’s outside basis difference in the limited partner interests it received from the Partnership in October 2014. Upon settlement of the Liquidity Option, the Liquidity Option liability was effectively replaced by the deferred tax liability of OTA calculated in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes.
At March 5, 2020, the Liquidity Option liability amount was $511.9 million. Since the book value of the Liquidity Option liability exceeded OTA’s estimated deferred tax liability of $439.7 million on that date, we recognized a non-cash benefit in earnings of $72.2 million, which is reflected in the “Benefit from (provision for) income tax” line on our Statement of Consolidated Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. OTA recognized an additional net, non-cash deferred income tax benefit of $83.1 million primarily due to a decrease in the outside basis difference of its investment in the Partnership attributable to a decline in the market price of the Partnership’s common units subsequent to March 5, 2020 through September 30, 2020. In total, our earnings for 2020 reflect $155.3 million of deferred income tax benefit attributable to OTA.
On September 30, 2020, OTA exchanged the Partnership common units it owned for non-publicly traded preferred units having a stated value of $1,000 per unit. As a result and beginning September 30, 2020, OTA’s deferred tax liability no longer fluctuates due to market price changes in our common units. For information regarding the issuance of preferred units on September 30, 2020, including the OTA-related exchange, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” within this Part II, Item 7.
For information regarding our income taxes, see Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Business Segment Highlights
We evaluate segment performance based on our financial measure of gross operating margin. Gross operating margin is an important performance measure of the core profitability of our operations and forms the basis of our internal financial reporting. We believe that investors benefit from having access to the same financial measures that our management uses in evaluating segment results.
The following table presents gross operating margin by segment and non-GAAP total gross operating margin for the years indicated (dollars in millions):
(1)
Within the context of this table, total segment gross operating margin represents a subtotal and corresponds to measures similarly titled within our business segment disclosures found under Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Total gross operating margin includes equity in the earnings of unconsolidated affiliates, but is exclusive of other income and expense transactions, income taxes, the cumulative effect of changes in accounting principles and extraordinary charges. Total gross operating margin is presented on a 100% basis before any allocation of earnings to noncontrolling interests. Our calculation of gross operating margin may or may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Segment gross operating margin for NGL Pipelines & Services and Crude Oil Pipelines & Services reflect adjustments for shipper make-up rights that are included in management’s evaluation of segment results. However, these adjustments are excluded from non-GAAP total gross operating margin.
The GAAP financial measure most directly comparable to total gross operating margin is operating income. For a discussion of operating income and its components, see the previous section titled “Income Statement Highlights” within this Part II, Item 7. The following table presents a reconciliation of operating income to total gross operating margin for the years indicated (dollars in millions):
Each of our business segments benefits from the supporting role of our marketing activities. The main purpose of our marketing activities is to support the utilization and expansion of assets across our midstream energy asset network by increasing the volumes handled by such assets, which results in additional fee-based earnings for each business segment. In performing these support roles, our marketing activities also seek to participate in supply and demand opportunities as a supplemental source of gross operating margin for us. The financial results of our marketing efforts fluctuate due to changes in volumes handled and overall market conditions, which are influenced by current and forward market prices for the products bought and sold.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and lower energy commodity prices, we experienced a reduction in volumes on a number of our assets (e.g., our crude oil pipelines and export docks and natural gas gathering systems) during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to reduced upstream drilling and production activity and lower downstream refinery activity and demand for transportation fuels. Furthermore, we may continue to experience throughput declines in the future on our gathering systems, long-haul liquids and natural gas pipelines and at our terminal and other facilities until the pandemic ends and economic activity is fully restored. For a general discussion of the impact of the pandemic on our partnership and industry, see “Current Outlook” within this Part II, Item 7.
NGL Pipelines & Services
The following table presents segment gross operating margin and selected volumetric data for the NGL Pipelines & Services segment for the years indicated (dollars in millions, volumes as noted):
(1)
Represents the NGL volumes we earn and take title to in connection with our processing activities.
(2)
Volumes reported correspond to the revenue streams earned by our natural gas processing plants.
(3)
Fee-based natural gas processing volumes are measured at either the wellhead or plant inlet in MMcf/d.
Natural gas processing and related NGL marketing activities
Gross operating margin from natural gas processing and related NGL marketing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $162.2 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross operating margin from our natural gas processing facilities located in the Rocky Mountains (Meeker, Pioneer and Chaco plants) decreased a combined $94.2 million year-to-year primarily due to lower average processing margins (including the impact of hedging activities). On a combined basis, fee-based natural gas processing volumes at these plants decreased 319 MMcf/d year-to-year.
Gross operating margin from our South Texas natural gas processing facilities decreased $90.2 million year-to-year primarily due to lower average processing margins (including the impact of hedging activities), which accounted for a $51.2 million decrease, lower average processing fees, which accounted for a $23.9 million decrease, and lower processing volumes, which accounted for an additional $12.8 million decrease. On a combined basis, fee-based natural gas processing volumes at these plants decreased 156 MMcf/d and equity NGL production volumes increased 5 MBPD year-to-year.
Gross operating margin from our Louisiana and Mississippi natural gas processing facilities decreased a net $32.4 million year-to-year primarily due to lower average processing margins (including the impact of hedging activities), which accounted for a $33.4 million decrease, and lower processing volumes, which accounted for an additional $17.9 million decrease, partially offset by lower operating costs, which accounted for a $10.7 million increase, and higher average processing fees, which accounted for an additional $9.5 million increase. Net to our interest, fee-based natural gas processing and equity NGL production volumes at these plants decreased a combined 389 MMcf/d and 8 MBPD, respectively, year-to-year.
Gross operating margin from our Permian Basin natural gas processing facilities decreased a net $18.9 million year-to-year primarily due to lower average processing margins (including the impact of hedging activities), which accounted for a $42.5 million decrease, and lower average processing fees, which accounted for an additional $25.2 million decrease, partially offset by higher processing volumes, which accounted for a $54.8 million increase. On a combined basis, fee-based natural gas processing and equity NGL production volumes at our Permian Basin plants increased 363 MMcf/d and 8 MBPD, respectively, year-to-year, primarily due to additional processing capacity at our Orla facility that was placed into service in July 2019 and the start-up of our Mentone facility in December 2019.
Gross operating margin from our NGL marketing activities increased a net $71.5 million year-to-year primarily due to higher sales volumes, which accounted for a $248.9 million increase, partially offset by lower average sales margins (including the impact of hedging activities), which accounted for a $177.7 million decrease. The year-to-year increase in gross operating margin can be attributed to results from marketing strategies that seek to optimize our storage assets, which accounted for a $123.7 million increase, partially offset by lower earnings from strategies that seek to optimize our export, plant and transportation assets, which accounted for a combined $98.2 million decrease. In addition, gross operating margin from our NGL marketing activities attributable to non-cash, mark-to-market earnings increased $46.0 million year-to-year.
NGL pipelines, storage and terminals
Gross operating margin from our NGL pipelines, storage and terminal assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $121.9 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
A number of our pipelines, including the Mid-America Pipeline System, Seminole NGL Pipeline, Chaparral NGL Pipeline, Shin Oak NGL Pipeline, Texas Express Pipeline and Front Range Pipeline, serve Permian Basin and/or Rocky Mountain producers. On a combined basis, gross operating margin from these pipelines increased a net $65.8 million year-to-year primarily due to higher average transportation fees, which accounted for a $64.9 million increase, and lower operating costs, which accounted for an additional $36.4 million increase, partially offset by lower transportation volumes of 101 MBPD (net to our interest), which accounted for a $25.9 million decrease.
Gross operating margin from LPG-related activities at EHT increased $62.7 million year-to-year primarily due to higher export volumes of 105 MBPD. The increase in export volumes is attributable to an LPG expansion project at EHT that was completed in the third quarter of 2019. Gross operating margin from our Houston Ship Channel Pipeline System increased $21.5 million year-to-year primarily due to an 86 MBPD increase in transportation volumes. Gross operating margin at our Morgan’s Point Ethane Export Terminal increased $8.6 million year-to-year primarily due to lower operating costs. Export volumes from our Morgan’s Point Ethane Export Terminal decreased 9 MBPD year-to-year.
Gross operating margin from our Aegis Pipeline increased a net $27.3 million year-to-year primarily due to a 107 MBPD increase in transportation volumes associated with contract commitments, which accounted for a $43.0 million increase, partially offset by higher operating costs, which accounted for a $9.5 million decrease.
Gross operating margin from our South Louisiana NGL Pipeline System and related storage facilities decreased a combined $22.6 million year-to-year primarily due to lower transportation volumes of 60 MBPD, which accounted for an $11.9 million decrease, and lower terminal revenues, which accounted for an additional $6.0 million decrease. Gross operating margin from our Lou-Tex NGL Pipeline decreased $8.4 million year-to-year primarily due to lower transportation volumes of 24 MBPD.
Gross operating margin from our Mont Belvieu storage facility decreased a net $16.6 million year-to-year primarily due to lower handling and throughput fee revenues, which accounted for a $45.6 million decrease, partially offset by higher storage fees, which accounted for a $32.1 million increase.
Gross operating margin from our South Texas NGL Pipeline System decreased $11.9 million year-to-year primarily due to lower pipeline capacity fee revenues earned from an affiliate pipeline. Transportation volumes on our South Texas NGL Pipeline System increased 15 MBPD year-to-year.
NGL fractionation
Gross operating margin from NGL fractionation during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $152.9 million when compared to the year ended December 31 2019. Gross operating margin from our Mont Belvieu-area NGL fractionators increased $123.9 million primarily due to higher fractionation volumes, which increased 353 MBPD year-to-year (net to our interest) primarily due to the start-up of Frac X and Frac XI in March 2020 and September 2020, respectively. Gross operating margin from our Hobbs NGL fractionator increased $20.2 million year-to-year primarily due to major maintenance activities completed in the first quarter of 2019. NGL fractionation volumes at our Hobbs NGL fractionator increased 12 MBPD year-to-year.
Crude Oil Pipelines & Services
The following table presents segment gross operating margin and selected volumetric data for the Crude Oil Pipelines & Services segment for the years indicated (dollars in millions, volumes as noted):
(1)
In general, segment volumes for the year ended December 31, 2020 were adversely impacted by the reduction in upstream crude oil production activities caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and crude oil price shock.
Gross operating margin from our Crude Oil Pipelines & Services segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $90.5 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross operating margin from our Midland-to-ECHO System and related business activities decreased $192.2 million year-to-year primarily due to lower average sales margins from marketing activities (including the impact of hedging activities) of $217.2 million. Gross operating margin from our Midland-to-ECHO 3 pipeline, which commenced operations in October 2020, was $30.0 million with transportation volumes of 214 MBPD.
Gross operating margin from our South Texas Crude Oil Pipeline System decreased $50.0 million year-to-year primarily due to lower transportation volumes, which accounted for a $32.4 million decrease, and lower transportation and other fees, which accounted for an additional $23.5 million decrease. Gross operating margin from our equity investment in the Eagle Ford Crude Oil Pipeline decreased $24.2 million year-to-year primarily due to lower transportation volumes. On an aggregate basis, transportation volumes on these two pipeline systems decreased a combined 68 MBPD year-to-year (net to our interest).
Gross operating margin from our equity investment in the Seaway Pipeline decreased $53.2 million year-to-year primarily due to lower average transportation fees, which accounted for a $36.7 million decrease, and lower transportation volumes, which accounted for an additional $18.9 million decrease. Net to our interest, transportation and marine terminal volumes for the Seaway Pipeline decreased 164 MBPD and 32 MBPD, respectively, year-to-year.
Gross operating margin from our ECHO terminal decreased $25.9 million year-to-year primarily due to lower terminaling and storage revenue, which accounted for a $16.6 million decrease, and a benefit recognized during the second quarter of 2019 in connection with a settlement, which accounted for an additional $13.9 million decrease.
Gross operating margin from our other crude oil marketing activities increased $225.8 million year-to-year primarily due to higher average sales margins (including the impact of hedging activities). The year-to-year increase in gross operating margin from these activities is primarily due to results from marketing strategies that seek to optimize our storage assets.
Gross operating margin from crude oil activities at EHT increased $15.3 million year-to-year primarily due to higher storage revenues. Crude oil terminal volumes at EHT decreased by 164 MBPD year-to-year. Lastly, gross operating margin from our EFS Midstream system increased $13.4 million year-to-year primarily due to higher average transportation fees.
Natural Gas Pipelines & Services
The following table presents segment gross operating margin and selected volumetric data for the Natural Gas Pipelines & Services segment for the years indicated (dollars in millions, volumes as noted):
Gross operating margin from our Natural Gas Pipelines & Services segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $136.0 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross operating margin from our Acadian Gas System decreased $45.4 million year-to-year primarily due to lower capacity reservation revenues on the Haynesville Extension pipeline, which accounted for a $32.5 million decrease, and lower net benefits from settlements, which accounted for an additional $15.4 million decrease. Transportation volumes on our Acadian Gas System decreased 144 BBtus/d year-to-year. Gross operating margin from our Texas Intrastate System decreased $36.8 million year-to-year primarily due to lower capacity reservation revenues. Transportation volumes on our Texas Intrastate System decreased 171 BBtus/d year-to-year. Gross operating margin from our Haynesville Gathering System decreased $19.9 million year-to-year primarily due to lower gathering volumes of 211 BBtus/d, which accounted for a $14.4 million decrease, and lower average gathering fees, which accounted for an additional $4.9 million decrease.
On a combined basis, gross operating margin from our Jonah Gathering System, Piceance Basin Gathering System, and San Juan Gathering System in the Rocky Mountains decreased a net $17.2 million year-to-year primarily due to lower volumes of 492 BBtus/d, which accounted for a $44.9 million decrease, partially offset by higher average fees, which accounted for a $22.5 million increase.
Gross operating margin from our natural gas marketing activities decreased $51.1 million year-to-year primarily due to lower average sales margins (including the impact of hedging activities), which accounted for a $37.0 million decrease, and lower sales volumes, which accounted for an additional $14.1 million decrease.
Gross operating margin from our Permian Basin Gathering System increased $34.3 million year-to-year primarily due to a 456 BBtus/d increase in natural gas gathering volumes.
Petrochemical & Refined Products Services
The following table presents segment gross operating margin and selected volumetric data for the Petrochemical & Refined Products Services segment for the years indicated (dollars in millions, volumes as noted):
(1)
Reflects aggregate sales volumes for our octane additive and iBDH facilities located at our Mont Belvieu complex and our HPIB facility located adjacent to the Houston Ship Channel.
Propylene production and related activities
Gross operating margin from propylene production and related activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $25.9 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross operating margin from our propylene production facilities increased a combined $14.1 million year-to-year primarily due to lower operating costs, which accounted for an $18.9 million increase, and higher exchange and storage fee revenues, which accounted for an additional $15.6 million increase, partially offset by lower propylene and associated by-product sales volumes, which accounted for a $23.6 million decrease. Propylene production volumes at these facilities decreased a combined 6 MBPD year-to-year (net to our interest). As refiners reduced their utilization rates in response to lower demand for refined products caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, there was a decrease in the availability of refinery grade propylene feedstock used by our facilities to create polymer grade propylene. As a result, our propylene production volumes were reduced, with the largest impacts occurring in the second quarter of 2020.
Gross operating margin from our propylene export terminals increased $10.2 million year-to-year primarily due to higher average terminal fees. Propylene export volumes decreased 3 MBPD year-to-year.
Isomerization and related operations
Gross operating margin from isomerization and related operations decreased a net $12.3 million year-to-year primarily due to lower average by-product sales prices, which accounted for a $21.9 million decrease, and lower isomerization volumes of 13 MBPD, which accounted for an additional $9.5 million decrease, partially offset by lower operating costs, which accounted for a $19.7 million increase.
Octane enhancement and related plant operations
Gross operating margin from our octane enhancement and related plant operations decreased a net $4.3 million year-to-year primarily due to lower average sales margins, which accounted for a $23.4 million decrease, and higher operating costs, which accounted for an additional $13.5 million decrease, partially offset by higher sales volumes, which accounted for a $27.6 million increase. The increase in operating expenses is primarily due to our iBDH plant, which is integrated with our legacy octane enhancement and high purity isobutylene assets and was placed into service in December 2019.
Refined products pipelines and related activities
Gross operating margin from refined products pipelines and related activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $12.2 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross operating margin from our TE Products Pipeline System and associated terminals decreased a combined $37.3 million year-to-year primarily due to lower interstate refined products transportation volumes, which accounted for a $12.5 million decrease, and lower NGL transportation volumes, which accounted for a $12.0 million decrease, higher operating costs, which accounted for a $3.8 million decrease, and lower average intrastate refined products transportation fees, which accounted for an additional $2.7 million decrease. Overall transportation volumes on our TE Products Pipeline System increased a net 34 MBPD year-to-year.
Gross operating margin from our refined products terminal in Beaumont, Texas decreased a net $7.1 million year-to-year primarily due to lower storage revenues, which accounted for a $14.5 million decrease, partially offset by lower operating costs, which accounted for a $9.4 million increase. Marine terminal volumes at Beaumont decreased 53 MBPD year-to-year.
Gross operating margin from our refined products marketing activities increased $27.4 million year-to-year primarily due to higher sales volumes.
Ethylene exports and other services
Gross operating margin from ethylene exports and other services for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $15.1 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Gross operating margin from our ethylene export terminal and its related operations was a combined $25.6 million for 2020. Our ethylene export terminal and associated infrastructure were placed into limited service in December 2019 and full service in December 2020. Loading volumes at our ethylene export terminal for 2020 were 10 MBPD (net to our interest).
Gross operating margin from marine transportation services decreased $12.4 million year-to-year primarily due to lower average fleet utilization rates in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Based on current market conditions (as of the filing date of this annual report), we believe that the Partnership and its consolidated businesses will have sufficient liquidity, cash flow from operations and access to capital markets to fund their capital investments and working capital needs for the reasonably foreseeable future. At December 31, 2020, we had $6.06 billion of consolidated liquidity, which was comprised of $5.0 billion of available borrowing capacity under EPO’s revolving credit facilities and $1.06 billion of unrestricted cash on hand.
We may issue debt and equity securities to assist us in meeting our future funding and liquidity requirements, including those related to capital investments. We have a universal shelf registration statement (the “2019 Shelf”) on file with the SEC which allows the Partnership and EPO to issue an unlimited amount of equity and debt securities, respectively.
Enterprise Declares Cash Distribution for Fourth Quarter of 2020
On January 7, 2021, we announced that the Board declared a quarterly cash distribution of $0.45 per common unit, or $1.80 per unit on an annualized basis, to be paid to the Partnership’s common unitholders with respect to the fourth quarter of 2020. The quarterly distribution was paid on February 11, 2021 to unitholders of record as of the close of business on January 29, 2021. The total amount paid was $988.8 million, which includes $7.1 million for distribution equivalent rights on phantom unit awards.
In light of current economic conditions, management will evaluate any future increases in cash distributions on a quarterly basis. The payment of any quarterly cash distribution is subject to management’s evaluation of our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows in connection with such payments and Board approval.
Consolidated Debt
At December 31, 2020, the average maturity of EPO’s consolidated debt obligations was approximately 20.4 years. The following table presents the scheduled maturities of principal amounts of EPO’s consolidated debt obligations at December 31, 2020 for the years indicated (dollars in millions):
In January 2020, EPO issued $3.0 billion aggregate principal amount of senior notes comprised of (i) $1.0 billion principal amount of 2.80% fixed-rate senior notes due January 2030 (“Senior Notes AAA”), (ii) $1.0 billion principal amount of 3.70% fixed-rate senior notes due January 2051 (“Senior Notes BBB”) and (iii) $1.0 billion principal amount of 3.95% fixed-rate senior notes due January 2060 (“Senior Notes CCC”). Net proceeds from this offering were used by EPO for the repayment of $500 million principal amount of its Senior Notes Q that matured in January 2020, temporary repayment of amounts outstanding under its commercial paper program and for general company purposes. In addition, net proceeds from this offering were used by EPO for the repayment of $1.0 billion principal amount of its Senior Notes Y that matured in September 2020.
In August 2020, EPO issued $1.0 billion principal amount of 3.20% fixed-rate senior notes due February 2052 (“Senior Notes DDD”) and $250.0 million principal amount of reopened 2.80% fixed-rate Senior Notes AAA. We received aggregate net proceeds of $1.25 billion from the sale of the notes after deducting underwriting discounts and other estimated offering expenses payable by us. Net proceeds from the issuance of these senior notes were used for general company purposes, including for growth capital investments, and to repay a portion of the $750.0 million in principal amount of Senior Notes TT that matured in February 2021.
In September 2020, EPO entered into a new 364-Day Revolving Credit Agreement that replaced its September 2019 364-Day Revolving Credit Agreement. The new 364-Day Revolving Credit Agreement matures in September 2021. There was no principal amount outstanding under the September 2019 364-Day Revolving Credit Agreement when it expired and was replaced by the September 2020 364-Day Revolving Credit Agreement.
In February 2021, EPO notified its trustee and paying agent to redeem all of the $575.0 million outstanding principal amount of its Senior Notes RR effective as of March 15, 2021 (one month prior to their scheduled maturity in April 2021). These notes are redeemable at EPO’s election at par (i.e., at a redemption price equal to the outstanding principal amount of such notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon). On a short term basis, the redemption of EPO’s Senior Notes RR is expected to be made using proceeds from the issuance of short term notes under EPO’s commercial paper program.
For additional information regarding our consolidated debt obligations, see Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Credit Ratings
As of March 1, 2021, the investment-grade credit ratings of EPO’s long-term senior unsecured debt securities were BBB+ from Standard and Poor’s, Baa1 from Moody’s and BBB+ from Fitch Ratings. In addition, the credit ratings of EPO’s short-term senior unsecured debt securities were A-2 from Standard and Poor’s, P-2 from Moody’s and from Fitch Ratings. EPO’s credit ratings reflect only the view of a rating agency and should not be interpreted as a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any of our securities. A credit rating can be revised upward or downward or withdrawn at any time by a rating agency, if it determines that circumstances warrant such a change. A credit rating from one rating agency should be evaluated independently of credit ratings from other rating agencies.
Common Unit Repurchases Under 2019 Buyback Program
In January 2019, we announced that the Board had approved a $2.0 billion multi-year unit buyback program (the “2019 Buyback Program”), which provides us with an additional method to return capital to investors. The 2019 Buyback Program authorizes the Partnership to repurchase its common units from time to time, including through open market purchases and negotiated transactions. The timing and pace of buy backs under the program will be determined by a number of factors including (i) our financial performance and flexibility, (ii) organic growth and acquisition opportunities with higher potential returns on investment, (iii) the market price of the Partnership’s common units and implied cash flow yield and (iv) maintaining targeted financial leverage, which is currently a debt-to-normalized adjusted EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization) ratio in the range of 3.25 to 3.75 times. No time limit has been set for completion of the 2019 Buyback Program, and it may be suspended or discontinued at any time.
We repurchased an aggregate 8,978,317 common units under the 2019 Buyback Program through open market and private purchases during the year ended December 31, 2020. The total purchase price of these repurchases was $186.3 million including commissions and fees. Units repurchased under the 2019 Buyback Program are immediately cancelled upon acquisition. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining available capacity under the 2019 Buyback Program was $1.73 billion.
In addition to the 2019 Buyback Program, privately held affiliates of EPCO acquired 1,459,000 of our common units on the open market during the year ended December 31, 2020. In the aggregate, 10,437,317 common units were purchased on the open market during the year ended December 31, 2020 under the 2019 Buyback Program and by privately held affiliates of EPCO.
Issuance of Common Units due to Settlement of Liquidity Option in March 2020
On March 5, 2020, we settled our obligations under the Liquidity Option Agreement by issuing 54,807,352 new common units to Skyline North Americas, Inc. in exchange for the capital stock of OTA. Upon settlement of the Liquidity Option, we indirectly acquired the 54,807,352 Partnership common units owned by OTA (which were issued by us to OTA in October 2014) and assumed all future income tax obligations of OTA, including its deferred tax liability. For additional information regarding settlement of the Liquidity Option, see Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
September 2020 Issuance of Series A Cumulative Convertible Preferred Units
On September 30, 2020, we issued and sold an aggregate of 50,000 Series A Cumulative Convertible Preferred Units in a private placement transaction. The stated value of each preferred unit is $1,000 per unit. The total offering price for the preferred units was $50.0 million, of which $32.5 million was received in cash with the remaining $17.5 million funded through the exchange of 1,120,588 of our common units owned by the purchasers. Cash proceeds from the preferred unit offering include $15.0 million received from a privately held affiliate of EPCO for the purchase of 15,000 preferred units. Offering expenses were approximately $1.0 million.
Concurrently, we exchanged all of the 54,807,352 Partnership common units owned directly by OTA for 855,915 of our new preferred units having an equivalent value. The preferred units held by OTA, like the common units OTA held prior to the exchange, are accounted for as treasury units by us in consolidation. The historical cost of the treasury units did not change as a result of the exchange and remains at the $1.3 billion recognized in March 2020 in connection with settlement of the Liquidity Option.
For additional information regarding the preferred units, see Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Cash Flow Statement Highlights
The following table summarizes our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the years indicated (dollars in millions).
Net cash flows provided by operating activities are largely dependent on earnings from our consolidated business activities. Changes in energy commodity prices may impact the demand for natural gas, NGLs, crude oil, petrochemical and refined products, which could impact sales of our products and the demand for our midstream services. Changes in demand for our products and services may be caused by other factors, including prevailing economic conditions, reduced demand by consumers for the end products made with hydrocarbon products, increased competition, public health emergencies, adverse weather conditions and government regulations affecting prices and production levels. We may also incur credit and price risk to the extent customers do not fulfill their contractual obligations to us in connection with our marketing activities and long-term take-or-pay agreements. For a more complete discussion of these and other risk factors pertinent to our business, see Part I, Item 1A of this annual report.
For additional information regarding our cash flow amounts, please refer to the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
The following information highlights significant year-to-year fluctuations in our consolidated cash flow amounts:
Operating activities
Net cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $629.0 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to:
• a $310.1 million year-to-year decrease primarily due to higher levels of working capital employed in our marketing activities, which accounted for a $1.4 billion decrease, partially offset by the timing of cash receipts and payments related to operations;
• a $177.5 million year-to-year decrease resulting from lower partnership earnings in 2020 when compared to 2019 (determined by adjusting our $801.4 million year-to-year decrease in net income for changes in the non-cash items identified on our Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows); and
• a $141.4 million year-to-year decrease in cash distributions attributable to earnings from unconsolidated affiliates, with those unconsolidated affiliates owning crude oil pipelines and terminals accounting for substantially all of the decrease.
For information regarding significant year-to-year changes in our consolidated net income and underlying segment results, see “Income Statement Highlights” and “Business Segment Highlights” within this Part II, Item 7.
Investing activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $1.45 billion when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to:
• a $1.24 billion year-to-year decrease in investments for property, plant and equipment (see “Capital Investments” within this Part II, Item 7 for additional information);
• a $124.2 million year-to-year increase in cash distributions attributable to the return of capital from unconsolidated affiliates, with those unconsolidated affiliates owning crude oil pipelines and terminals accounting for a majority of the increase; and
• a $96.0 million year-to-year decrease in investments in unconsolidated affiliates primarily due to lower cash outlays for NGL and crude oil pipeline projects.
Financing activities
Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased a net $77.6 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to:
• a $601.9 million year-to-year decrease in cash contributions from noncontrolling interests. In July 2019, an affiliate of Apache Corporation acquired a noncontrolling 33% equity interest in our consolidated subsidiary that owns the Shin Oak NGL Pipeline for $440.7 million. In addition, cash contributions from noncontrolling interests in connection with our Pascagoula natural gas processing plant and ethylene export facility decreased a combined $105.5 million year-to-year;
• a $105.2 million year-to-year increase in cash used to acquire common units under our 2019 Buyback Program;
• an $82.2 million year-to-year decrease in net cash proceeds from the issuance of common units under our distribution reinvestment plan (“DRIP”) and employee unit purchase plan (“EUPP”). In July 2019, the Partnership announced that, beginning with the quarterly distribution payment paid in August 2019, it would use common units purchased on the open market, rather than issuing new common units, to satisfy its delivery obligations under the DRIP and EUPP; and
• a $51.2 million year-to-year increase in cash distributions paid to common unitholders attributable to increases in the quarterly cash distribution rate per unit; partially offset by
• a net $757.4 million year-to-year increase in net cash inflows from debt. In 2020, we issued $4.25 billion aggregate principal amount of senior notes, partially offset by the repayment of $1.5 billion principal amount of senior notes. In 2019, we issued $2.5 billion aggregate principal amount of senior notes, partially offset by the repayment or repurchase of $1.52 billion principal amount of senior and junior subordinated notes. In addition, net repayments of short term notes under EPO’s commercial paper program were $481.8 million in 2020 compared to net issuances of $481.8 million in 2019; and
• a $31.5 million increase in net cash proceeds from the issuance of preferred units in September 2020.
Non-GAAP Cash Flow Measures
Distributable Cash Flow
Our partnership agreement requires us to make quarterly distributions to our unitholders of all available cash, after any cash reserves established by Enterprise GP in its sole discretion. Cash reserves include those for the proper conduct of our business, including those for capital investments, debt service, working capital, operating expenses, common unit repurchases, commitments and contingencies and other amounts. The retention of cash by the partnership allows us to reinvest in our growth and reduce our future reliance on the equity and debt capital markets.
We measure available cash by reference to distributable cash flow (“DCF”), which is a non-GAAP cash flow measure. DCF is an important financial measure for our common unitholders since it serves as an indicator of our success in providing a cash return on investment. Specifically, this financial measure indicates to investors whether or not we are generating cash flows at a level that can sustain our declared quarterly cash distributions. DCF is also a quantitative standard used by the investment community with respect to publicly traded partnerships since the value of a partnership unit is, in part, measured by its yield, which is based on the amount of cash distributions a partnership can pay to a unitholder. Our management compares the DCF we generate to the cash distributions we expect to pay our common unitholders. Using this metric, management computes our distribution coverage ratio. Our calculation of DCF may or may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Based on the level of available cash each quarter, management proposes a quarterly cash distribution rate to the Board of Enterprise GP, which has sole authority in approving such matters. Unlike several other master limited partnerships, our general partner has a non-economic ownership interest in us and is not entitled to receive any cash distributions from us based on incentive distribution rights or other equity interests.
Our use of DCF for the limited purposes described above and in this report is not a substitute for net cash flows provided by operating activities, which is the most comparable GAAP measure. For a discussion of net cash flows provided by operating activities, see “Cash Flow Statement Highlights” within this Part II, Item 7.
The following table summarizes our calculation of DCF for the years indicated (dollars in millions):
(1)
For a discussion of the primary drivers of changes in our comparative income statement amounts, see “Income Statement Highlights” within this Part II, Item 7.
(2)
Reflects distributions received from unconsolidated affiliates attributable to earnings and the return of capital.
(3)
Sustaining capital expenditures include cash payments and accruals applicable to the period.
(4)
Represents DCF before proceeds from asset sales and the monetization of interest rate derivative instruments accounted for as cash flow hedges.
(5)
See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report for information regarding our quarterly cash distributions declared with respect to the years indicated.
(6)
At the sole discretion of Enterprise GP, cash retained by the partnership with respect to each of these periods was primarily reinvested in growth capital projects. This retainage of cash substantially reduced our reliance on the equity capital markets to fund such expenditures.
(7)
Distribution coverage ratio is determined by dividing DCF by total cash distributions paid to common unitholders and in connection with distribution equivalent rights with respect to the period.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net cash flows provided by operating activities to DCF for the years indicated (dollars in millions):
Free Cash Flow
Free Cash Flow (“FCF”), a non-GAAP financial measure, is a traditional cash flow metric that is widely used by a variety of investors and other participants in the financial community, as opposed to DCF, which is a cash flow measure primarily used by investors and others in evaluating midstream energy companies, including master limited partnerships. In general, FCF is a measure of how much cash flow a business generates during a specified time period after accounting for all capital investments, including expenditures for growth and sustaining capital projects. By comparison, only sustaining capital expenditures are reflected in DCF.
We believe that FCF is important to traditional investors since it reflects the amount of cash available for reducing debt, investing in additional capital projects, paying distributions, common unit repurchases and similar matters. Since business partners fund certain capital projects of our consolidated subsidiaries, our determination of FCF reflects the amount of cash contributed from and distributed to noncontrolling interests. Our calculation of FCF may or may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Our use of FCF for the limited purposes described above and in this report is not a substitute for net cash flows provided by operating activities, which is the most comparable GAAP measure.
FCF fluctuates based on our earnings, the level of investing activities we undertake each period, and the timing of operating cash receipts and payments. The following table summarizes our calculation of FCF for the years indicated (dollars in millions):
The elements used in calculating FCF are sourced directly from our statements of consolidated cash flows presented under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report. For a discussion of significant year-to-year changes in our cash flow statement amounts, see “Cash Flow Statement Highlights” within this Part II, Item 7.
Capital Investments
The following table summarizes our capital investments for the years indicated (dollars in millions):
(1)
Growth and sustaining capital amounts presented in the table above are presented on a cash basis. In total, these amounts represent “Capital expenditures” as presented on our Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows.
(2)
Growth capital projects either (a) result in new sources of cash flow due to enhancements of or additions to existing assets (e.g., additional revenue streams, cost savings resulting from debottlenecking of a facility, etc.) or (b) expand our asset base through construction of new facilities that will generate additional revenue streams and cash flows.
(3)
Sustaining capital expenditures are capital expenditures (as defined by GAAP) resulting from improvements to existing assets. Such expenditures serve to maintain existing operations but do not generate additional revenues or result in significant cost savings.
We placed a number of growth capital projects into commercial service during 2020 including:
• Frac X and Frac XI in March 2020 and September 2020, respectively;
• expansion projects on the Texas Express Pipeline and Front Range Pipeline in April 2020;
• the Midland-to-ECHO segment of the Midland-to-Webster pipeline in October 2020; and
• refrigerated storage at our ethylene export terminal in December 2020.
We currently have $3.6 billion of growth capital projects scheduled to be completed by the end of 2023, which includes completion of a natural gasoline hydrotreater facility at our Mont Belvieu-area complex in the fourth quarter of 2021, the Gillis Lateral natural gas pipeline and related infrastructure in the fourth quarter of 2021, and our PDH 2 facility in the second quarter of 2023.
Capital investing activity throughout the domestic energy industry has been significantly reduced in response to the supply and demand disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In light of these adverse macroeconomic conditions, we discussed with our customers and reevaluated our planned capital investments in order to modify the capacity, timing and need for certain capital projects and to maximize available liquidity. Based on information currently available, we expect our total capital investments for 2021, net of contributions from joint venture partners, to approximate $2.1 billion, which reflects growth capital investments of $1.6 billion and sustaining capital expenditures of $440 million. In addition, we currently expect our growth capital investments in 2022 and 2023 for sanctioned projects to approximate $800 million and $400 million, respectively. These amounts do not include capital investments associated with SPOT, our proposed deepwater offshore crude oil terminal, which remains subject to governmental approvals. We currently anticipate receiving approval for SPOT as early as the third quarter of 2021; however, we can give no assurance as to whether the project will ultimately be approved or the timing of such decision.
Our forecast of capital investments for 2021 through 2023 is based on announced strategic operating and growth plans (through the filing date of this quarterly report), which are dependent upon our ability to generate the required funds from either operating cash flows or other means, including borrowings under debt agreements, the issuance of additional equity and debt securities, and potential divestitures. We may revise our forecast of capital investments due to factors beyond our control, such as adverse economic conditions, weather-related issues and changes in supplier prices. Furthermore, our forecast of capital investments may change due to decisions made by management at a later date, which may include unforeseen acquisition opportunities. Our success in raising capital, including partnering with other companies to share project costs and risks, continues to be a significant factor in determining how much capital we can invest. We believe our access to capital resources is sufficient to meet the demands of our current and future growth needs and, although we expect to make the forecast capital investments noted above, we may adjust the timing and amounts of projected expenditures in response to changes in capital market conditions.
Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2020 with Year Ended December 31, 2019
In total, investments in growth capital projects decreased $1.2 billion year-to-year primarily due to the following:
• completion of projects at our Mont Belvieu complex, which accounted for a $759.7 million decrease and included placing into service our iBDH facility (December 2019), Frac X (March 2020) and Frac XI (September 2020);
• lower investments in natural gas processing facilities and related infrastructure that support Permian Basin production, which accounted for a $372.4 million decrease. We completed the final phase of our Orla plant in July 2019 and placed our Mentone plant into service in December 2019;
• completion of the Shin Oak NGL Pipeline (in stages through the fourth quarter of 2019), which accounted for a $353.2 million decrease; and
• lower investments in projects attributable to our ethylene business, which accounted for a $175.3 million decrease; partially offset by,
• higher investments in our PDH 2 facility, which accounted for a $335.7 million increase;
• higher investments in crude oil pipelines, including those expanding our Midland-to-ECHO System, and related infrastructure that support Permian Basin production, which accounted for a combined $82.2 million increase; and
• higher investments in natural gas pipelines and related infrastructure in support of East Texas and Louisiana production, which accounted for a $47.9 million increase.
Investments in unconsolidated affiliates decreased $96.0 million year-to-year primarily due to lower spending on NGL pipeline expansion projects, which accounted for a $49.4 million decrease, and lower spending on our joint venture dock infrastructure at Corpus Christi and other crude oil-related projects, which accounted for an additional $44.2 million decrease.
Fluctuations in investments for sustaining capital projects are primarily due to the timing and cost of pipeline integrity and similar projects.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In our financial reporting processes, we employ methods, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of our financial statements. These methods, estimates and assumptions also affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses for each reporting period. Investors should be aware that actual results could differ from these estimates if the underlying assumptions prove to be incorrect. The following sections discuss the use of estimates within our critical accounting policies:
Depreciation Methods and Estimated Useful Lives of Property, Plant and Equipment
In general, depreciation is the systematic and rational allocation of an asset’s cost, less its residual value (if any), to the periods it benefits. The majority of our property, plant and equipment is depreciated using the straight-line method, which results in depreciation expense being incurred evenly over the life of an asset. Depreciation expense incorporates management estimates regarding the useful economic lives and residual values of our assets. At the time we place our assets into service, we believe such assumptions are reasonable; however, circumstances may develop that cause us to change these assumptions, which would change our depreciation amounts prospectively. Examples of such circumstances include (i) changes in laws and regulations that limit the estimated economic life of an asset, (ii) changes in technology that render an asset obsolete, (iii) changes in expected salvage values or (iv) significant changes in our forecast of the remaining life for the associated resource basins, if applicable.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the net carrying value of our property, plant and equipment was $41.91 billion and $41.6 billion, respectively. We recorded $1.68 billion and $1.56 billion of depreciation expense during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For information regarding our property, plant and equipment, see Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Measuring Recoverability of Long-Lived Assets and Fair Value of Equity Method Investments
Long-lived assets, which consist of intangible assets with finite useful lives and property, plant and equipment, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable through future cash flows. Examples of such events or changes might be production declines that are not replaced by new discoveries or long-term decreases in the demand for or price of natural gas, NGLs, crude oil, petrochemicals or refined products.
The carrying value of a long-lived asset is deemed not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of undiscounted estimated cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. Estimates of undiscounted cash flows are based on a number of assumptions including anticipated operating margins and volumes; estimated useful life of the asset or asset group; and estimated residual values. If the carrying value of a long-lived asset is not recoverable, an impairment charge would be recorded for the excess of the asset’s carrying value over its estimated fair value, which is derived from an analysis of the asset’s estimated future cash flows, the market value of similar assets and replacement cost of the asset less any applicable depreciation or amortization. In addition, fair value estimates also include the usage of probabilities when there is a range of possible outcomes.
We evaluate our equity method investments for impairment when there are events or changes in circumstances that indicate there is a potential loss in value of the investment attributable to an other than temporary decline. Examples of such events or changes in circumstances include continuing operating losses of the entity and/or long-term negative changes in the entity’s industry. In the event we determine that the value of an investment is not recoverable due to an other than temporary decline, we record a non-cash impairment charge to adjust the carrying value of the investment to its estimated fair value. We assess the fair value of our equity method investments using commonly accepted techniques, and may use more than one method, including, but not limited to, recent third party sales and discounted estimated cash flow models. Estimates of discounted cash flows are based on a number of assumptions including discount rates; probabilities assigned to different cash flow scenarios; anticipated margins and volumes and estimated useful lives of the investment’s underlying assets.
A significant change in the assumptions we use to measure recoverability of long-lived assets and the fair value of equity method investments could result in our recording a non-cash impairment charge. Any write-down of the carrying values of such assets would increase operating costs and expenses at that time.
In 2020 and 2019, we recognized non-cash asset impairment charges attributable to assets other than goodwill totaling $594.3 million and $132.8 million, respectively, which are a component of operating costs and expenses. For information regarding impairment charges involving property, plant and equipment and investments in unconsolidated affiliates, see Notes 4 and 5, respectively, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Valuation and Amortization Methods of Customer Relationships and Contract-Based Intangible Assets
The specific, identifiable intangible assets of an acquired business depend largely upon the nature of its operations and include items such as customer relationships and contracts. The method used to value such assets depends on a number of factors, including the nature of the asset and the economic returns the asset is expected to generate.
Customer relationship intangible assets represent the estimated economic value assigned to commercial relationships acquired in connection with business combinations. In certain instances, the acquisition of these intangible assets provides us with access to customers in a defined resource basin and is analogous to having a franchise in a particular area. Efficient operation of the acquired assets (e.g., a natural gas gathering system) helps to support the commercial relationships with existing producers and provides us with opportunities to establish new ones within our existing asset footprint. The duration of this type of customer relationship is limited by the estimated economic life of the associated resource basin that supports the customer group. When estimating the economic life of a resource basin, we consider a number of factors, including reserve estimates and the economic viability of production and exploration activities.
In other situations, the acquisition of a customer relationship intangible asset provides us with access to customers whose hydrocarbon volumes are not attributable to specific resource basins. As with basin-specific customer relationships, efficient operation of the associated assets (e.g., a marine terminal that handles volumes originating from multiple sources) helps to support the commercial relationships with existing customers and provides us with opportunities to establish new ones. The duration of this type of customer relationship is typically limited to the term of the underlying service contracts, including assumed renewals.
The value we assign to customer relationships is amortized to earnings using methods that closely resemble the pattern in which the estimated economic benefits will be consumed (i.e., the manner in which the intangible asset is expected to contribute directly or indirectly to our cash flows). For example, the amortization period for a basin-specific customer relationship asset is limited by the estimated finite economic life of the associated hydrocarbon resource basin.
Contract-based intangible assets represent specific commercial rights we own arising from discrete contractual agreements. A contract-based intangible asset with a finite life is amortized over its estimated economic life, which is the period over which the contract is expected to contribute directly or indirectly to our cash flows. Our estimates of the economic life of contract-based intangible assets are based on a number of factors, including (i) the expected useful life of the related tangible assets (e.g., a marine terminal, pipeline or other asset), (ii) any legal or regulatory developments that would impact such contractual rights and (iii) any contractual provisions that enable us to renew or extend such arrangements.
If our assumptions regarding the estimated economic life of an intangible asset were to change, then the amortization period for such asset would be adjusted accordingly. Changes in the estimated useful life of an intangible asset would impact operating costs and expenses prospectively from the date of change. If we determine that an intangible asset’s carrying value is not recoverable through its future cash flows, we would be required to reduce the asset’s carrying value to its estimated fair value through the recording of a non-cash impairment charge. Any such write-down of the value of an intangible asset would increase operating costs and expenses at that time.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the carrying value of our customer relationship and contract-based intangible asset portfolio was $3.31 billion and $3.45 billion, respectively. We recorded $143.2 million and $174.7 million of amortization expense attributable to intangible assets during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For information regarding our intangible assets, see Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Methods We Employ to Measure the Fair Value of Goodwill and Related Assets
Our goodwill balance was $5.45 billion and $5.75 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Goodwill, which represents the cost of an acquired business in excess of the fair value of its net assets at the acquisition date, is subject to annual impairment testing in the fourth quarter of each year or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the goodwill may not be recoverable. Goodwill impairment charges represent the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying value (including its respective goodwill) exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill.
We determine the fair value of each reporting unit using accepted valuation techniques, primarily through the use of discounted cash flows (i.e., an income approach to fair value) supplemented by market-based assessments, if available. The estimated fair values of our reporting units incorporate assumptions regarding the future economic prospects of the assets and operations that comprise each reporting unit including: (i) discrete financial forecasts for the assets comprising the reporting unit, which, in turn, rely on management’s estimates of long-term operating margins, throughput volumes, capital investments and similar factors; (ii) long-term growth rates for the reporting unit’s cash flows beyond the discrete forecast period; and (iii) appropriate discount rates. The fair value estimates are based on Level 3 inputs of the fair value hierarchy. We believe that the assumptions we use in estimating reporting unit fair values are consistent with those that market participants would use in their fair value estimation process. However, due to uncertainties in the estimation process and volatility in the supply and demand for hydrocarbons and similar risk factors, actual results could differ significantly from our estimates.
In December 2020, management determined that the carrying value of our natural gas pipelines and services reporting unit exceeded its estimated fair value. This reporting unit, which reflects the operations of our Natural Gas Pipelines & Services business segment, includes our natural gas gathering and transmission pipelines, storage facilities and related marketing activities. The long-term outlook for natural gas production in certain supply basins such as the Rocky Mountains and East Texas is expected to remain lower for longer due to reduced drilling activity. In addition, the decline in pipeline revenues attributable to lower regional natural gas price spreads is expected to adversely impact the future cash flows of our transmission pipelines. These factors, coupled with an increase in the estimated rate of return required for such businesses by market participants, resulted in the fair value of this reporting unit being less than its carrying value at December 31, 2020. The resulting goodwill impairment charge of $296.3 million represents the entire amount of goodwill attributable to this reporting unit.
We did not record any goodwill impairment charges during the year ended December 31, 2019. Based on our most recent goodwill impairment test at December 31, 2020, the estimated fair value of each of our reporting units, with the exception of our natural gas pipelines and services reporting unit, was at least 10% in excess of its carrying value.
For information regarding our goodwill, see Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Use of Estimates for Revenues and Expenses
As noted previously, preparing our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates that affect amounts presented in the financial statements. Due to the time required to compile actual billing information and receive third party data needed to record transactions, we routinely employ estimates in connection with revenue and expense amounts in order to meet our accelerated financial reporting deadlines.
Our most significant routine estimates involve revenues and costs of certain natural gas processing facilities, pipeline transportation revenues, fractionation revenues, marketing revenues and related purchases, and power and utility costs. These types of transactions must be estimated since the actual amounts are generally unavailable at the time we complete our accounting close process. The estimates subsequently reverse in the next accounting period when the corresponding actual customer billing or vendor-invoiced amounts are recorded.
Changes in facts and circumstances may result in revised estimates, which could affect our reported financial statements and accompanying disclosures. Prior to issuing our financial statements, we review our revenue and expense estimates based on currently available information to determine if adjustments are required. Investors should be aware that actual results could differ from these estimates if the underlying assumptions prove to be incorrect.
Other Matters
Parent-Subsidiary Guarantor Relationship
The Partnership (the “Parent Guarantor”) has guaranteed the payment of principal and interest on the consolidated debt obligations of EPO (the “Subsidiary Issuer”), with the exception of the remaining debt obligations of TEPPCO Partners, L.P. (collectively, the “Guaranteed Debt”). If EPO were to default on any of its Guaranteed Debt, the Partnership would be responsible for full and unconditional repayment of such obligations. At December 31, 2020, the total amount of Guaranteed Debt was $30.59 billion, which was comprised of $27.5 billion of EPO’s senior notes, $2.63 billion of EPO’s junior subordinated notes and $455.6 million of related accrued interest.
The Partnership’s guarantees of EPO’s senior note obligations, commercial paper notes and borrowings under bank credit facilities represent unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of the Partnership that rank equal in right of payment to all other existing or future unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness of the Partnership. In addition, these guarantees effectively rank junior in right of payment to any existing or future indebtedness of the Partnership that is secured and unsubordinated, to the extent of the assets securing such indebtedness.
The Partnership’s guarantees of EPO’s junior subordinated notes represent unsecured and subordinated obligations of the Partnership that rank equal in right of payment to all other existing or future subordinated indebtedness of the Partnership and senior in right of payment to all existing or future equity securities of the Partnership. The Partnership’s guarantees of EPO’s junior subordinated notes effectively rank junior in right of payment to (i) any existing or future indebtedness of the Partnership that is secured, to the extent of the assets securing such indebtedness and (ii) all other existing or future unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness of the Partnership.
The Partnership may be released from its guarantee obligations only in connection with EPO’s exercise of its legal or covenant defeasance options as described in the underlying agreements.
Selected Financial Information of Obligor Group
The following tables present summarized financial information of the Partnership (as Parent Guarantor) and EPO (as Subsidiary Issuer) on a combined basis (collectively, the “Obligor Group”), after the elimination of intercompany balances and transactions among the Obligor Group.
In accordance with Rule 13.01 of Regulation S-X, the summarized financial information of the Obligor Group excludes the Obligor Group’s equity in income and investments in the consolidated subsidiaries of EPO that are not party to the guarantee obligations (the “Non-Obligor Subsidiaries”). The total carrying value of the Obligor Group’s investments in the Non-Obligor Subsidiaries was $45.98 billion at December 31, 2020. The Obligor Group’s equity in the earnings of the Non-Obligor Subsidiaries for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.54 billion. Although the net assets and earnings of the Non-Obligor Subsidiaries are not directly available to the holders of the Guaranteed Debt to satisfy the repayment of such obligations, there are no significant restrictions on the ability of the Non-Obligor Subsidiaries to pay distributions or make loans to EPO or the Partnership. EPO exercises control over the Non-Obligor Subsidiaries. We continue to believe that the consolidated financial statements of the Partnership presented under Item 8 of this annual report provide a more appropriate view of our credit standing. Our investment grade credit ratings are based on the Partnership’s consolidated financial statements and not the Obligor Group financial information presented below.
The following table presents summarized balance sheet information for the combined Obligor Group at December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
The following table presents summarized income statement information for the combined Obligor Group for the year ended December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions):
(1)
Represents scheduled future maturities of our current and long-term debt principal obligations. For information regarding our consolidated debt obligations, see Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
(2)
Estimated cash payments for interest are based on the principal amount of our consolidated debt obligations outstanding at December 31, 2020, the contractually scheduled maturities of such balances, and the applicable interest rates. Our estimated cash payments for interest are influenced by the long-term maturities of our $2.65 billion in junior subordinated notes (due June 2067 through February 2078). The estimated cash payments assume that (i) the junior subordinated notes are not repaid prior to their respective maturity dates and (ii) the amount of interest paid on the junior subordinated notes is based on either (a) the current fixed interest rate charged or (b) the weighted-average variable rate paid in 2020, as applicable, for each note through the respective maturity date.
(3)
Primarily represents (i) land held pursuant to property leases, (ii) the lease of underground storage caverns for natural gas and NGLs, (iii) the lease of transportation equipment used in our operations and (iv) office space leased from affiliates of EPCO.
(4)
Represents enforceable and legally binding agreements to purchase goods or services as of December 31, 2020. The estimated payment obligations are based on contractual prices in effect at December 31, 2020 applied to all future volume commitments. Actual future payment obligations may vary depending on prices at the time of delivery.
(5)
Primarily represents our unconditional payment obligations under firm pipeline transportation contracts.
(6)
Primarily represents the noncurrent portion of asset retirement obligations and deferred revenues.
We are obligated to spend up to an aggregate $270 million over a ten-year period ending in 2025 on specified midstream gathering assets for certain producers utilizing our EFS Midstream System. If constructed, these new assets would be owned by us and be a component of the EFS Midstream System. As of December 31, 2020, we have spent $151 million of the $270 million commitment. Due to the uncertain timing of the remaining potential capital expenditures, we have excluded this amount from the preceding table.
For additional information regarding our significant contractual obligations, see Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably expected to have a material current or future effect on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Related Party Transactions
For information regarding our related party transactions, see Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report as well as Part III, Item 13 of this annual report.
Insurance
For information regarding insurance matters, see Note 18 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.