Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains “forward-looking statements” that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. We caution that assumptions, expectations, projections, intentions or beliefs about future events may, and often do, vary from actual results and the differences can be material. See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Also, see the risk factors and other cautionary statements described under the heading “Item 1A - Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We do not undertake any obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements except as otherwise required by applicable law.
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operation includes the following sections:
•
Overview
•
Critical Accounting Policies - a discussion of accounting policies that require critical estimates and assumptions;
•
Results of Operations - an analysis of our operating results, including disclosures about the sustainability of our earnings;
•
Financial Condition - an analysis of our financial position;
•
Liquidity and Capital Resources - an analysis of our cash flows and capital position; and
•
Non-GAAP Financial Measures - reconciliation of non-GAAP measures.
Overview
We are a bank holding company headquartered in Wichita, Kansas. Our wholly-owned banking subsidiary, Equity Bank, provides a broad range of financial services primarily to businesses and business owners as well as individuals through our network of 51 full-service branches located in Arkansas, Kansas, Missouri and Oklahoma. As of December 31, 2020, we had, on a consolidated basis, total assets of $4.01 billion, total deposits of $3.45 billion, total loans held for investment, net of allowances, of $2.56 billion and total stockholders’ equity of $407.6 million. Primarily due to a goodwill impairment charge of $104.8 million during the third quarter of 2020, net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $75.0 million compared to net income of $25.6 million for the prior year ended December 31, 2019.
History and Background
From 2003 through 2020, we completed a series of eighteen acquisitions and two charter consolidations. We seek to integrate the banks we acquire into our existing operational platform and enhance stockholder value through the creation of efficiencies within the combined operations. In conjunction with our strategic acquisition growth, we strive to reposition and improve the loan portfolio and deposit mix of the banks we acquire. Following our acquisitions, we focus on identifying and disposing of problematic loans and replacing them with higher quality loans generated organically. In addition, we concentrate on growth in our commercial loan portfolio, which we believe generally offers higher return opportunities than our consumer loan portfolio, primarily by hiring additional talented bankers, particularly in our metropolitan markets, and incentivizing our bankers to expand their commercial banking relationships. We also seek to increase our most attractive deposit accounts primarily by growing deposits in our community markets and cross selling our depository products to our loan customers.
Our principal objective is to continually increase stockholder value and generate consistent earnings growth by expanding our commercial banking franchise both organically and through strategic acquisitions. We believe our strategy of selectively acquiring and integrating community banks has provided us with economies of scale and improved our overall franchise efficiency. We expect to continue to pursue strategic acquisitions and believe our targeted market areas present us with many and varied acquisition opportunities. We are also focused on continuing to grow organically and believe the markets in which we operate currently provide meaningful opportunities to expand our commercial customer base and increase our current market share. We believe our geographic footprint, which is strategically split between growing metropolitan markets, such as Kansas City, Tulsa and Wichita, and stable community markets within Western Kansas, Western Missouri, Topeka, Northern Arkansas and Northern Oklahoma, provides us with access to low cost stable core deposits in community markets that we can use to fund commercial loan growth in our metropolitan markets. We strive to provide an enhanced banking experience for our customers by providing them with a comprehensive suite of sophisticated banking products and services tailored to meet their needs, while delivering the high-quality relationship-based customer service of a community bank.
Highlights for the Year Ended December 31, 2020
•
Net interest income of $132.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net interest income of $125.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $6.8 million, or 5.4%.
•
Total loans held for investment of $2.59 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $2.56 billion at December 31, 2019, an increase of $35.0 million, or 1.4%.
•
Total deposits of $3.45 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $3.06 billion at December 31, 2019, an increase of $384.1 million, or 12.5%.
•
Total assets of $4.01 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $3.95 billion at December 31, 2019, an increase of $63.8 million, or 1.6%.
•
Tangible book value per common share of $24.68 at December 31, 2020, compared to $20.75 at December 31, 2019, an increase of $3.93, or 18.9%.
We completed our purchase of assets and assumption of deposits of Almena State Bank (“Almena”), facilitated by the FDIC, consisting of one branch location in Norton, Kansas, and one branch location in Almena, Kansas, on October 23, 2020. At closing, this transaction included total assets of $66.9 million, net loans of $31.4 million and total deposits of $62.5 million.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused economic and social disruption on an unprecedented scale. While some industries have been impacted more severely than others, all businesses have been impacted to some degree. This disruption has resulted in the shuttering of businesses across the country, significant job loss and aggressive measures by federal, state and local government.
Congress, the President and the Federal Reserve have taken several actions designed to cushion the economic fallout. Most notably, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was signed into law on March 27, 2020, as a $2 trillion legislative package. The goal of the CARES Act is to prevent a severe economic downturn through various measures, including direct financial aid to American families and economic stimulus to significantly impacted industry sectors. The package also included extensive emergency funding for hospitals and medical providers. In addition to the general impact of COVID-19, certain provisions of the CARES Act as well as other recent legislative and regulatory relief efforts have had or are expected to have a material impact on the Company’s operations. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related adverse local and national economic consequences, the Company is subject to many risks, including but not limited to:
•
credit losses resulting from financial stress being experienced by the Company’s borrowers as a result of the pandemic and related governmental actions (including risks related to the Paycheck Protection Program or PPP, under the CARES Act and related credit risks resulting from PPP lending due to forbearance or failure of customers to qualify for loan forgiveness);
•
collateral for loans, such as real estate, may continue to decline in value, which could cause credit losses to increase;
•
increased demands on capital and liquidity;
•
the risk that the Company’s net interest income, lending activities, deposits, swap activities, and profitability may be negatively affected by volatility of interest rates caused by uncertainties stemming from the pandemic; and
•
cybersecurity and information security risks as the result of an increase in the number of employees working remotely.
Financial Position and Results of Operations: COVID-19 has had a material impact on the Company’s allowance for loan losses. While to date there have been no significant charge-offs related to COVID-19, the allowance for loan losses calculation and resulting provision for loan losses have been significantly impacted by changes in economic conditions. Given that economic scenarios have become less certain since the pandemic was declared in early March, management believes the need for additional allowance for loan losses has increased significantly. For additional information see “NOTE 4 - LOANS AND ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN LOSSES” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Should economic conditions worsen, the Company could experience further increases in the required allowance for loan losses and record additional provision for loan losses expense. The execution of the payment deferral program discussed in the following commentary improved the ratio of past due loans to total loans. It is possible that asset quality measures could worsen at future measurement periods if the effects of COVID-19 are prolonged.
The Company’s interest and fee income could be reduced due to COVID-19. In keeping with guidance from regulators, the Company is actively working with COVID-19 affected borrowers to defer their payments, interest and fees. While interest and fees will still accrue to income, through normal GAAP accounting, should eventual credit losses on these deferred payments emerge, interest income and fees accrued would need to be reversed. In such a scenario, interest income in future periods could be negatively impacted. At this time, the Company is unable to project the materiality of such an impact but recognizes the breadth of the economic impact may affect borrowers’ ability to repay in future periods.
Capital and Liquidity: As of December 31, 2020, all the Company’s capital ratios and Equity Bank’s capital ratios were in excess of all regulatory requirements. While currently classified as well capitalized, an extended economic recession brought about by COVID-19 could adversely impact reported and regulatory capital ratios by further credit losses. The Company relies on cash on hand as well as dividends from Equity Bank to service our debt. If Equity Bank’s capital deteriorates such that it is unable to pay dividends to the Company for an extended period, the Company may not be able service its debt.
The Company maintains access to multiple sources of liquidity. Wholesale funding markets have remained open to the Company, but rates for short term funding may be volatile. If funding costs are elevated for an extended period, it could have an adverse effect on net interest margin. If an extended recession caused large numbers of deposit customers to withdraw their funds, the Company might become more reliant on volatile or more expensive sources of funding.
Our Processes, Controls and Business Continuity Plan: In early March 2020, management successfully deployed a modified working strategy, including emphasis on social distancing and remote work as necessary to emphasize the safety of the Company’s teams and continuity of business processes. The Company and its leaders provided timely communications to team members and customers, implemented protocols for team member safety and initiated strategies for monitoring and responding to local COVID-19 impacts - including customer relief efforts. The Company’s preparedness efforts, coupled with quick and decisive plan implementation, resulted in minimal impacts to operations as a result of COVID-19. Prior technology planning resulted in the successful deployment of a portion of the operational team to a remote environment, while the remainder of the team continued to work on location in a workspace emphasizing social distancing. To achieve implementation of the working strategy, during the first quarter of 2020, the Company incurred a minimal amount of technology spending to provide additional laptops to team members who required them to work remotely. Since early May 2020, all the Company’s bank locations have been open to customers with social distancing measures in place. The Company continues to serve customers curbside and drive-through but offers full lobby access during normal hours. No material operational or internal control challenges or risks have been identified to date. The Company continues to anticipate and respond to any future COVID-19 interruptions or developments. As of December 31, 2020, the Company does not anticipate significant challenges to our ability to maintain systems and controls considering the measures we have taken to prevent the spread of COVID-19. The Company does not currently face any material resource constraint through the implementation of the business continuity plans.
Lending Operations and Accommodations to Borrowers: In keeping with regulatory guidance to work with borrowers during this unprecedented situation, the Company executed a payment deferral program for our commercial lending clients that were adversely affected by the pandemic. Depending on the demonstrated need of the client, the Company originally deferred either the full loan payment or the principal component of the loan payment for 90 or 180 days. Loans originally deferred for 90 days may, dependent on specific qualifications, be approved for an additional 90-day deferral. In accordance with interagency guidance issued in March 2020, these short-term deferrals are not automatically considered troubled debt restructurings, are not reflected in past due loan balances and have not been reported as a classified loan solely due to a deferral. Subsequent loan deferrals were assessed for troubled debt restructuring classification in accordance with section 4013 of the CARES Act, or in accordance with interagency guidance, and if certain criteria were met the deferred loan was not classified as a troubled debt restructuring. The Company has made subsequent loan deferrals that have qualified under section 4013 of the CARES Act and these deferred loans were not classified as troubled debt restructurings. Deferred loans are subject to ongoing monitoring and will be downgraded or placed on nonaccrual if noted repayment weaknesses exist. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 28 loans, totaling $60.9 million, that have been granted a payment deferral, and remain on deferral, as part of our COVID-19 response.
We have been an active participant in all phases of the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), administered by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”), and we helped many of our customers obtain loans through the program. PPP loans generally have a two-year term and earn interest at 1.0%. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has 1,612 loans, with an outstanding balance of $253.7 million that were originated under this program. It is the Company’s understanding that loans funded through the PPP program are fully guaranteed by the U.S. government. Should those circumstances change, the Company could be required to establish additional allowance for loan losses through additional provision for loan losses expense charged to earnings.
The Company also participates in the Main Street Lending Program (“MSL Program”), created by the Federal Reserve to support lending to small and medium-sized businesses and nonprofit organizations that were in sound financial condition before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. There was a total of $14.1 million outstanding under the MSL Program for the period ended December 31, 2020.
Credit: While all industries have and will continue to experience adverse impacts as a result of COVID-19, the Company had exposures (on balance sheet loans and commitments to lend) in the following loan categories that are considered to be most at-risk of a significant impact as of December 31, 2020.
Hospitality Lending - The Company’s exposure to the hospitality sector at December 31, 2020, approximated $264.9 million, or 11.3%, of total loans excluding PPP loans. As of December 31, 2020, $14.1 million of these loans were actively participating in a deferral program.
The top 20 loans within our hospitality portfolio comprise $216.6 million, or 81.8%, of the total exposure. These loans are geographically diversified and well secured. The borrowers are well known to the Company and experienced hoteliers who have evidenced efforts to enhance profitability in the current economic environment by driving down costs and creatively occupying their properties, including arrangements with medical professionals and others on the front line of this pandemic. Historically, the portfolio has exhibited strong operational cash flows. The remainder of the portfolio is comprised of many smaller balance loans.
Aircraft Manufacturing - The Company’s exposure to the aircraft manufacturing category at December 31, 2020, approximated $41.7 million, or 1.8%, of total loans excluding PPP loans. As of December 31, 2020, none of these loans were actively participating in a deferral program. The portfolio is comprised of experienced industry operators who have historically performed without exception.
The Company has worked with customers directly affected by COVID-19 and is prepared to offer short-term assistance in accordance with regulatory guidelines. As a result of the current economic environment caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company is engaging in frequent communication with borrowers to better understand their situation and the challenges faced, allowing us to respond proactively as needs and issues arise.
While management is optimistic about the performance of the above addressed portions of the portfolio as a whole, the Company acknowledges the risks associated with the current economic conditions and related unknowns. These risks are believed to have been addressed and reserved for through our allowance for loan losses and associated provision for loan losses as of and for the period ended December 31, 2020.
Retail Operations: The Company is committed to assisting our customers and communities in this time of need. The Company is serving customers curbside and drive-through but offers full lobby access during normal hours. Temporary changes have been introduced to help with the financial hardship caused by COVID-19 for both our customers and non-customers.
The Company continues to monitor the safety of our staff through health stations at each work location. Staffing is adequate to address the requests for time off by any of our employees who are impacted by health or childcare issues.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are integral to understanding the results reported. Our accounting policies are described in “NOTE 1 - NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe that of our significant accounting policies, the following may involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity.
Purchased Credit Impaired Loans: As a part of previous acquisitions, we acquired certain loans for which there was, at acquisition, evidence of deterioration of credit quality since origination. These purchased credit impaired loans were recorded at the acquisition date fair value, such that there is no carryover of the seller’s allowance for loan losses. After acquisition, losses are recognized by an increase in the allowance for loan losses. Such purchased credit impaired loans are accounted for individually. We estimate the amount and timing of expected cash flows for each loan, and the expected cash flows in excess of the amount paid are recorded as interest income over the remaining life of the loan (accretable yield). The excess of the loan’s contractual principal and interest over expected cash flows is not recorded (non-accretable difference). Over the life of the loan, expected cash flows continue to be estimated. If the present value of the expected cash flows is less than the carrying amount, a loss is recorded. If the present value of the expected cash flows is greater than the carrying amount, it is recognized as part of future interest income.
Impaired Loans: A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all contractual principal and interest due according to the terms of the loan agreement. All loans are individually evaluated for impairment. Impaired loans are measured based on the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate or on the value of the underlying collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. We evaluate the collectability of both principal and interest when assessing the need for a loss accrual.
Factors considered by management in determining impairment include payment status, collateral value, and the probability of collecting scheduled principal and interest payments when due. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration all of the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record, and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed.
Troubled Debt Restructurings: In cases where a borrower experiences financial difficulty and we make certain concessionary modifications to contractual terms, the loan is classified as a troubled debt restructured loan and classified as impaired. Generally, a nonaccrual loan that is a troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”) remains on nonaccrual until such time that repayment of the remaining principal and interest is not in doubt, and the borrower has a period of satisfactory repayment performance.
Allowance for Loan Losses: The allowance for loan losses is a valuation allowance for probable incurred credit losses. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when management believes the collectability of a loan balance is unlikely. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. Management estimates the allowance balance required using past loan loss experience, the nature and volume of the portfolio, information about specific borrower situations and estimated collateral values, economic conditions, and other factors. A loan review process, independent of the loan approval process, is utilized by management to verify loans are being made and administered in accordance with Company policy, to review loan risk grades and potential losses, to verify that potential problem loans are receiving adequate and timely corrective measures to avoid or reduce losses, and to assist in the verification of the adequacy of the loan loss reserve. Allocations of the allowance may be made for specific loans, but the entire allowance is available for any loan that, in management’s judgment, should be charged-off.
The allowance consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are individually classified as impaired. If a loan is impaired, a portion of the allowance is allocated so that the loan is reported net at the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan’s existing rate or at the fair value of collateral if repayment is expected solely from the sale of the collateral. TDR’s are separately identified for impairment disclosures and are measured at the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan’s effective rate at inception. If a TDR is considered to be a collateral dependent loan, the loan is reported, net, at the fair value of the collateral. For TDR’s that subsequently default, we determine the amount of reserve in accordance with the accounting policy for the allowance for loan losses.
The general component of the allowance for loan losses covers non-impaired loans and is based on historical loss experience adjusted for current factors. The historical loss experience is determined by portfolio and class and is based on the actual loss history experienced by us. This actual loss experience is then adjusted by comparing current conditions to the conditions that existed during the loss history. We consider the changes related to (i) lending policies, (ii) economic conditions, (iii) nature and volume of the loan portfolio and class, (iv) lending staff, (v) volume and severity of past due, non-accrual, and risk graded loans, (vi) loan review system, (vii) value of underlying collateral for collateral dependent loans, (viii) concentration levels and (ix) effects of other external factors.
Goodwill: Goodwill results from business acquisitions and represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of acquired tangible assets and liabilities and identifiable intangible assets.
Goodwill is assessed at least annually for impairment and any such impairment is recognized and expensed in the period identified. Goodwill will be assessed more frequently if a triggering event occurs which indicates that the carrying value of the asset might be impaired. We have selected December 31 as the date to perform our annual goodwill impairment test. Goodwill is the only intangible asset with an indefinite useful life. At September 30, 2020, the Company determined that goodwill was impaired and subsequently booked a $104.8 million non-cash impairment charge. For additional information see “NOTE 1 - NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES” and “NOTE 7 - GOODWILL AND CORE DEPOSIT INTANGIBLES” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Fair Value: Fair values of assets and liabilities are estimated using relevant market information and other assumptions. Fair value estimates involve uncertainties and matters of significant judgment regarding interest rates, credit risk, prepayments, collateral values and other factors, especially in the absence of broad markets for particular assets and liabilities. Changes in assumptions or in market conditions could materially affect the estimates.
Results of Operations
We generate most of our revenue from interest income and fees on loans, interest and dividends on investment securities and non-interest income, such as service charges and fees, debit card income and mortgage banking income. We incur interest expense on deposits and other borrowed funds and non-interest expense, such as salaries and employee benefits and occupancy expenses.
Changes in interest rates earned on interest-earning assets or incurred on interest-bearing liabilities, as well as the volume and types of interest-earning assets, interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing liabilities and stockholders’ equity, are usually the largest drivers of periodic change in net interest income. Fluctuations in interest rates are driven by many factors, including governmental monetary policies, inflation, deflation, macroeconomic developments, changes in unemployment, the money supply, political and international circumstances and domestic and foreign financial markets. Periodic changes in the volume and types of loans in our loan portfolio are affected by, among other factors, economic and competitive conditions in Arkansas, Kansas, Missouri and Oklahoma, as well as developments affecting the consumer, commercial and real estate sectors within these markets.
For information comparing our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, to year ended December 31, 2018, see “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on March 10, 2020.
Net Income
Year ended December 31, 2020, compared with year ended December 31, 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, there was a net loss and net loss allocable to common stockholders of $75.0 million, compared to net income and net income allocable to common stockholders of $25.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $100.5 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase in non-interest expense of $109.4 million, primarily due to a $104.8 million charge to goodwill impairment, and an increase in provision for loan losses of $5.9 million were partially offset by a decrease in provision for income taxes of $6.9 million and increases in net interest income of $6.8 million and non-interest income of $1.0 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The changes in the components of net income are discussed in more detail below in the following sections of “Results of Operations.”
Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin Analysis
Net interest income is the difference between interest income on interest-earning assets, including loans and securities, and interest expense incurred on interest-bearing liabilities, including deposits and other borrowed funds. To evaluate net interest income, management measures and monitors (1) yields on loans and other interest-earning assets, (2) the costs of deposits and other funding sources, (3) the net interest spread and (4) net interest margin. Net interest spread is the difference between rates earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest margin is calculated as net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets. Because non-interest-bearing sources of funds, such as non-interest-bearing deposits and stockholders’ equity also fund interest-earning assets, net interest margin includes the benefit of these non-interest-bearing sources of funds. Net interest income is affected by changes in the amount and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, referred to as a “volume change,” and it is also affected by changes in yields earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on interest-bearing deposits and other borrowed funds, referred to as a “yield/rate change.”
The following table shows the average balance of each principal category of assets, liabilities, and stockholders’ equity and the average yields on interest-earning assets and average rates on interest-bearing liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. The yields and rates are calculated by dividing income or expense by the average daily balances of the associated assets or liabilities.
Average Balance Sheets and Net Interest Analysis
(1)Average loan balances include nonaccrual loans, hedge fair value adjustments and merger fair value adjustments.
(2)Net interest margin is calculated by dividing net interest income by average interest-earning assets for the period.
(3)Tax exempt income is not included in the above table on a tax equivalent basis.
(4)Actual unrounded values are used to calculate the reported yield or rate disclosed. Accordingly, recalculations using the amounts in thousands as disclosed in this report may not produce the same amounts.
Increases and decreases in interest income and interest expense result from changes in average balances (volume) of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as changes in average interest yields/rates. The following table analyzes the change in volume variances and yield/rate variances for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, and the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Analysis of Changes in Net Interest Income
(1)The effect of changes in volume is determined by multiplying the change in volume by the previous year’s average rate. Similarly, the effect of rate changes is calculated by multiplying the change in average rate by the prior year’s volume. The changes attributable to both volume and rate, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated to the volume variance and the rate variance in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amount of the change in each.
Year ended December 31, 2020, compared with year ended December 31, 2019
The increase in net interest income before the provision for loan losses is primarily due to the increase in the volume of interest-earnings assets, partially offset by a 61 basis point decrease in yields on interest-earning assets. This decrease in yield is largely due to the 1.00% PPP loans, administered by the SBA, in our portfolio during 2020. The increase in average volume of interest-earning assets was primarily due to increases in loans. The decrease in interest expense was due to an 84 basis point decrease in the average rates of interest-bearing liabilities and an overall decrease in volume of interest-bearing liabilities.
The increase in loan interest income was driven by the $88.3 million increase in average loan volume. The impact to net interest income from loan fees for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $10.4 million compared to $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Average balances of borrowings from the FHLB decreased by $64.2 million from an average balance of $277.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, to an average balance of $213.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, coupled with a 132 basis point decrease in average borrowing cost resulted in a decrease in interest expense of $4.4 million. Interest expense on the bank stock loan for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $415 thousand compared to $654 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. Total cost of interest-bearing liabilities decreased 84 basis points to 0.81% for the year ended December 31, 2020, from 1.65% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase in net interest margin is largely due to the cost of interest-bearing liabilities decreasing at a faster rate than interest-earning assets. The decrease in cost of funds is primarily from the overall decrease in rates on interest-bearing liabilities, partially due to an increase in non-interest-bearing checking accounts and, to a lesser degree, the decrease in volume of borrowings.
Provision for Loan Losses
We maintain an allowance for loan losses for probable incurred credit losses. The allowance for loan losses is increased by a provision for loan losses, which is a charge to earnings, and subsequent recoveries of amounts previously charged-off, but is decreased by charge-offs when the collectability of a loan balance is unlikely. Management estimates the allowance balance required using past loan loss experience, the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, information about specific borrower situations and estimated collateral values, discounted cash flows, economic conditions and other factors including regulatory guidance. As these factors change, the amount of the loan loss provision changes.
Year ended December 31, 2020, compared with year ended December 31, 2019
The provision for loan losses for the period ended December 31, 2020, was $24.3 million compared to $18.4 million for the period ended December 31, 2019. The provision was increased significantly during the period ended December 31, 2020, largely as the result of increases in qualitative loss factors brought on by the projected economic impact of COVID-19. As part of the process to adjust qualitative factors in response to COVID-19, we considered the loss rates we experienced during the last economic downturn, the level of loan deferrals in the loan portfolio and industries we considered at risk to determine the necessary level of probable incurred loss. The loss rate adjustments from the last economic downturn were allocated across all loan segments as projecting losses to any one loan segment would be difficult given the unique nature of the pandemic and the pandemic was expected to impact all loan segments.
Included in the period ended December 31, 2019, was a first quarter $14.5 million provision against one credit relationship believed to be an isolated incident unique within our portfolio. We charged-off a net of $15.2 million on this credit relationship during the year ended December 31, 2019. For additional detail see “Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Allowance for Loan Losses.” Net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2020, were $2.8 million as compared to net charge-offs of $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, gross charge-offs were $3.3 million offset by gross recoveries of $544 thousand. In comparison, gross charge-offs were $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, offset by gross recoveries of $1.1 million.
Non-Interest Income
The primary sources of non-interest income are service charges and fees, debit card income, mortgage banking income, increases in the value of bank owned life insurance, investment referral income, the recovery of zero-basis purchased loans, net gains on the sale of available-for-sale securities and other securities transactions. Non-interest income does not include loan origination or other loan fees which are recognized as an adjustment to yield using the interest method.
The following table provides a comparison of the major components of non-interest income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Non-Interest Income
For the Years Ended December 31,
Year ended December 31, 2020, compared with year ended December 31, 2019
The increase in non-interest income was primarily due to gain on acquisition and increases in debit card income, mortgage banking fees, trust income and insurance sales commissions, partially offset by decreases in service charges and fees, other non-interest income, income from equity method investments and increase in the value of bank-owned life insurance. During the year ended December 31, 2020, there was $2.1 million in gain on acquisition related to the Almena acquisition. Debit card income was $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $906 thousand, or 11.0%, from $8.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Mortgage banking increased $685 thousand, or 27.8%, from $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Service charges and fees decreased $1.8 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same time period during 2019, primarily due to a decrease in non-sufficient fund charges. In connection with acquisitions, we received the rights to certain loans that were previously charged-off by the acquired bank. At acquisition, there was no expectation of future cash flows from these previously charged-off loans and thus they were assigned a zero basis. Subsequent to the acquisitions, we have received cash payments on several of these loans. No interest has been accrued as cash flow payments have not been expected prior to receipt. Cash receipts on these zero-basis loans totaled $134 thousand and $143 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Non-Interest Expense
The following table provides a comparison of the major components of non-interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Non-Interest Expense
For the Year Ended December 31,
Year ended December 31, 2020, compared with year ended December 31, 2019
This increase in non-interest expense was primarily due to a $104.8 million charge to goodwill impairment and increases in salaries and employee benefits of $2.0 million, other real estate owned of $1.6 million, data processing of $867 thousand, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) insurance of $860 thousand, amortization of core deposit intangibles of $682 thousand, other non-interest expense of $310 thousand and net occupancy and equipment of $110 thousand, partially offset by decreases in merger expense of $616 thousand, advertising and business development of $577 thousand, professional fees of $452 thousand and telecommunications of $206 thousand. These items and other changes in the various components of non-interest expense are discussed in more detail below.
Salaries and employee benefits: There was a $2.0 million increase in salaries for year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to year ended December 31, 2019. This increase reflects the addition of staff related to the October 2020 Almena acquisition and the full year effect of the addition of staff related to the February 2019 MidFirst acquisition. In addition, during the same time period, there was an increase in incentives and bonuses of $2.0 million, restricted stock unit expense of $659 thousand and retirement plan expense of $213 thousand, partially offset by the deferral of $1.2 million of loan origination costs associated with originating SBA PPP loans. Included in salaries and employee benefits is share-based compensation expense of $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net occupancy and equipment: Net occupancy and equipment includes expenses related to the use of premises and equipment, such as depreciation, operating lease payments, repairs and maintenance, insurance, property taxes and utilities, net of incidental rental income of excess facilities. The increase is partly related to the inclusion of a full year of expenses related to the MidFirst acquisition and the subsequent addition of three locations and the October 2020 Almena acquisition added two more bank locations.
Data processing: The increase was principally due to additional debit card processing costs as usage increased, so did software license expense.
Professional fees: The decrease of $452 thousand, or 9.5%, principally is due to a decrease in attorney fees of $527 thousand, advisor services of $452 thousand and regulatory assessments of $32 thousand, partially offset by an increase in accounting fees of $418 thousand and consulting fees of $141 thousand.
Other real estate owned: As detailed in “NOTE 5 - OTHER REAL ESTATE OWNED” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, other real estate owned expenses, including provision for unrealized losses, were $3.3 million, partially offset by gains on the sale of other real estate of $835 thousand and gains on the sale of other assets of $201 thousand, for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, other real estate owned expenses, including provision for unrealized losses, were $904 thousand and loss on sale of other real estate owned was $10 thousand, partially offset by gains on initial evaluation of other real estate properties of $191 thousand and gains on the sale of other assets of $15 thousand.
Other: Other non-interest expenses consist of subscriptions, memberships and dues, employee expenses including travel, meals, entertainment and education, supplies, printing, insurance, account related losses, correspondent bank fees, customer program expenses, losses net of gains on the sale of fixed assets, losses net of gains on the sale of repossessed assets other than real estate and other operating expenses such as settlement of claims.
Merger expenses: Merger expenses include legal, advisory and accounting fees associated with services to facilitate the acquisition of other banks. Merger expenses also include data processing conversion costs and costs associated with the integration of personnel, processes, facilities and employee bonuses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, merger expenses of $299 thousand are related to the Almena acquisition. For the year ended December 31, 2019, merger expenses of $915 thousand are related to the MidFirst acquisition.
Efficiency Ratio
The efficiency ratio is a supplemental financial measure utilized in the internal evaluation of our performance and is not defined under GAAP. Our efficiency ratio is computed by dividing non-interest expense, excluding goodwill impairment, merger expenses and loss on debt extinguishment, by the sum of net interest income and non-interest income, excluding net gains on sales of and settlement of securities and gain on acquisition. Generally, an increase in the efficiency ratio indicates that more resources are being utilized to generate the same volume of income, while a decrease would indicate a more efficient allocation of resources. The ratio defined under GAAP that is most comparable to the efficiency ratio is non-interest expense to net interest income plus non-interest income which is discussed in “Results of Operations - Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
The Company’s non-interest expense, less goodwill impairment, to net interest income plus non-interest income decreased from year ended December 31, 2019, to December 31, 2020, primarily due to net interest income plus non-interest income increasing at a higher rate than non-interest expense less goodwill impairment, as discussed in “Results of Operations - Non-GAAP Financial Measures.” The efficiency ratio increased slightly during the same time period due to non-interest expense, excluding goodwill impairment and merger expenses, increasing in a slightly higher proportional rate than net interest income and non-interest income, excluding net gains on security transactions and gain on acquisition, as discussed in “Results of Operations - Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin Analysis” and “Results of Operations - Non-Interest Income.”
Income Taxes
The amount of income tax expense is influenced by the amount of pre-tax income, the amount of tax-exempt income, the amount of non-deductible expenses and available tax credits.
Year ended December 31, 2020, compared with year ended December 31, 2019
The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, was (0.5)% as compared to the U.S. statutory rate of 21.0%. The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019, was 22.2% as compared to the U.S. statutory rate of 21.0%. As detailed in “NOTE 15 - INCOME TAXES” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the income tax rates differed from the U.S. statutory rates primarily due to non-taxable income, non-deductible expenses, non-deductible goodwill and tax credits.
Impact of Inflation
Our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. These require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars, without considering changes in the relative value of money over time due to inflation or recession.
Unlike many industrial companies, substantially all our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on our performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates may not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. However, other operating expenses do reflect general levels of inflation.
Financial Condition
Overview
Our total assets increased $63.8 million, or 1.6%, from $3.95 billion at December 31, 2019, to $4.01 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in total assets was primarily from increases in cash and cash equivalents of $191.4 million, partially offset by decreases in goodwill of $104.8 million and investment securities of $39.3 million. Our total liabilities increased $134.2 million, or 3.9%, from $3.47 billion at December 31, 2019, to $3.61 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in total liabilities was from increases in total deposits of $384.1 million and subordinated debt of $73.1 million, somewhat offset by decreases in FHLB advances of $314.2 million and bank stock loan of $9.0 million. Our total stockholders’ equity decreased $70.4 mill1ion, or 14.7%, from $478.1 million at December 31, 2019, to $407.6 million at December 31, 2020.
Loan Portfolio
Loans are the largest category of earning assets and typically provide higher yields than other types of earning assets. Excluding the Almena acquisition, gross loans held for investment increased by $3.6 million, or 0.1%, compared with December 31, 2019. Growth consisted of $142.4 million, or 24.1%, from commercial and industrial, $59.9 million, or 6.5%, from commercial real estate and $1.4 million, or 1.5%, from agricultural, offset by decreases of $121.5 million, or 24.1%, from residential real estate, $29.3 million, or 12.6%, from real estate construction, $9.8 million, or 14.4%, from consumer and $8.2 million, or 5.8%, from agricultural real estate. We also had an increase in loans classified as held for sale of $6.5 million, or 108.9%, from December 31, 2019, to December 31, 2020.
Our loan portfolio consists of various types of loans, most of which are made to borrowers located in the Wichita, Kansas City and Tulsa MSAs, as well as various community markets throughout Arkansas, Kansas, Missouri and Oklahoma. Although the portfolio is diversified and generally secured by various types of collateral, the majority of our loan portfolio consists of commercial and industrial and commercial real estate loans and a substantial portion of our borrowers’ ability to honor their obligations is dependent on local economic conditions in Arkansas, Kansas, Missouri and Oklahoma. As of December 31, 2020, there was no concentration of loans to any one type of industry exceeding 10% of total loans.
At December 31, 2020, gross total loans were 75.5% of deposits and 64.9% of total assets. At December 31, 2019, gross total loans were 83.6% of deposits and 64.9% of total assets.
The organic, or non-acquired, growth in our loan portfolio is attributable to our ability to attract new customers from other financial institutions and overall growth in our markets. Our lending staff has been successful in building banking relationships with new customers. Several new lenders have been hired in our markets and these employees have been successful in transitioning their former clients and attracting new clients. Lending activities originate from the efforts of our lenders with an emphasis on lending to individuals, professionals, small to medium-sized businesses and commercial companies located in the Wichita, Kansas City and Tulsa MSAs, as well as community markets in Arkansas, Kansas, Missouri and Oklahoma.
The following table summarizes our loan portfolio by type of loan as of the dates indicated.
Composition of Loan Portfolio
Commercial and industrial: Commercial and industrial loans include loans used to purchase fixed assets, to provide working capital or meet other financing needs of the business. Of the $142.4 million in growth during 2020, $6.1 million, or 4.3%, was a result of loans acquired through the Almena acquisition. The remainder was a combination of loan originations within our target markets and changes in the balances of revolving lines of credit, partially offset by reductions of broadly syndicated shared national credit originations and mortgage finance loan participations.
Commercial real estate: Commercial real estate loans include all loans secured by nonfarm nonresidential properties and by multifamily residential properties, as well as 1-4 family investment-purpose real estate loans. Of the $59.9 million in growth during 2020, $5.5 million, or 9.2%, was a result of loans acquired through the Almena acquisition.
Real estate construction: Real estate construction loans include loans made for the purpose of acquisition, development, or construction of real property, both commercial and consumer.
Residential real estate: Residential real estate loans include loans secured by primary or secondary personal residences. The Almena acquisition added $3.3 million in residential real estate loans during the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2020, we purchased one pool of residential real estate mortgage loans totaling $752 thousand. Pools of mortgages are occasionally purchased to expand our loan portfolio and provide additional loan income.
Agricultural real estate, Agricultural, Consumer and other: Agricultural real estate loans are loans related to farmland. Agricultural loans are primarily operating lines subject to annual farming revenues including productivity/yield of the agricultural commodities produced. Consumer loans are generally secured by consumer assets but may be unsecured. The Almena acquisition added $10.5 million in agricultural, $4.1 million in agricultural real estate and $1.8 million in consumer loans during the year ended December 31, 2020. These three loan types represent 11.1% of our overall loan portfolio.
The contractual maturity ranges of loans in our loan portfolio and the amount of such loans with predetermined interest rates and floating rates in each maturity range as of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, are summarized in the following tables.
Loan Maturity and Sensitivity to Changes in Interest Rates
Nonperforming Assets
The following table presents information regarding nonperforming assets at the dates indicated.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets (“NPAs”) include loans on nonaccrual status, accruing loans 90 or more days past due, restructured loans, other real estate acquired through foreclosure and other repossessed assets.
The nonperforming loans at December 31, 2020, consisted of 232 separate credits and 158 separate borrowers. We had eight nonperforming loan relationships each with outstanding balances exceeding $1.0 million as of December 31, 2020. Of the increase in nonperforming assets, $8.7 million was a result of the Almena acquisition. There are several procedures in place to assist us in maintaining the overall quality of our loan portfolio. We have established underwriting guidelines to be followed by lenders and we also monitor delinquency levels for any negative or adverse trends. There can be no assurance, however, that our loan portfolio will not become subject to increasing pressures from deteriorating borrower credit due to general economic conditions.
Potential Problem Loans
We categorize loans into risk categories based on relevant information about the ability of borrowers to service their debt such as: current financial information, historical payment experience, credit documentation, public information and current economic trends, among other factors. Loans are analyzed individually and classified based on credit risk. Consumer loans are considered pass credits unless downgraded due to payment status or reviewed as part of a larger credit relationship. We use the following definitions for risk ratings:
Pass: Loans classified as pass include all loans that do not fall under one of the three following categories. These loans are considered unclassified.
Special Mention: Loans classified as special mention have a potential weakness that deserves management’s close attention. If left uncorrected, these potential weaknesses may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects for the loan or of our credit position at some future date. These loans are considered classified.
Substandard: Loans classified as substandard are inadequately protected by the current net worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Loans so classified have a well-defined weakness or weaknesses that jeopardize the liquidation of the debt. They are characterized by the distinct possibility that the institution will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected. These loans are considered classified.
Doubtful: Loans classified as doubtful have all the weaknesses inherent in those classified as substandard, with the added characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, based on currently existing facts, conditions and values, highly questionable and improbable. These loans are considered classified.
Potential problem loans consist of loans that are performing in accordance with contractual terms, but for which management has concerns about the borrower’s ability to comply with repayment terms because of the borrower’s potential financial difficulties. Potential problem loans are assigned a grade of special mention or substandard. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $52.3 million in potential problem loans which were not included in either non-accrual or 90 days past due categories, compared to $27.2 million at December 31, 2019.
The risk category of loans by class of loans is as follows for December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019.
Risk Category of Loans by Class
At December 31, 2020, loans considered unclassified decreased to 96.3% of total loans from 97.4% of total loans at December 31, 2019.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had $60.9 million, or 2.6%, of total loans excluding PPP loans participating in the payment deferral program. For additional information see “NOTE 4 - LOANS AND ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN LOSSES” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
In accordance with applicable regulation, appraisals or evaluations are required to independently value real estate and, as an important element, to consider when underwriting loans secured in part or in whole by real estate. The value of real estate collateral provides additional support to the borrower’s credit capacity.
With respect to potential problem loans, all monitored and under-performing loans are reviewed and evaluated to determine if they are impaired. If we determine that a loan is impaired, then we evaluate the borrower’s overall financial condition to determine the need, if any, for possible write downs or appropriate additions to the allowance for loan losses based on the unlikelihood of full repayment of principal and interest in accordance with the contractual terms or the net realizable value of the pledged collateral.
Allowance for loan losses
Please see “Critical Accounting Policies - Allowance for Loan Losses” for additional discussion of our allowance policy.
In connection with our review of the loan portfolio, risk elements attributable to particular loan types or categories are considered when assessing the quality of individual loans. For additional information see “NOTE 1 - NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Purchased credit impaired loans: Please see “Critical Accounting Policies - Allowance for Loan Losses” for additional discussion of our purchased credit impaired loans policy. For additional information about our purchased credit impaired loans see “NOTE 4 - LOANS AND ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN LOSSES” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Analysis of allowance for loan and lease losses: At December 31, 2020, the allowance for loan losses totaled $33.7 million, or 1.30% of total loans. At December 31, 2019, the allowance for loan losses aggregated $12.2 million, or 0.48% of total loans.
The allowance for loan losses on loans collectively evaluated for impairment totaled $23.2 million, or 0.92%, of the $2.54 billion in loans collectively evaluated for impairment at December 31, 2020, compared to an allowance for loan losses of $11.0 million, or 0.44%, of the $2.50 billion in loans collectively evaluated for impairment at December 31, 2019, and an allowance for loan losses of $9.6 million, or 0.38%, of the $2.51 billion in loans collectively evaluated for impairment at December 31, 2018. The increase in allowance as a percentage of total loans and of loans collectively evaluated for impairment from December 31, 2019, to December 31, 2020, principally reflect management’s evaluation of current environmental conditions and changes in the composition and quality of our loan portfolio.
Net losses as a percentage of average loans was 0.10% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 0.68% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, and 0.04% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2018.
There have been no material changes to our accounting policies related to our allowance for loan and lease loss methodology during 2020 and 2019.
We will be adopting CECL effective January 1, 2021, and have estimated the impact from adoption related to loans held for investment to range from a $30.0 million to $40.0 million increase to the allowance for credit losses, a $4.0 million to $6.4 million increase to deferred tax asset and a $12.0 million to $19.6 million decrease to retained earnings. The increase in the allowance for credit loss noted above includes a $14.0 million reclassification of purchased credit impaired non-accretable discount to the allowance for credit losses. For additional information about the adoption of CECL see “NOTE 1 - NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following table presents, as of and for the periods indicated, an analysis of the allowance for loan and lease losses and other related data.
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses
(1) Excluding loans held for sale.
The following table shows the allocation of the allowance for loan losses among our loan categories and certain other information as of the dates indicated. The total allowance is available to absorb losses from any loan or lease category.
Analysis of the Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses
Management believes that the allowance for loan and lease losses at December 31, 2020, is adequate to cover probable incurred losses in the loan portfolio as of such date. There can be no assurance, however, that we will not sustain losses in future periods that could be substantial in relation to the size of the allowance at December 31, 2020.
Securities
We use our securities portfolio to provide a source of liquidity, to provide an appropriate return on funds invested, to manage interest rate risk, to meet pledging requirements and to meet regulatory capital requirements. At December 31, 2020, securities represented 21.7% of total assets compared with 23.1% at December 31, 2019.
At the date of purchase, debt securities are classified into one of two categories, held-to-maturity or available-for-sale. We do not purchase securities for trading purposes. At each reporting date, the appropriateness of the classification is reassessed. Investments in debt securities are classified as held-to-maturity and carried at cost, adjusted for the amortization of premiums and the accretion of discounts, in the financial statements only if management has the positive intent and ability to hold those securities to maturity. Debt securities not classified as held-to-maturity are classified as available-for-sale and measured at fair value in the financial statements with unrealized gains and losses reported, net of tax, as accumulated comprehensive income or loss until realized. Interest earned on securities is included in total interest and dividend income. Also included in total interest and dividend income are dividends received on stock investments in the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and the FHLB of Topeka. These stock investments are stated at cost.
The following table summarizes the amortized cost and fair value by classification of available-for-sale securities as of the dates shown.
Available-For-Sale Securities
The following table summarizes the amortized cost and fair value by classification of held-to-maturity securities as of the dates shown.
Held-To-Maturity Securities
At December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we did not own securities of any one issuer (other than the U.S. government and its agencies or sponsored entities) for which aggregate adjusted cost exceeded 10% of the consolidated stockholders’ equity at the reporting dates noted.
The following tables summarize the contractual maturity of debt securities and their weighted average yields as of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019. Expected maturities will differ from contractual maturities because issuers may have the right to call or prepay obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties. Securities not due at a single maturity date, primarily mortgage-backed securities, are shown separately. Available-for-sale securities are shown at fair value and held-to-maturity securities are shown at cost, adjusted for the amortization of premiums and the accretion of discounts.
(1)
The calculated yield is not calculated on a tax equivalent basis.
(1)
The calculated yield is not calculated on a tax equivalent basis.
Mortgage-backed securities are securities that have been developed by pooling a number of real estate mortgages and which are principally issued by federal agencies such as Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and non-agency private label providers. Unlike U.S. Treasury and U.S. government agency securities, which have a lump sum payment at maturity, mortgage-backed securities provide cash flows from regular principal and interest payments and principal prepayments throughout the lives of the securities. Premiums and discounts on mortgage-backed securities are amortized and accreted over the expected life of the security and may be impacted by prepayments. As such, mortgage-backed securities purchased at a premium will generally produce decreasing net yields as interest rates drop because homeowners tend to refinance their mortgages resulting in prepayments and an acceleration of premium amortization. Securities purchased at a discount will reflect higher net yields in a decreasing interest rate environment as prepayments result in an acceleration of discount accretion.
The contractual maturity of mortgage-backed securities is not a reliable indicator of their expected lives because borrowers have the right to prepay their obligations at any time. Monthly pay downs on mortgage-backed securities cause the average lives of these securities to be much different than their stated lives. At December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, 85.1% and 89.9% of the mortgage-backed securities held by us had contractual final maturities of more than ten years with a weighted average life of 2.5 years and 4.2 years and a modified duration of 2.4 years and 3.8 years.
Deposits
Our lending and investing activities are primarily funded by deposits. A variety of deposit accounts are offered with a wide range of interest rates and terms including demand, savings, money market and time deposits. We rely primarily on competitive pricing policies, convenient locations, comprehensive marketing strategy and personalized service to attract and retain these deposits.
The following table shows our composition of deposits at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Composition of Deposits
The following table shows deposits assumed in 2020 acquisitions, as of the time of such acquisitions.
The following table shows deposits assumed in 2019 acquisitions, as of the time of such acquisitions.
The following table shows the average deposit balance and average rate paid on deposits for the year ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Average Deposit Balances and Average Rate Paid
Included in interest-bearing demand deposits are Insured Cash Sweep (“ICS”) services reciprocal demand deposit balances of $256.0 million at December 31, 2020, $43.8 million at December 31, 2019, and $33.3 million at December 31, 2018. Also, included in savings and money market deposits at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are ICS services reciprocal money-market deposits balances of $23.7 million, $20.0 million, and $21.0 million. These balances represent customer funds placed in the ICS service that allows Equity Bank to break large demand and money-market deposits into smaller amounts and place them in a network of other ICS banks to ensure FDIC insurance coverage on the entire deposit. These deposits are placed through ICS services, but are Equity Bank’s customer relationships that management views as core funding.
Included in time deposits are Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Service (“CDARS”) program balances of $14.9 million, $9.5 million, and $131.1 million at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. CDARS allows Equity Bank to break large deposits into smaller amounts and place them in a network of other CDARS banks to ensure FDIC insurance coverage on the entire deposit. Reciprocal deposits are not considered brokered deposits as long as the aggregate balance is less than the lessor of 20% of total liabilities or $5.0 billion and Equity Bank is well capitalized and well rated. All non-reciprocal deposits and reciprocal deposits in excess of regulatory limits are considered brokered deposits.
The following table provides information on the maturity distribution of time deposits of $100,000 or more as of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019.
Other Borrowed Funds
We utilize borrowings to supplement deposits to fund our lending and investing activities. Short-term borrowing and long-term borrowing consist of funds from the FHLB, federal funds purchased and retail repurchase agreements, a bank stock loan and subordinated debentures.
The following table presents our short-term borrowings at the dates indicated.
Federal funds purchased and retail repurchase agreements: We have available federal funds lines of credit with our correspondent banks. Retail repurchase agreements outstanding represent the purchase of interests in securities by banking customers. Retail repurchase agreements are stated at the amount of cash received in connection with the transaction. We do not account for any of our repurchase agreements as sales for accounting purposes in our financial statements. Repurchase agreements with banking customers are settled on the following business day. See “NOTE 11 - BORROWINGS” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
FHLB advances: FHLB advances include both draws against our line of credit and fixed rate term advances. Each term advance is payable in full at its maturity date and contains provision for prepayment penalties. The Company acquired $17.4 million in FHLB term advances in the August 2018 City Bank merger. Our FHLB borrowings are used for operational liquidity needs for originating and purchasing loans, purchasing investments and general operating cash requirements. See “NOTE 11 - BORROWINGS” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Bank stock loan: The Company maintains a borrowing facility through an unaffiliated financial institution. The terms of the loan require us and Equity Bank to maintain minimum capital ratios and other covenants. The loan and accrued interest may be pre-paid at any time without penalty. In the event of default, the lender has the option to declare all outstanding balances as immediately due. For detailed information, see “NOTE 11 - BORROWINGS” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Subordinated debentures: In conjunction with the 2012 acquisition of First Community, we assumed certain subordinated debentures owed to special purpose unconsolidated subsidiaries that are controlled by us, FCB Capital Trust II and FCB Capital Trust III, (“CTII” and “CTIII,” respectively). In conjunction with the 2016 acquisition of Community First Bancshares, Inc., we assumed certain subordinated debentures owed to a special purpose unconsolidated subsidiary that is controlled by us, Community First (AR) Statutory Trust I, (“CFSTI”). For additional information, see “NOTE 12 - SUBORDINATED DEBT” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Subordinated notes: In 2020, the Company entered into Subordinated Note Purchase Agreements with certain qualified institutional buyers and institutional accredited investors pursuant to which the Company issued and sold a total of $75.0 million in aggregate principal amounts of its 7.00% Fixed-to-Floating Rate Subordinated Notes due 2030. For additional information, see “NOTE 12 - SUBORDINATED DEBT” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Market and public confidence in our financial strength and financial institutions in general will largely determine access to appropriate levels of liquidity. This confidence is significantly dependent on our ability to maintain sound asset quality and appropriate levels of capital reserves.
Liquidity is defined as the ability to meet anticipated customer demands for future funds under credit commitments and deposit withdrawals at a reasonable cost and on a timely basis. We measure our liquidity position by giving consideration to both on- and off-balance sheet sources of and demands for funds on a daily, weekly and monthly basis.
Liquidity risk involves the risk of being unable to fund assets with the appropriate duration and rate-based liabilities, as well as the risk of not being able to meet unexpected cash needs. Liquidity planning and management are necessary to ensure the ability to fund operations in a cost-effective manner and to meet current and future potential obligations such as loan commitments, lease obligations and unexpected deposit outflows. In this process, we focus on both assets and liabilities and on the manner in which they combine to provide adequate liquidity to meet our needs.
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, our liquidity needs have primarily been met by core deposits, security and loan maturities and amortizing investment and loan portfolios. Other funding sources include federal funds purchased, retail repurchase agreements, brokered certificates of deposit, subordinated notes and borrowings from the FHLB.
Our largest sources of funds are FHLB borrowings and deposits and our largest uses of funds are the origination or purchases of loans and securities purchases. Average loans were $2.70 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 3.4% over average loans of $2.61 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excess deposits are primarily invested in our interest-bearing deposit account with the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank, investment securities, federal funds sold or other short-term liquid investments until the funds are needed to fund loan growth. Our securities portfolio has a weighted average life of 3.0 years and a modified duration of 2.8 years at December 31, 2020. We believe that our daily funding needs can be met through cash provided by operating activities, payments and maturities on loans and investment securities, our core deposit base, FHLB advances and other borrowing relationships. On March 13, 2017, the Company entered into an agreement with an unaffiliated financial institution that provided for a maximum borrowing facility of $30.0 million, which was subsequently amended on March 11, 2019, to increase the maximum borrowing facility to $40.0 million. This agreement, which is secured by Equity Bank stock, can be used to fund future acquisitions and for general corporate purposes. There was no outstanding balance on this borrowing facility for the period ending December 31, 2020.
Cash Flow Overview
During 2020, operating activities provided $43.6 million of liquidity, investing activities infused $96.0 million of cash assets and financing activities generated $51.8 million of additional funds, ultimately increasing total cash and cash equivalents by $191.4 million. The cash provided by investing activities came primarily from $66.9 million of net proceeds from securities transactions and $25.9 million of net cash received from the Almena acquisition. The cash provided by financing activities was principally due to a $321.5 million increase in deposits and $75.0 million from subordinated notes originations, partially offset by a $314.2 million reduction in FHLB borrowings, treasury stock purchases of $19.3 million and a $9.0 million net payoff of the bank stock loan.
During 2019, $48.5 million of liquidity was provided by operating activities and $96.1 million of net cash via investing activities was offset by $248.1 million of net cash used in financing activities, resulting in a $103.5 million reduction in cash and cash equivalents. The cash provided by investing activities came principally from $85.4 million of net cash received from the MidFirst acquisition plus an $8.5 million net reduction in loan balances. The cash usage in financing activities was driven mostly by a $158.7 million decrease in deposits, a $60.5 million paydown in FHLB advances, a $14.4 million reduction in federal funds purchased and retail repurchase agreements, $10.9 million for treasury stock purchases, premises and equipment acquisitions for $6.9 million and $6.5 million in net principal payments on the bank stock loan.
For information related to cash flow during 2018, see “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 10, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Items
In the normal course of business, we enter into various transactions, which, in accordance with GAAP, are not included in our consolidated balance sheets. We enter into these transactions to meet the financing needs of our customers. These transactions include commitments to extend credit and standby and commercial letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheets. Our exposure to credit loss is
represented by the contractual amounts of these commitments. The same credit policies and procedures are used in making these commitments as for on-balance sheet instruments.
Our commitments associated with outstanding standby and performance letters of credit and commitments to extend credit expiring by period as of December 31, 2020, are summarized below. Since commitments associated with letters of credit and commitments to extend credit may expire unused, the amounts shown do not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding requirements.
Credit Extensions and Commitments
December 31, 2020
Standby and Performance Letters of Credit: For additional information see “NOTE 22 - COMMITMENTS AND CREDIT RISK” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Commitments to Extend Credit: For additional information see “NOTE 22 - COMMITMENTS AND CREDIT RISK” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and other commitments to make future payments as of December 31, 2020 (other than securities sold under repurchase agreements). These obligations consist of our future cash payments associated with contractual obligations pursuant to FHLB advances, time deposit contracts, borrowed funds, and non-cancelable future operating leases. Payments related to leases are based on actual payments specified in underlying contracts.
Other contractual obligations represent commitments made by us to make capital investments in limited-liability entities that invest in qualified affordable housing projects. Payments on these obligations are made as requested by the managers of the limited-liability entities, however the table below includes an estimate of the anticipated timing of payments pursuant to these commitments.
Contractual Obligations
December 31, 2020
Capital Resources
Capital management consists of providing equity to support our current and future operations. The bank regulators view capital levels as important indicators of an institution’s financial soundness. As a general matter, FDIC-insured depository institutions and their holding companies are required to maintain minimum capital relative to the amount and types of assets they hold. As a bank holding company and a state-chartered-Fed-member bank, the Company and Equity Bank are subject to regulatory capital requirements.
Capital adequacy guidelines and prompt corrective action regulations involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities and certain off-balance-sheet items calculated under regulatory accounting practices. Capital amounts and classifications are also subject to qualitative judgments by regulators. Failure to meet capital requirements can initiate regulatory action. Management believes as of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, the Company and Equity Bank meet all capital adequacy requirements to which they are subject.
Prompt corrective action regulations provide five classifications: well capitalized, adequately capitalized, undercapitalized, significantly undercapitalized, and critically undercapitalized, although these terms are not used to represent overall financial condition. If adequately capitalized, regulatory approval is required to accept brokered deposits. If undercapitalized, capital distributions are limited, as are asset growth and acquisitions, and capital restoration plans are required.
Failure to meet capital guidelines could subject the institution to a variety of enforcement remedies by federal bank regulatory agencies, including termination of deposit insurance by the FDIC, restrictions on certain business activities and appointment of the FDIC as conservator or receiver. As of December 31, 2020, the most recent notifications from the federal regulatory agencies categorized Equity Bank as “well capitalized” under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action. To be categorized as well capitalized, Equity Bank must maintain minimum total capital, Tier 1 capital, Common Equity Tier 1 capital and Tier 1 leverage ratios as set forth in the table. There are no conditions or events since that notification that management believes have changed Equity Bank’s category.
The decrease in stockholders’ equity was principally attributable to a loss of $75.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and treasury stock purchases of $19.3 million, partially offset by change in other comprehensive gain of $19.8 million, stock based compensation of $3.5 million, common stock issued under employee stock purchase plan of $596 thousand, employee stock loan payments of $34 thousand and common stock issued upon exercise of stock options of $20 thousand. For additional information about the Company’s capital see “NOTE 16 - REGULATORY MATTERS” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We identify certain financial measures discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K as being “non-GAAP financial measures.” In accordance with the SEC’s rules, we classify a financial measure as being a non-GAAP financial measure if that financial measure excludes or includes amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of excluding or including amounts, that are included or excluded, as the case may be, in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as in effect from time to time in the United States in our statements of income, balance sheets or statements of cash flows. Non-GAAP financial measures do not include operating and other statistical measures or ratios or statistical measures calculated using exclusively either financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, operating measures or other measures that are not non-GAAP financial measures or both.
The non-GAAP financial measures that we discuss in this Annual Report on Form 10-K should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the most directly comparable or other financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Moreover, the manner in which we calculate the non-GAAP financial measures that we discuss in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may differ from that of other companies reporting measures with similar names. You should understand how such other banking organizations calculate their financial measures similar or with names similar to the non-GAAP financial measures we have discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K when comparing such non-GAAP financial measures.
Tangible Book Value per Common Share and Tangible Book Value Per Diluted Common Share: Tangible book value is a non-GAAP measure generally used by financial analysts and investment bankers to evaluate financial institutions. We calculate: (a) tangible common equity as total stockholders’ equity less preferred stock, goodwill, core deposit intangibles, net of accumulated amortization, mortgage servicing asset, net of accumulated amortization and naming rights, net of accumulated amortization; (b) tangible book value per common share as tangible common equity (as described in clause (a)) divided by shares of common stock outstanding; and (c) tangible book value per diluted common share as tangible common equity (as described in clause (a)) divided by shares of common stock outstanding plus the period-end dilutive effects of vested restricted stock units and the assumed exercise of stock options and redemption of non-vested restricted stock units. For tangible book value, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP is book value.
Management believes that these measures are important to many investors who are interested in changes from period to period in book value per common share exclusive of changes in intangible assets. Goodwill and other intangible assets have the effect of increasing total book value while not increasing our tangible book value.
The following table reconciles, as of the dates set forth below, total stockholders’ equity to tangible common equity, tangible book value per common share, and diluted tangible book value per common share and compares these values with book value per common share.
Tangible Common Equity to Tangible Assets: Tangible common equity to tangible assets is a non-GAAP measure generally used by financial analysts and investment bankers to evaluate financial institutions. We calculate: (a) tangible common equity as total stockholders’ equity less preferred stock, goodwill, core deposit intangibles, net of accumulated amortization, mortgage servicing asset, net of accumulated amortization and naming rights, net of accumulated amortization; (b) tangible assets as total assets less goodwill, core deposit intangibles, net of accumulated amortization, mortgage servicing asset, net of accumulated amortization and naming rights, net of accumulated amortization; and (c) tangible common equity to tangible assets as tangible common equity (as described in clause (a)) divided by tangible assets (as described in clause (b)). For common equity to tangible assets, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP is total stockholders’ equity to total assets.
Management believes that this measure is important to many investors in the marketplace who are interested in the relative changes from period to period in common equity and total assets, each exclusive of changes in intangible assets. Goodwill and other intangible assets have the effect of increasing both total stockholders’ equity and total assets while not increasing tangible common equity or tangible assets.
The following table reconciles, as of the dates set forth below, total stockholders’ equity to tangible common equity and total assets to tangible assets.
Return on Average Tangible Common Equity: Return on average tangible common equity is a non-GAAP measure generally used by financial analysts and investment bankers to evaluate financial institutions. We calculate: (a) average tangible common equity as total average stockholders’ equity less average intangible assets and preferred stock; (b) adjusted net income allocable to common stockholders as net income allocable to common stockholders plus goodwill impairment, net of actual tax effect, plus amortization of intangible assets less estimated tax effect on amortization of intangible assets (tax rates used in this calculation were 21% for 2020, 2019 and 2018; 35% for 2017 and 2016) (c) return on average tangible common equity as adjusted net income allocable to common stockholders (as described in clause (b)) divided by average tangible common equity (as described in clause (a)). For return on average tangible common equity, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP is return on average equity.
Management believes that this measure is important to many investors in the marketplace because it measures the return on equity, exclusive of the effects of intangible assets on earnings and capital. Goodwill and other intangible assets have the effect of increasing average stockholders’ equity and, through amortization, decreasing net income allocable to common stockholders while not increasing average tangible common equity or decreasing adjusted net income allocable to common stockholders.
The following table reconciles, as of the dates set forth below, total average stockholders’ equity to average tangible common equity and net income allocable to common stockholders to adjusted net income allocable to common stockholders.
Efficiency Ratio: The efficiency ratio is a non-GAAP measure generally used by financial analysts and investment bankers to evaluate financial institutions. We calculate the efficiency ratio by dividing non-interest expense, excluding goodwill impairment, merger expenses and loss on debt extinguishment, by the sum of net interest income and non-interest income, excluding net gains on the sale of available-for-sale securities and other securities transactions, and the net gain on acquisition. The GAAP-based efficiency ratio is non-interest expenses divided by net interest income plus non-interest income.
In management’s judgment, the adjustments made to non-interest expense and non-interest income allow investors and analysts to better assess operating expenses in relation to operating revenue by removing merger expenses, loss on debt extinguishment, net gains on the sale of available-for-sale securities and other securities transactions, and the net gain on acquisition.
The following table reconciles, as of the dates set forth below, the efficiency ratio to the GAAP-based efficiency ratio.