Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. It should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Our reportable operating segments consist of the water and oil & gas segments. These segments are based on the industries in which the technology solutions are sold, the type of ERD or other technology sold and the related solution and service. In addition, our corporate operating expenses include expenditures in support of the water and oil & gas segments, as well as R&D expenditures applicable to potential future industry verticals, or enabling technologies that could benefit either or both existing business units.
Highlights
Water Segment
•In 2020, we announced significant project awards, including plants in Chile, China, Egypt, the Middle East, North Africa and Saudi Arabia. When completed, our PXs in these facilities are expected to recycle hydraulic energy equivalent to over 2.4 terawatt hours of energy annually, an amount associated with over 1.5 million metric tons of carbon emissions.
•We opened our new manufacturing and warehousing facility in Tracy, California. Our new Tracy facility supplements the existing manufacturing, warehousing and distribution of our PX, Turbochargers and pumps located in San Leandro, California. We commissioned our Tracy facility in July 2020.
•In late 2020, we shipped our Ultra PX to support the operations of a chemical manufacturer in central India, which is expected to be commissioned by the second quarter of 2021.
Oil & Gas Segment
•On June 24, 2020, we and Schlumberger Technology Corporation (“Schlumberger”) entered into an agreement to terminate the VorTeq License Agreement (“VorTeq License Agreement”).
•As a result of the termination of the VorTeq License Agreement, we are now free to market our VorTeq technology to all companies in the broader pressure pumping market.
•In January 2020, we opened our commercial development center for oil & gas field testing, manufacturing, and training, located in Katy, Texas.
Results of Operations
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, can be found under Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 6, 2020, as amended on June 10, 2020, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at http://www.sec.gov and at our investor relations website (https://ir.energyrecovery.com).
Total Revenue
Energy Recovery, Inc. | Form 10-K 2020 Annual Report | 28
Product Revenue
Product revenue by channel customer is presented in the following table.
Our MPD channel continues to be the main driver of our revenue growth. In fiscal year 2020, our large-scale desalination projects were largely unaffected by the COVID-19 pandemic and the decline in economic conditions. The MPD channel revenue benefited from the long project cycle, despite the COVID-19 pandemic and the decline in economic conditions, and where we were expecting there might be project delays. Our OEM and AM channels, which contain projects of shorter duration, were negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting decline in the economic conditions in fiscal year 2020, which ultimately delayed certain new installation and upgrade projects, as well as non-critical plant maintenance. Specifically, in our OEM channel, we sell into a number of industries, including tourism and hospitality, which were greatly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
License and Development Revenue
The change in license and development revenue was due to the termination of the VorTeq License Agreement. In June 2020, we and Schlumberger entered into an agreement to terminate the VorTeq License Agreement effective June 1, 2020. During the second quarter of fiscal year 2020, as there were no future performance obligations to be recognized under the VorTeq License Agreement after the effective date, we recognized in full the remaining deferred revenue balance of $24.4 million, and therefore, no license and development revenue were recognized based on this contract in the third and fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020. In addition, no future license and development revenue will be recognized on the VorTeq License Agreement.
Concentration of Revenue
Product revenue attributable to domestic and international sales as a percentage of total product revenue is presented in the following table.
Energy Recovery, Inc. | Form 10-K 2020 Annual Report | 29
The following table presents customers accounting for 10% or more of our product revenue by segment. Although certain customers might account for greater than 10% of our product revenue at any one point in time, the concentration of product revenue between a limited number of large MPD customers shifts regularly, depending on contract negotiations. The percentages by customer reflect specific relationships or contracts that would concentrate our product revenue for the periods presented and does not indicate a trend specific to any one customer.
** Zero or less than 10%.
One international Oil & Gas segment customer accounted for 100% of the Company’s license and development revenue for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Product Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The increase in product gross profit was due primarily to increased product sales to MPD customers. The decrease in product gross margin was due primarily to costs related to reduced utilization of our manufacturing facilities related to COVID-19, costs related to new COVID-19 safety protocols, overhead costs of our newly commissioned Tracy, California, facility, and lower average selling prices due primarily to higher MPD channel size and volume.
Operating Expenses
Total Operating Expenses
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses. The increase in G&A expenses was due primarily to higher employee-related costs of $1.0 million, an increase in professional services costs of $0.5 million related to our ESG report and legal fees, higher software licensing and support fees of $0.5 million, an increase in other costs of $0.5 million, and an increase in bad debt expense of $0.2 million. Employee-related costs, as compared to the prior year, increased due primarily to higher compensation expense related to inflation and a slight increase in headcount, and higher recruiting costs, partially offset by lower travel costs related to decreased travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic, lower severance costs, and a decrease in share-based compensation expense.
Energy Recovery, Inc. | Form 10-K 2020 Annual Report | 30
Sales and marketing (“S&M”) expenses. The decrease in S&M expenses was due primarily to lower marketing costs of $0.8 million, including trade shows and marketing materials, a decrease in employee-related costs of $0.3 million, and lower other costs of $0.2 million, including commissions and professional services costs. Employee-related costs, as compared to the prior year, decreased due primarily to lower travel costs related to decreased travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase in employee compensation and benefits, and higher share-based compensation expense.
Research and development (“R&D") expenses. R&D expenses remained relatively flat in 2020. R&D expenditures related to the development of the VorTeq fell in 2020 decreased; however, was partially offset by costs to support incubation initiatives. R&D expenses in the current year, as compared to the prior year, included lower testing supplies expenditures of $0.7 million, partially offset by an increase in employee-related costs of $0.4 million and professional engineering services of $0.2 million. Employee-related costs, as compared to the prior year, increased due primarily to higher employee compensation and benefits, partially offset by lower travel costs related to decreased travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease in share-based compensation expense.
Amortization of intangible assets. Amortization of intangible assets was lower due primarily to certain finite-lived intangible assets that were fully expensed in the prior year.
Impairment of long-lived assets. We conducted an analysis on certain VorTeq long-lived assets that were directly related to obligations under the VorTeq License Agreement and determined that certain of those assets were impaired. The net carrying value of the impaired VorTeq-related machinery and equipment of $2.3 million was recognized in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Segment and Corporate Operating Expenses
Water segment. The decrease in the Water segment operating expenses was due primarily to lower employee-related costs, R&D costs to support further development of our PX, Turbocharger and pump, amortization of intangible assets related to fully amortized intangible assets in 2019, marketing costs, and commission costs, partially offset by an increase in bad debt expense related to increased sales.
Oil & Gas segment. The decrease of Oil & Gas segment operating expenses, excluding the impairment of long-lived assets, was due primarily to reduced development expenditures of the VorTeq, which resulted in a shift of employee-related costs to other future R&D initiatives, that are captured in corporate expenses, and lower testing supply expenditures, as well as lower equipment depreciation.
Corporate operating expenses. The increase of corporate operating expenses was due primarily to higher employee-related costs and costs to support our future R&D initiatives, software and licensing costs, facility and office expenses, and professional service costs.
Energy Recovery, Inc. | Form 10-K 2020 Annual Report | 31
Other Income, Net
Total other income, net decreased due primarily to lower interest income. Our investment strategy in fiscal year 2020 shifted from equity investments to cash and cash equivalents due primarily to the uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and following the drop in liquidity during the initial months of the outbreak.
Income Taxes
The fiscal year 2020 tax expense included a tax benefit of $0.7 million related to tax deductions from stock-based compensation.
The fiscal year 2019 tax expense included a deferred tax benefit of $1.0 million related to an increase in prior year U.S. federal R&D credits and a tax benefit of $0.5 million related to tax deductions from stock-based compensation, partially offset by deferred tax expense of $0.4 million due primarily to a remeasurement of our state deferred tax assets due to an adjustment to our estimated blended state effective tax rate.
On March 18, 2020, the U.S. government enacted the “Families First Coronavirus Response Act” (“FFCRA”). The FFCRA provides, among other things, a refundable payroll tax credit for emergency sick and family and medical leave required to be paid to employees under the FFCRA. On March 27, 2020, the U.S. government also enacted the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act” (“CARES Act”). The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to net operating losses, acceleration of alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. As a result of the alternative minimum tax credit refund acceleration provision, we will receive an additional $0.1 million of tax refund of minimum tax credits carried over from fiscal year 2018 on our fiscal year 2019 U.S. federal income tax return. Additionally, the CARES Act provides a refundable payroll tax credit against the employer’s share of social security tax (the “Employee Retention Credit”), and permits employers to defer, until fiscal years 2021 and 2022, payment of their remaining payroll tax liability (“Payroll Tax Deferral”). On December 21, 2021, the U.S. Congress passed the Bipartisan-Bicameral Omnibus COVID Relief Deal, which extends the deadline of many provisions under the CARES Act to new deadlines that will expire between April 30, 2021 through December 31, 2021. To date, we have applied for both the Employee Retention Credit and the Payroll Tax Deferral, which will defer federal social security tax payments. These federal social security taxes payments will in turn be paid out in equal installments in fiscal years 2021 and 2022.
Energy Recovery, Inc. | Form 10-K 2020 Annual Report | 32
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
From time to time, management and our Board of Directors reviews our liquidity and future cash needs and may make a decision on (1) the return of capital to our shareholders through a share repurchase program or dividend payout; or (2) seek additional debt or equity financing. As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity consisted of: (i) unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $94.3 million; (ii) short-term investments of $20.4 million that are primarily invested in marketable debt instruments such as corporate notes and bonds and U.S. Treasury securities; and (iii) accounts receivable, net of allowances of $11.8 million. As of December 31, 2020, there were unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $1.0 million held outside the U.S. We invest cash not needed for current operations predominantly in high-quality, investment-grade, marketable debt instruments with the intent to make such funds available for operating purposes as needed. Although these securities are available for sale, we generally hold these securities to maturity, and therefore, do not currently see a need to trade these securities in order to support our liquidity needs in the foreseeable future. The risk of this portfolio to us is in the ability of the underlying companies to cover their obligations at maturity, not in our ability to trade these securities at a profit. Based on current projections, we believe existing cash balances and future cash inflows from this portfolio will meet our liquidity needs for at least the next 12 months.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.3 million of short-term contract assets which only represents unbilled trade receivables from certain Water segment contract sales which includes contractual holdback provisions, pursuant to which we will invoice the final retention payment due within the next 12 months. The customer holdbacks represent amounts intended to provide a form of security for the customer; and accordingly, these contract assets have not been discounted to present value. The retention payments with no performance conditions are recorded as trade receivables.
Loan and Pledge Agreement
We entered into a loan and pledge agreement with a financial institution on January 27, 2017. Since inception, this loan and pledge agreement has been amended multiple times to accommodate our growth (the as amended loan and pledge agreement is hereinafter referred to as the “Loan and Pledge Agreement”). The Loan and Pledge Agreement, which will expire on June 30, 2022, provides for a committed revolving credit line of $16.0 million and an uncommitted revolving credit line of $4.0 million. The covenants of the Loan and Pledge Agreement allow us to incur indebtedness owed to a foreign subsidiary in an aggregate amount not to exceed $66.0 million, which amount is subordinated to any amounts outstanding under the Loan and Pledge Agreement. We are in compliance with all covenants related to this Loan and Pledge Agreement.
Revolving Loans
Revolving loans under the Loan and Pledge Agreement incur interest per annum at a base rate equal to the London Inter-bank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus 1.5%. Any default bears the aforementioned interest rate plus an additional 2%. The unused portion of the credit line is subject to a fee equal to the product of 0.2% per annum multiplied by the difference, if positive, between $16.0 million and the average daily balance of all advances under the committed facility plus aggregate average daily undrawn amounts of all letters of credit issued under the committed facility during the immediately preceding month or portion thereof. As of December 31, 2020, there was no debt outstanding under the Loan and Pledge Agreement.
Letters of Credit
Under the Loan and Pledge Agreement, we are allowed to borrow and request letters of credit, which are limited to a term of three years, against the eligible assets held from time to time in the pledged account maintained with the financial institution. As of December 31, 2020, there were no letters of credit outstanding under the Loan and Pledge Agreement.
Stand-By Letters of Credit
Under the Loan and Pledge Agreement, we are allowed to issue stand-by letters of credit (“SBLCs”) up to one year past the expiration date of the Loan and Pledge Agreement and to hold SBLCs with other financial institutions up to $5.1 million. SBLCs have a term limit of three years, are secured by pledged U.S. investments, and do not have any cash collateral balance requirement. SBLCs are deducted from the total revolving credit line under the Loan and Pledge Agreement and are subject to a non-refundable quarterly fee that is in an amount equal to 0.7% per annum of the face amount of the outstanding SBLCs. As of December 31, 2020, outstanding SBLCs totaled $13.3 million.
Energy Recovery, Inc. | Form 10-K 2020 Annual Report | 33
CARES Act
We have not availed ourselves of any loans made available under the CARES Act, including both the Payroll Protection Program and the Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program. We continue to monitor the programs the Federal government and the State of California are putting in place, and will participate in those programs for which we are eligible, if the need arises.
Share Repurchase Program
On March 9, 2021, our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program (the “March 2021 Authorization”) under which we, at the discretion of management, may repurchase up to $50.0 million in aggregate cost of our outstanding common stock. The March 2021 Authorization does not have an expiration date.
Cash Flows
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities in fiscal year 2020 increased over fiscal year 2019, due primarily to higher adjusted net income, partially offset by changes in assets and liabilities. The higher adjusted net income was largely driven by strong revenue growth. The lower cash used for operating assets and liabilities in fiscal year 2020, as compared to fiscal year 2019, was due primarily to higher sales of products and strong collections of our accounts receivable. Our greatest risks to our operating cash flows in this crisis are the strength of our existing and projected backlog, as well as customer receivables in a time when many companies are experiencing stress to their operating cash flows.
Due to the project driven, non-cyclical nature of our business, operating cash flow can fluctuate significantly from year to year, due to the timing of receipts of large project orders. Operating cash flow may be negative in one year and significantly positive in the next, consequently individual quarterly results and comparisons may not necessarily indicate a significant trend, either positive or negative.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities primarily relates to maturities and purchases of marketable securities, and capital expenditures supporting our growth. Our investments in marketable securities are structured to preserve principal and liquidity while at the same time maximizing yields without significantly increasing risk. The significant increase in cash from investing activities in fiscal year 2020, as compared to cash used in investing activities in fiscal year 2019, was due primarily to the movement of our investments in debt securities to cash and cash equivalents during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities primarily relates to the issuance of equity from our employee equity incentive plans, which in fiscal year 2020 was lower than fiscal year 2019.
Energy Recovery, Inc. | Form 10-K 2020 Annual Report | 34
Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements
We believe that our existing resources and cash generated from our operations will be sufficient to meet our anticipated capital requirements for at least the next 12 months. However, we may need to raise additional capital or incur additional indebtedness to continue to fund our operations or to support acquisitions in the future and/or to fund investments in our latest technology arising from rapid market adoption. These needs could require us to seek additional equity or debt financing. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including the continuing market acceptance of our products, our rate of revenue growth, the timing of new product introductions, the expansion of our R&D, manufacturing and S&M activities, the timing and extent of our expansion into new geographic territories and the amount and timing of cash used for stock repurchases. In addition, we may enter into potential material investments in, or acquisitions of, complementary businesses, services or technologies in the future which could also require us to seek additional equity or debt financing. Should we need additional liquidity or capital funds, these funds may not be available to us on favorable terms, or at all.
Contractual Obligations
Lease Facilities. We lease facilities and equipment under fixed noncancelable operating leases that expire on various dates through fiscal year 2030.
Purchase Order Arrangements. We have purchase order arrangements with our vendors for which we have not received the related goods or services. These arrangements are subject to change based on our sales demand forecasts. We have the right to cancel the arrangements prior to the date of delivery. The purchase order arrangements are related to various raw materials and component parts, as well as capital equipment.
See Note 8, “Commitments and Contingencies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to our fixed noncancelable operating leases and our purchase order arrangements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. These accounting principles require us to make estimates and judgments that can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the Consolidated Financial Statements as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expense during the periods presented. We believe that the estimates and judgments upon which we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that we make these estimates and judgments. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our consolidated financial results will be affected. The accounting policies that reflect our more significant estimates and judgments and which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are revenue recognition; valuation of stock options; valuation and impairment of goodwill; inventory; and deferred taxes and valuation allowances on deferred tax assets.
The following is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies or estimates. Our accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1, “Description of Business and Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. At the inception of each contract, performance obligations are identified and the total transaction price is allocated to the performance obligations.
Our contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, we allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative stand-alone selling price. We generally determine standalone selling prices based on the prices charged to customers.
Energy Recovery, Inc. | Form 10-K 2020 Annual Report | 35
With respect to termination, we do not have the ability to cancel a contract for convenience. In general, customers can cancel for convenience upon the payment of a termination fee that covers costs and profit. It is rare for customers to cancel contracts.
See Note 1, “Description of Business and Significant Accounting Policies - Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more detail on product and service revenue recognition - Water segment, cost-to-total cost (“CTC”) revenue recognition - Oil & Gas segment, license and development revenue recognition - Oil & Gas segment.
Stock-based Compensation
We measure and recognize stock-based compensation expense based on the fair value measurement for all stock-based awards made to our employees and directors, including restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and incentive stock options, over the requisite service period (typically the vesting period of the awards). The fair value of RSUs is based on our common stock price on the date of grant. The fair value of stock options is calculated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires a number of complex assumptions including expected life, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, and dividend yield. The estimation of awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment, and to the extent that actual results or updated estimates differ from our current estimates, such amounts are recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period in which the estimates are revised. See Note 11, “Stock-based Compensation,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of stock-based compensation.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
The purchase price of an acquired company is allocated between intangible assets and the net tangible assets of the acquired business with the residual purchase price recorded as goodwill. The determination of the value of the intangible assets acquired involves certain judgments and estimates. These judgments can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future and the appropriate weighted average cost of capital.
Goodwill is not amortized but is evaluated annually (July 1) for impairment at the reporting unit level or when indicators of a potential impairment are present. We estimate the fair value of the reporting unit using the discounted cash flow and market approaches. The forecast of future cash flows, which are based on our best estimate of future net sales and operating expenses, are based primarily on expected category expansion, pricing, market segment, and general economic conditions. In addition, we incorporate other significant inputs to our fair value calculations, including discount rate and market multiples, to reflect current market conditions, and also considered the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the termination of the VorTeq License Agreement in our calculations.
Acquired intangible assets with determinable useful lives are amortized on a straight-line or accelerated basis over the estimated periods benefited, ranging from one to 20 years. Acquired intangible assets with contractual terms are amortized over their respective legal or contractual lives. Other non-contractual intangible assets with determinable lives are amortized over periods ranging from five to 20 years.
We evaluate the recoverability of intangible assets by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to estimated future net undiscounted cash flows generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment recognized is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. The evaluation of recoverability involves estimates of future operating cash flows based upon certain forecasted assumptions, including, but not limited to, revenue growth rates, gross profit margins, and operating expenses over the expected remaining useful life of the related asset. A shortfall in these estimated operating cash flows could result in an impairment charge in the future.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (using the first-in, first-out “FIFO” method) or net realizable value. We calculate inventory valuation adjustments for excess and obsolete inventory based on current inventory levels, movement, expected useful lives, and estimated future demand of the products and spare parts. During fiscal year 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we expensed the reduced utilization of our manufacturing facilities to product cost of revenue.
Energy Recovery, Inc. | Form 10-K 2020 Annual Report | 36
Income Taxes
Current and non-current tax assets and liabilities are based upon an estimate of taxes refundable or payable for each of the jurisdictions in which our company is subject to tax. In the ordinary course of business, there is inherent uncertainty in quantifying income tax positions. We assess income tax positions and record tax benefits for all years subject to examination based upon our evaluation of the facts, circumstances, and information available at the reporting dates. For those tax positions where it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, we record the largest amount of tax benefit with a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. For those income tax positions where it is not more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, no tax benefit is recognized in the financial statements. When applicable, associated interest and penalties are recognized as a component of income tax expense. Accrued interest and penalties are included within the related tax asset or liability on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Deferred income taxes are provided for temporary differences arising from differences in bases of assets and liabilities for tax and financial reporting purposes. Deferred income taxes are recorded on temporary differences using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Significant judgment is required in determining whether and to what extent any valuation allowance is needed on the Company’s deferred tax assets. In making such a determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence including recent results of operations, scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future income, and available tax planning strategies. See Note 9, “Income Taxes,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the tax valuation allowance.
Our operations are subject to income and transaction taxes in the U.S. and in foreign jurisdictions. Significant estimates and judgments are required in determining our worldwide provision for income taxes. Some of these estimates are based on interpretations of existing tax laws or regulations. The ultimate amount of tax liability may be uncertain as a result.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1, “Description of Business and Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.