ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following section should be read in conjunction with Item 1: Business; Item 1A: Risk Factors; and Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains forward-looking statements relating to present or future trends or factors that are subject to risks and uncertainties. These risks include, but are not limited to: specific and overall impacts of the COVID-19 global pandemic on Escalade’s financial condition and results of operations; Escalade’s plans and expectations surrounding the transition to its new Chief Executive Officer and all potential related effects and consequences; the impact of competitive products and pricing; product demand and market acceptance; new product development; Escalade’s ability to achieve its business objectives, especially with respect to its Sporting Goods business on which it has chosen to focus; Escalade’s ability to successfully achieve the anticipated results of strategic transactions, including the integration of the operations of acquired assets and businesses and of divestitures or discontinuances of certain operations, assets, brands, and products; the continuation and development of key customer, supplier, licensing and other business relationships; Escalade’s ability to develop and implement our own direct to consumer e-commerce distribution channel; Escalade’s ability to successfully negotiate the shifting retail environment and changes in consumer buying habits; the financial health of our customers; disruptions or delays in our business operations, including without limitation disruptions or delays in our supply chain, arising from political unrest, war, labor strikes, natural disasters, public health crises such as the coronavirus pandemic, and other events and circumstances beyond our control; Escalade’s ability to control costs; Escalade’s ability to successfully implement actions to lessen the potential impacts of tariffs and other trade restrictions applicable to our products and raw materials, including impacts on the costs of producing our goods, importing products and materials into our markets for sale, and on the pricing of our products; general economic conditions; fluctuation in operating results; changes in foreign currency exchange rates; changes in the securities markets; Escalade’s ability to obtain financing and to maintain compliance with the terms of such financing; the availability, integration and effective operation of information systems and other technology, and the potential interruption of such systems or technology; risks related to data security of privacy breaches; and other risks detailed from time to time in Escalade’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Escalade’s future financial performance could differ materially from the expectations of management contained herein. Escalade undertakes no obligation to release revisions to these forward-looking statements after the date of this report.
Overview
Escalade, Incorporated (Escalade, the Company, we, us or our) is focused on growing its Sporting Goods segment through organic growth of existing categories, strategic acquisitions, and new product development. The Sporting Goods segment competes in a variety of categories including basketball goals, archery, indoor and outdoor recreation and fitness products. Strong brands and on-going investment in product development provide a solid foundation for building customer loyalty and continued growth.
Within the sporting goods industry, the Company has successfully built a robust market presence in several niche markets. This strategy is heavily dependent on expanding our customer base, barriers to entry, strong brands, excellent customer service and a commitment to innovation. A key strategic advantage is the Company’s established relationships with major customers that allow the Company to bring new products to market in a cost-effective manner while maintaining a diversified portfolio of products to meet the demands of consumers. In addition to strategic customer relations, the Company has substantial manufacturing and import experience that enable it to be a reliable and low-cost supplier.
To enhance growth opportunities, the Company has focused on promoting new product innovation and development and brand marketing. In addition, the Company has embarked on a strategy of acquiring companies or product lines that complement or expand the Company's existing product lines or provide expansion into new or emerging categories in sporting goods. A key objective is the acquisition of product lines with barriers to entry that the Company can take to market through its established distribution channels or through new market channels. Significant synergies are achieved through assimilation of acquired product lines into the existing Company structure.
In 2018, the Company acquired Victory Tailgate, LLC, a brand known for its premium licensed and custom tailgating games. In October 2020, the Company acquired the assets of the billiard table, game room, and recreational product lines of American Heritage Billiards, including the related intellectual property. In December 2020, the Company acquired substantially all of the business and assets of Revel Match LLC, dba RAVE Sports, a brand known for its innovative and high-quality water recreation products. These and other acquisitions strengthen the Company’s leadership in various product categories, while providing exciting new opportunities within the growing water sports market. The Company also sometimes divests or discontinues certain operations, assets, and products that do not perform to the Company's expectations or no longer fit with the Company's strategic objectives.
Management believes that key indicators in measuring the success of these strategies are revenue growth, earnings growth, new product introductions, and the expansion of channels of distribution. The following table sets forth the annual percentage change in revenues and net income over the past three years:
COVID-19 Pandemic
The emergence of the coronavirus (COVID-19) around the world, and particularly in the United States and China, presents significant risks to the Company, not all of which the Company is able to fully evaluate or even to foresee at the current time. Economic and health conditions in the United States and across most of the globe have changed rapidly since the end of the Company’s first quarter of 2020. In the short-term, demand for the Company’s products has increased, notably in our fitness products, basketball, playground, and indoor/outdoor games. Some of the increase in demand is likely due to consumers being required or encouraged by governmental authorities to stay at home, schools being closed, and employers requiring employees to work remotely and/or implementing furloughs and layoffs. Such increased demand may not continue and/or demand may decrease from historical levels depending on the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, the length of time it takes for normal economic and operating conditions to resume, additional governmental actions that may be taken and/or extensions of time for restrictions that have been imposed to date, and numerous other uncertainties.
In addition, increased customer demand for certain products presents challenges for the Company to anticipate and adjust inventory levels to meet such demand. So far, the Company has been able to obtain products from its suppliers on a timely basis. To alleviate the risks of incurring product outages, the Company has accelerated orders of certain products with a resulting increase in inventories. While the Company believes it is currently in strong financial condition, a substantial decrease in customer demand and/or slower payments by the Company’s mass merchants, specialty dealers and other customers could adversely affect the Company’s liquidity.
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to affect the Company’s operations through the fourth quarter of 2020 and may continue to do so indefinitely thereafter. All of these factors may have far reaching impacts on the Company’s business, operations, and financial results and conditions, directly and indirectly, including without limitation impacts on the health of the Company’s management and employees, many of whom are still working remotely, manufacturing, distribution, marketing and sales operations, customer and consumer behaviors, and on the overall economy. The scope and nature of these impacts, most of which are beyond the Company’s control, continue to evolve and the outcomes are uncertain.
Due to the above circumstances and as described generally in this Form 10-K, the Company’s results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020 are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for fiscal year 2021. Management cannot predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s sales channels, supply chain, manufacturing and distribution nor to economic conditions generally, including the effects on consumer spending. The ultimate extent of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company is highly uncertain and will depend on future developments, and such effects could exist for an extended period of time even after the pandemic might end.
Results of Operations
The following schedule sets forth certain consolidated statement of operations data as a percentage of net revenue:
Revenue and Gross Margin
Net revenue increased 51.6% in 2020 compared to 2019. The Company recognized increased sales across nearly all product categories due to increased product placement and continued high demand, most notably in our outdoor and fitness categories.
The overall gross margin percentage increased to 27.3% in 2020 compared with 23.5% in 2019. Margins were favorably impacted by factory utilization, change in sales mix and supply chain improvements made throughout the year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses (SG&A) were $40.3 million in 2020 compared to $31.6 million in 2019, an increase of $8.7 million or 27.5%. The increase in SG&A is in line with the growth of the business. SG&A as a percent of sales is 14.7% in 2020 compared with 17.6% in 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
The effective tax rate for 2020 and 2019 was 21.2% and 18.8%, respectively. The 2020 effective tax rate is slightly higher than the federal statutory rate primarily due to the impact of state taxes, with federal income tax credits helping to offset the impact of the state taxes and lower the statutory rate. The 2019 effective tax rate is lower than the statutory rate primarily due to the federal benefit of state income taxes and federal income tax credits.
Sporting Goods
Net revenues, operating income, and net income for the Sporting Goods segment for the three years ended December 26, 2020 were as follows:
Net revenue increased 51.6% in 2020 compared to 2019.
The gross margin ratio in 2020 was 27.3% compared to 23.5% in 2019. The increase was primarily due to factory utilization, changes in sales mix and supply chain improvements made throughout the year. Operating income, as a percentage of net revenue, increased to 11.9% in 2020 compared to 4.8% in 2019.
Financial Condition and Liquidity
The current ratio, a basic measure of liquidity (current assets divided by current liabilities), for 2020 was 3.1, compared to 4.8 in 2019. Receivable levels increased to $65.3 million in 2020 compared with $35.5 million in 2019 and net inventory increased $30.2 million to $72.5 million in 2020 from $42.3 million in 2019.
The Company’s working capital requirements are primarily funded through cash flows from operations and revolving credit agreements with its bank. During 2020, the Company’s maximum borrowings under its primary revolving credit lines and overdraft facility totaled $33.6 million compared to $10.5 million in 2019. The overall effective interest rate in 2020 was 2.4% compared to the effective rate of 8.7% in 2019. Total long-term debt at the end of the Company’s 2020 fiscal year was $30.1 million.
On January 21, 2019, the Company entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (“2019 Restated Credit Agreement”) with its issuing bank, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (“Chase”), and the other lenders identified in the 2019 Restated Credit Agreement (collectively, the “Lender”). Under the terms of the 2019 Restated Credit Agreement, the Lender has made available to the Company a senior revolving credit facility with increased maximum availability of $50.0 million. The maturity date was extended to January 31, 2022. In addition to the increased borrowing amount and extended maturity date, other significant changes reflected in the 2019 Restated Credit Agreement include: more favorable interest rate provisions; increases in borrowing base availability; releases of existing mortgages on the Company’s real property; and increasing to $25.0 million the total consideration that the Company may use for acquisitions without obtaining the Lender’s consent, as long as no event of default exists.
On December 14, 2020, the Company and its wholly owned subsidiary, Indian Industries, Inc. (“Indian”) entered into the Third Amendment dated as of December 14, 2020 (the “Third Amendment”) to the 2019 Restated Credit Agreement dated as of January 21, 2019 among the Company, Indian, each of their domestic subsidiaries, and Chase, as Administrative Agent and as Lender. Under the terms of the Third Amendment, the maximum availability under the senior revolving credit facility increased to $75.0 million, up from $50.0 million. The maturity date of the revolving credit facility was extended to December 14, 2023. In addition to the increased borrowing amount and extended maturity date, other significant changes reflected in the Third Amendment include: increases in borrowing base availability if the Company’s funded debt to EBITDA ratio is less than 1.75 to 1:00; increasing to $30.0 million the total consideration that the Company may use for acquisitions without obtaining the Lender’s consent, as long as no event of default exists; resetting the maximum authorized stock repurchases to $15.0 million for the period commencing upon entry into the Third Amendment; increasing the interest rate on borrowings by twenty five basis points; increasing the unused facility fee by five basis points; and adding more specific provisions and procedures for replacement of LIBOR if and when LIBOR would no longer be the benchmark for determining interest rates.
Cash flows from operations and revolving credit agreements were used to fund acquisitions, to pay shareholder dividends, and to fund stock repurchases.
In 2021, the Company estimates capital expenditures to be approximately $7.0 million.
The Company believes that cash generated from its projected 2021 operations and the commitment of borrowings from its primary lender will provide it with sufficient cash flows for its operations.
It is possible that if economic conditions deteriorate, this could have adverse effects on the Company’s ability to operate profitably during fiscal year 2021. To the extent that occurs, management will pursue cost reduction initiatives and consider realignment of its infrastructure in an effort to match the Company’s overhead and cost structure with the sales level dictated by current market conditions.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements under the sub-heading “New Accounting Pronouncements”.
Off Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
The Company has no financing arrangements that are not recorded on the Company’s balance sheet.
Contractual Obligations
The following schedule summarizes the Company’s material contractual obligations as of December 26, 2020:
Critical Accounting Estimates
The methods, estimates and judgments used in applying the Company’s accounting policies have a significant impact on the results reported in its financial statements. Some of these accounting policies require difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. The most critical accounting estimates are described below and in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Product Warranty
The Company provides limited warranties on certain of its products for varying periods. Generally, the warranty periods range from 30 days to one year. However, some products carry extended warranties of three-year, five-year, seven-year, ten-year, fifteen-year, and lifetime warranties. The Company records an accrued liability and reduction in sales for estimated future warranty claims based upon historical experience and management’s estimate of the level of future claims. Changes in the estimated amounts recognized in prior years are recorded as an adjustment to the accrued liability and sales in the current year. To the extent there are product defects in current products that are unknown to management and do not fall within historical defect rates, the product warranty reserve could be understated and the Company could be required to accrue additional product warranty costs thus negatively affecting gross margin.
Inventory Valuation Reserves
The Company evaluates inventory for obsolescence and excess quantities based on demand forecasts over specified time frames, usually one year. The demand forecast is based on historical usage, sales forecasts and current as well as anticipated market conditions. All amounts in excess of the demand forecast are deemed to be potentially excess or obsolete and a reserve is established based on the anticipated net realizable value. To the extent that demand forecasts are greater than actual demand and the Company fails to reduce manufacturing output accordingly, the Company could be required to record additional inventory reserves which would have a negative impact on gross margin.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The Company provides an allowance for doubtful accounts based upon a review of outstanding receivables, historical collection information and existing economic conditions. Accounts receivable are ordinarily due between 30 and 60 days after the issuance of the invoice. Accounts are considered delinquent when more than 90 days past due. Delinquent receivables are reserved or written off based on individual credit evaluation and specific circumstances of the customer. To the extent that actual bad debt losses exceed the allowance recorded by the Company, additional reserves would be required which would increase selling, general and administrative costs.
Customer Allowances
Customer allowances are common practice in the industries in which the Company operates. These agreements are typically in the form of advertising subsidies, volume rebates and catalog allowances and are accounted for as a reduction to gross sales. The Company reviews such allowances on an ongoing basis and accruals are adjusted, if necessary, as additional information becomes available.
Impairment of Goodwill
The Company reviews goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable, in accordance with guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standard Codification (ASC) 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other. A qualitative assessment is first performed to determine if the fair value of the reporting unit is "more likely than not" less than the carrying value. If so, we proceed to a quantitative assessment, in which the fair value of the reporting unit is compared to its carrying value. If the carrying value of goodwill exceeds the implied estimated fair value calculated, an impairment charge to current operations is recorded to reduce the carrying value to the implied estimated fair value.
If a quantitative assessment of goodwill impairment testing is required, the Company establishes fair value by using an income approach or a combination of a market approach and an income approach. The market approach uses the guideline-companies method to estimate the fair value of a reporting unit based on reported sales of publicly-held entities engaged in the same or a similar business as the reporting unit. The income approach uses the discounted cash flow method to estimate the fair value of a reporting unit by calculating the present value of the expected future cash flows of the reporting unit. The discount rate is based on a weighted average cost of capital determined using publicly-available interest rate information on the valuation date and data regarding equity, size and country-specific risk premiums/decrements compiled and published by a commercial source. The Company uses assumptions about expected future operating performance in determining estimates of those cash flows, which may differ from actual cash flows.
The Company has one reporting unit that is identical to our operating segment, Sporting Goods. Of the total recorded goodwill of $32.7 million at December 26, 2020, the entire amount was allocated to the Escalade Sports reporting unit. The results of the qualitative impairment assessment of the Escalade Sports reporting unit indicated that it was not “more likely than not” that the fair value of the reporting unit was less than the carrying value as of December 26, 2020.
Long Lived Assets
The Company evaluates the recoverability of certain long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Estimates of future cash flows used to test recoverability of long-lived assets include separately identifiable undiscounted cash flows expected to arise from the use and eventual disposition of the assets. Where estimated future cash flows are less than the carrying value of the assets, impairment losses are recognized based on the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the assets.
Non-Marketable Equity Method Investment
The Company had a minority equity position in a company strategically related to the Company’s business, but did not have control over this company. The accounting method employed was dependent on the level of ownership and degree of influence the Company can exert on operations. Where the equity interest was less than 20% and the degree of influence was not significant, the cost method of accounting is employed. Where the equity interest was greater than 20% but not more than 50%, the equity method of accounting is utilized. Under the equity method, the Company’s proportionate share of net income was recorded in equity in earnings of affiliates on the consolidated statements of operations. The proportionate share of net income was $0.1 million in 2018. Total cash dividends received from this equity investment amounted to $2,323 thousand in 2018. On May 17, 2018, the company completed the sale of its 50% interest for $33.7 million, resulting in a gain on sale of $13.0 million. In conjunction with the sale, the Company entered into a new license agreement with Stiga for the licensing rights to manufacture, market, promote, sell and distribute Stiga-branded table tennis hobby products in the United States, Mexico and Canada. The Company has had the licensing rights for such products since 1995 pursuant to an existing license agreement that expired December 31, 2018. The new license agreement went into effect on January 1, 2019.
Effect of Inflation
The Company cannot accurately determine the precise effects of inflation. The Company attempts to pass on increased costs and expenses through price increases when necessary. The Company is working on reducing expenses; improving manufacturing technologies; and redesigning products to keep these costs under control.
Capital Expenditures
As of December 26, 2020, the Company had no material commitments for capital expenditures. In 2021, the Company estimates capital expenditures to be approximately $7.0 million.