Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section should be read in conjunction with “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” included in Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Annual Report and our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this 2020 Annual Report. “Business Overview,” "COVID-19 Update" and "2020 Highlights" briefly present our business and certain significant events addressed in this section or elsewhere in this 2020 Annual Report. This 2020 Annual Report should be read in its entirety for a complete description of our business and discussion of these events.
Business Overview
Element Solutions Inc, incorporated in Delaware in January 2014, is a leading global specialty chemicals company whose businesses supply a broad range of solutions that enhance the performance of products people use every day. Developed in multi-step technological processes, these innovative solutions enable customers' manufacturing processes in several key industries, including consumer electronics, power electronics, semiconductor fabrication, communications and data storage infrastructure, automotive systems, industrial surface finishing, consumer packaging and offshore energy. Our businesses provide products that, in substantially all cases, are consumed by customers as part of their production process, providing us with reliable and recurring revenue streams as the products are replenished in order to continue production. Our customers use our innovation as competitive advantages, relying on us to help them navigate through fast-paced, high-growth markets. Our product development and product extensions are expected to continue to drive sales growth in both new and existing markets, while expanding margins, through a consistent focus on increasing customer value propositions.
We believe the majority of our businesses hold strong positions in the high-growth markets they serve. Our strategy is based on a balance of operational excellence and prudent capital allocation. Our operating teams focus on the strong execution of customer-led product development, superior technical sales support and continuous supply chain optimization. Our senior leadership aims to foster an environment of accountability and success for our operating teams while also evaluating and executing on high-return capital allocation opportunities that can drive improvements in long-term shareholder value. In the future, we may pursue targeted and opportunistic acquisitions in our existing and adjacent end-markets that strengthen our current businesses, expand and diversify our product offering, and enhance our growth and strategic position.
We generate revenue from the development, formulation and sale of our chemistry solutions globally. Our extensive global teams of specially trained scientists and engineers develop products while our expert sales and service organizations ensure customer needs are met every day. We leverage close relationships with both customers and OEMs to execute our growth strategy and identify opportunities for new products. These new products are developed and created by drawing upon our broad and longstanding intellectual property portfolio and technical expertise. Our specialty chemicals and processes are seen as integral to customer' product performance. We believe that our customers place significant value on the consistency and quality of our brands, which we capitalize on through significant market share, customer loyalty and supply chain access. Lastly, operational risks and switching costs make it difficult for our customers to change suppliers which allows us to retain customers and maintain our market positions.
Our operations are organized into two segments: Electronics and Industrial & Specialty, which are each described below:
Electronics - The Electronics segment researches, formulates and sells specialty chemicals and materials for all types of electronics hardware from complex printed circuit board designs to advanced semiconductor packaging. In mobile communications, computers, automobiles and aerospace equipment, its products are an integral part of the electronics manufacturing process and the functionality of end-products. The segment's "wet chemistries" for metallization, surface treatments and solderable finishes form the physical circuitry pathways and its "assembly materials," such as solders, pastes, fluxes and adhesives, join those pathways together. The segment provides specialty chemical solutions through the following businesses: Assembly Solutions, Circuitry Solutions and Semiconductor Solutions.
Industrial & Specialty - The Industrial & Specialty segment researches, formulates and sells specialty chemicals that enhance surfaces or improve industrial processes in diverse industrial sectors from automotive trim to transcontinental infrastructure and from high-speed printing to high-design faucets. Its products include chemical systems that protect and decorate metal and plastic surfaces; consumable chemicals that enable printing image transfer on flexible packaging materials; and chemistries used in water-based hydraulic control fluids in offshore energy production. These fully consumable products are used in the aerospace, automotive, construction, consumer electronics, consumer packaged goods and oil and gas production end markets. The segment provides specialty chemical solutions through the following businesses: Industrial Solutions, Graphics Solutions and Energy Solutions.
COVID-19 Update
The 2020 COVID-19 pandemic caused a global economic slowdown, significant end-market volatility and business uncertainty. In an effort to contain COVID-19 or slow its spread, governments and businesses around the world undertook significant countermeasures, including business closures, mandated “shelter in place” orders, travel restrictions and other edicts, which have negatively impacted, and continue to negatively impact, business activity around the globe.
Due to the pandemic and these related actions, we experienced weaker demand beginning in April 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, which trend tapered off during the third quarter of 2020. Overall market conditions improved monthly through the second half of 2020. Our industrially oriented businesses were the most impacted, particularly those serving automotive end-markets.
Our supply chain demonstrated resilience and has remained largely intact in 2020. Our pre-existing business continuity planning exercises helped us with contingencies to support our customers in the event of manufacturing facility shutdowns.
Our top priority has been protecting the health and safety of our employees. To that end, we proactively implemented policies and procedures, including travel restrictions, remote work and heightened sanitary and social distancing policies at our locations around the world. These actions resulted in a general decrease of discretionary expenses in 2020, including travel and entertainment expenses, as health and safety protocols were adopted worldwide. In addition, we implemented certain actions to reduce cost in the event the economic downturn were to be deeper and/or last longer than it actually was or did. These actions included temporary employee salary reductions and furloughs to reduce expenses and preserve margins. However, with a goal of preserving employment, we did not pursue any material restructuring or workforce reductions.
The ultimate extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business or our future results of operations, financial condition, expected cash flows and/or stock price remains unknown as COVID-19, including its variants, continue to spread. The long-term impact of this pandemic will depend on numerous and evolving factors that are highly uncertain, vary by market and cannot be quantified at this time. These factors include the duration of the pandemic, the efficacy, availability and/or public acceptance of vaccines targeting COVID-19, the impact of variants of COVID-19 that may affect its spread or virulence or the effectiveness of vaccines on the virus, and evolving macroeconomic factors driven by the virus's overall spread and impact.
2020 Highlights
•Launch of MacDermid Envio Solutions - During the third quarter of 2020, we launched MacDermid Envio Solutions, a new business within our Industrial & Specialty segment which focuses on helping customers reduce their environmental impact through proprietary chemistry as well as equipment for turnkey wastewater treatment and the recovery of metals and other valuable materials.
•Senior Notes Refinancing - On August 18, 2020, we completed a private offering of $800 million aggregate principal amount of 3.875% USD Notes due 2028 and the subsequent full redemption of our 5.875% USD Notes due 2025. The 200 basis point reduction in interest rate reduces our annual interest payments by $16.0 million starting in 2021. In connection with the redemption, we expensed $45.7 million, consisting of a make-whole premium of $33.6 million and the write-off of debt issuance costs and original issue discount of $12.1 million, which was recorded in "Other (expense) income, net" in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
•Cash Dividend - On December 15, 2020, we paid a cash dividend of $0.05 per outstanding share of our common stock to all stockholders of record at the close of business on November 25, 2020. The dividend totaled approximately $12.4 million.
•Element Solutions Foundation - During the fourth quarter of 2020, we established the ESI Foundation to serve as the Company’s charitable giving entity with an initial funding of $5.0 million. The foundation intends to provide monetary grants to qualified charitable organizations in the communities where our employees live and work. The foundation plans to focus on causes important to the environmental and social well-being of these communities.
•Repurchases of Common Stock - During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 5.7 million shares of our common stock for $55.7 million, at an average price of approximately $9.74 per share. The remaining authorization under our previously-announced $750 million stock repurchase program was approximately $187 million at December 31, 2020.
Acquisitions
In the future, we may pursue acquisitions in our existing or adjacent end-markets with product offerings that complement our portfolio or geographic footprint. We expect to achieve commercial and distribution efficiencies by expanding into related categories that can be marketed through our existing distribution channels or provide us with new distribution channels for our existing products. To the extent we pursue future acquisitions, we expect that acquisition candidates would demonstrate a combination of attractive margins, strong cash flow characteristics, niche leading positions and consumable products that generate recurring revenue. We believe the diversity of the niche-end markets we serve will enable us to continue our growth and maintain strong cash flow generation throughout economic cycles and mitigate the impact of a downturn in any single market. We will only pursue a candidate when it is deemed to be fiscally prudent and that meets our acquisition criteria. We anticipate that any future acquisitions would be financed through a combination of cash on hand, operating cash flow, availability under our Credit Agreement and/or new debt or equity offerings.
Foreign Currency Exposure
Approximately 74% of our net sales originated outside of the U.S. and were denominated in numerous currencies, including the euro, Chinese yuan, British pound, and Taiwan dollar. Therefore, changes in foreign exchange rates in any given reporting period may positively or negatively impact our financial performance. Foreign exchange translation negatively impacted our 2020 net sales performance by an immaterial amount.
In addition, our foreign subsidiaries are subject to foreign currency risk relating to receipts from customers, payments to suppliers and intercompany transactions that are not in their functional currency, which is typically their local currency. As a result, our foreign subsidiaries can and have entered into foreign exchange hedges to protect against transaction exposures. We actively assess our hedging programs in order to mitigate foreign exchange risk exposures. This includes programs to hedge our foreign currency denominated balance sheet exposures as well as foreign currency anticipated cash flows.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates that may significantly impact our reported financial results and accompanying disclosures. We base our estimates on assumptions and judgments based on historical experience, current conditions as well as other factors that we consider reasonable. Estimates relate to matters that are inherently uncertain and actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences could be material to our financial statements.
We consider the accounting estimates discussed below to be critical to the understanding of our financial statements and involve difficult, subjective or complex judgments that could potentially affect our reported results. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this 2020 Annual Report for a detailed discussion of the application of these and other accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue either upon shipment or delivery of product depending on when it is reasonably assured that both title and the risks and rewards of ownership have been passed on to the customer, our performance obligations have been fulfilled and collectability is probable. Estimates for sales rebates, incentives and discounts, as well as sales returns and allowances, are accounted for as reductions of revenue when the earnings process is complete. Differences between estimated expense and actual costs are typically immaterial and are recognized in earnings in the period such differences are determined.
Most performance obligations relate to contracts with a duration of less than one year, in which we have the right to invoice the customer at the time the performance obligation is satisfied for the amount of revenue recognized at that time. Accordingly, we have elected the practical expedient available under ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, not to disclose remaining performance obligations under our contracts. We have also elected the practical expedient to expense incremental costs for obtaining contracts with terms of less than one year.
Goodwill
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level annually in the fourth quarter, or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. Our reporting units are determined based upon our organizational structure in place at the date of the goodwill impairment test. The fair value of each reporting unit is determined based equally on market multiples and the present value of discounted future cash flows. The discounted cash flows are prepared based upon
cash flows at the reporting unit level and involve significant judgments related to future growth rates and discount rates, among other considerations, from the vantage point of a market participant.
If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that reporting unit, goodwill is not impaired and no further testing is required. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, the goodwill impairment loss is calculated as the difference between these amounts, limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
As part of our 2020 goodwill impairment test in the fourth quarter of 2020, we determined that the excess of the fair value of the Energy Solutions reporting unit within our Industrial & Specialty segment exceeded its carrying value by less than 20%. Goodwill assigned to the Energy Solutions reporting unit was approximately $245 million as of the assessment date. The estimated fair value of this reporting unit is highly sensitive to changes in these estimates and assumptions; therefore, in some instances, changes in these assumptions may impact whether the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying value. We performed sensitivity analysis around these assumptions in order to assess the reasonableness of the assumptions and the resulting estimated fair values. Based on a sensitivity analysis performed for the Energy Solutions reporting unit, a 100 basis point increase in the WACC or 100 basis point decrease in the terminal growth rate, without any other changes to the valuation, would not result in the carrying value being greater than the fair value. Future impairments of this reporting units may occur if the business does not achieve its expected cash flows or macroeconomic conditions result in an increase in the WACC used to estimate fair value.
In 2020, we also determined that the fair values of the remaining reporting units were considered substantially in excess of their respective carrying values.
See Note 8, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this 2020 Annual Report for additional information.
Income Taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the differences between the financial statement basis and the tax basis of assets, liabilities, net operating losses and tax carryforwards. A valuation allowance is required to be recognized to reduce the recorded deferred tax asset to the amount that will more likely than not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income by jurisdiction during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible or when carryforwards can be utilized. We consider the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income and tax planning strategies in this assessment. If these estimates and related assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record additional valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets resulting in additional income tax expense. We evaluate our valuation allowance conclusions on a quarterly basis based on available evidence and realization of deferred tax assets ultimately depends on the existence of sufficient taxable income in the applicable carryback or carryforward periods. Changes in the Company's estimates of and reliance on such evidence may affect the estimate of the realization of the benefits of tax attribute carryforwards. It is reasonably possible that further adjustments will be made to the valuation allowance for state tax carryforwards.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences and carryforwards are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date of such change.
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and in various states and foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. The first step in evaluating the tax position for recognition is to determine the amount of evidence that supports a favorable conclusion for the tax position upon audit. In order to recognize the tax position, we must determine whether it is more likely than not that the position is sustainable. The final evaluation step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that has a more than 50% chance of being realized upon final settlement. Although we believe that the positions taken on income tax matters are reasonable, we establish tax reserves in recognition that various taxing authorities may challenge certain of those positions taken, potentially resulting in additional tax liabilities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A summary of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 3, Recent Accounting Pronouncements, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this 2020 Annual Report.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial results presented in accordance with GAAP in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section, we present certain non-GAAP financial measures, such as operating results on a constant currency and organic basis and Adjusted EBITDA. Management internally reviews each of these non-GAAP measures to evaluate performance on a comparative period-to-period basis in terms of absolute performance, trends and expected future performance with respect to our business. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures, which are each further described below, provide investors with an additional perspective on trends and underlying operating results on a period-to-period comparable basis. We also believe that investors find this information helpful in understanding the ongoing performance of our operations separate from items that may have a disproportionate positive or negative impact on our financial results in any particular period or are considered to be associated with our capital structure.
These non-GAAP financial measures, however, have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation from, a substitute for, or superior to, the related financial information that we report in accordance with GAAP. The principal limitation of these non-GAAP financial measures is that they exclude significant expenses and income that are required by GAAP to be recorded in our financial statements and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies due to potential differences in calculation methods. In addition, these measures are subject to inherent limitations as they reflect the exercise of judgment by management about which items are excluded or included in determining these non-GAAP financial measures. Investors are encouraged to review the definitions and reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most comparable GAAP financial measures included in this 2020 Annual Report and not to rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
Constant Currency
We disclose operating results, from net sales through operating profit and Adjusted EBITDA, on a constant currency basis by adjusting to exclude the impact of changes due to the translation of foreign currencies of our international locations into U.S. dollars. Management believes this non-GAAP financial information facilitates period-to-period comparison in the analysis of trends in business performance, thereby providing valuable supplemental information regarding our results of operations, consistent with how we internally evaluate our financial results.
The impact of foreign currency translation is calculated by converting our current-period local currency financial results into U.S. dollars using the prior period's exchange rates and comparing these adjusted amounts to our prior period reported results. The difference between actual growth rates and constant currency growth rates represents the estimated impact of foreign currency translation.
Organic Net Sales Growth
Organic net sales growth is defined as net sales excluding the impact of foreign currency translation, changes due to the pass-through pricing of certain metals and acquisitions and/or divestitures, as applicable. Management believes this non-GAAP financial measure provides investors with a more complete understanding of the underlying net sales trends by providing comparable net sales over differing periods on a consistent basis.
For a reconciliation of GAAP net sales growth to organic net sales growth, see "Net Sales" within the "Results of Operations" section below.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA (earnings before interest, provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization), excluding the impact of additional items included in GAAP earnings which we believe are not representative or indicative of our ongoing business or are considered to be associated with our capital structure. Management believes Adjusted EBITDA provides investors with a more complete understanding of the long-term profitability trends of our business and facilitates comparisons of our profitability to prior and future periods.
For a reconciliation of "Net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders" to Adjusted EBITDA and more information about the adjustments made, see Note 23, Segment Information, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this 2020 Annual Report.
Results of Operations
(nm) Calculation not meaningful.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Sales
Net sales for 2020 increased by 1% on a reported and constant currency basis and declined by 3% on an organic basis. Electronics' consolidated results were positively impacted by $53.6 million of acquisitions and $5.2 million of pass-through metals pricing and Industrial & Specialty's consolidated results were positively impacted by $11.3 million of acquisitions.
The following table reconciles GAAP net sales growth to constant currency and organic net sales growth:
NOTE: Totals may not sum due to rounding.
Electronics' net sales for 2020 increased by 8% on a reported and constant currency basis and 2% on an organic basis.
•Assembly Solutions: net sales increased by 5% on a reported basis and declined 4% on an organic basis. The Kester Acquisition and pass-through metals pricing had a positive impact on reported net sales of 8% and 1%, respectively. Foreign exchange did not have a material impact on reported net sales. The decrease in organic net sales was primarily due to weak demand related to COVID-19-related production slowdowns in the second quarter of 2020 across all regions we serve, which impacted key end-markets such as automotive and consumer electronics, partially offset by recovery in the same end markets in the fourth quarter of 2020.
•Circuitry Solutions: net sales increased by 6% on a reported basis and 5% on an organic basis. Foreign exchange had a positive impact of 1% on reported net sales. The increase in organic net sales was primarily due to strong demand for high-end smartphones and 5G telecommunication infrastructure, as well as strength from memory disk customers driven by continued growth in data center markets.
•Semiconductor Solutions: net sales increased by 23% on a reported basis and 17% on an organic basis. The Kester Acquisition had a positive impact of 6% on reported net sales. Foreign exchange did not have a material impact on reported net sales. The increase in organic net sales was primarily due to growth in advanced packaging, driven by growth in semiconductor volumes, and increased demand for advanced assembly products, driven by 5G telecommunication infrastructure.
Industrial & Specialty's net sales for 2020 decreased by 9% on a reported basis, 8% on a constant currency basis and 10% on an organic basis.
•Industrial Solutions: net sales declined by 9% on a reported basis and 11% on an organic basis. The DMP Acquisition had a positive impact of 2% on reported net sales. Foreign exchange had a negative impact of 1% on reported net sales. The decrease in organic net sales was primarily driven by automotive production slowdowns due to the COVID-19 pandemic in all regions and demand weakness in construction and general industrial manufacturing markets in the first half of the year, partially offset by sequential recovery in the same end markets.
•Graphic Solutions: net sales declined by 5% on a reported basis and 4% on an organic basis. Foreign exchange had a negative impact of 1% on reported net sales. The decrease in organic net sales was primarily due to lower volumes of ancillary products, such as screen printing and newspaper plates, as well as delayed marketing campaigns by CPG customers.
•Energy Solutions: net sales declined 16% on a reported basis and 13% on an organic basis. Foreign exchange had a negative impact of 3% on reported net sales. The decrease in organic net sales was primarily due to demand weakness related to the COVID-19 pandemic and the subsequent decline in the price of oil which significantly curtailed production and drilling activity globally, as well as the continuing impact of the loss of certain business in the first quarter of 2019, which had a negative impact of approximately 2% on organic net sales growth.
Gross Profit
Electronics' gross profit for 2020 increased by 7% on a reported and constant currency basis. The constant currency increase in gross profit for the period was driven by growth in telecom and data storage markets and was partially offset by COVID-19-related production slowdowns in the automotive markets. Gross margin declined modestly due to unfavorable product mix.
Industrial & Specialty's gross profit for 2020 decreased by 9% on a reported basis and 8% on a constant currency basis. The constant currency decrease in gross profit was primarily driven by lower net sales in Industrial Solutions.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for 2020 increased 3% on a reported and constant currency basis. The constant currency increase was driven primarily by higher incentive compensation accruals, the initial funding of $5.0 million associated with the creation of the Element Solutions Foundation in the fourth quarter of 2020, as well as an increase in research and development expenses related to the acquisition of a new subsea production control fluid within our Energy Solutions business for $6.3 million. See Note 8, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, for additional information. This was partially offset by cost containment initiatives across the business to mitigate the impact of COVID-19-related slowdowns, including lower travel expenses, which decreased approximately $15.0 million on a constant currency basis, and lower personnel expenses, including the impact of temporary employee salary reductions and furloughs.
Other (Expense) Income, net
Interest expense, net
Net interest expense decreased $27.3 million primarily due to the pay down of our credit facilities on January 31, 2019 in connection with the Arysta Sale, as well as our private offering of $800 million aggregate principal amount of 3.875% USD Notes due 2028 and subsequent full redemption of our 5.875% USD Notes due 2025 during the third quarter of 2020. This private offering is expected to result in continued significant interest savings in 2021.
Foreign exchange (loss) gain
Foreign exchange loss increased $65.2 million primarily due to the remeasurement of euro- and British pound-denominated intercompany balances.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net for 2020 totaled $51.7 million, of which $45.7 million related to the redemption of our 5.875% USD Notes due 2025. Other expense, net for 2019 totaled $46.2 million, of which $61.0 million was for debt refinancing costs related to paying down our then existing credit facilities at the time of the Arysta Sale, partially offset by a $11.7 million gain on derivative contracts associated with the refinancing of our non-U.S. dollar denominated third-party debt in the first quarter of 2019.
Income Tax
The income tax expense for 2020 totaled $4.3 million, as compared to $61.3 million in 2019. Tax expense changed primarily due to changes in pre-tax income and changes in U.S. tax law. For additional information see Note 11, Income Taxes, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this 2020 Annual Report.
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
Other comprehensive income for 2020 totaled $85.7 million as compared to $517 million in the prior year. The change was driven primarily by realized foreign currency translation losses of $480 million related to the Arysta Sale in 2019, as well as currency translation losses associated with the Brazilian real, partially offset by gains associated with the Chinese yuan and euro.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA Performance
Electronics' Adjusted EBITDA for 2020 increased 10% on a reported and constant currency basis. The constant currency increase was driven primarily by higher gross profit, as well as lower general and administrative expenses.
Industrial & Specialty's Adjusted EBITDA for 2020 decreased 11% on a reported basis and 10% on a constant currency basis. The constant currency decrease was driven primarily by lower gross profit, partially offset by lower general and administrative expenses.
Comparison of Fiscal Years 2019 and 2018
For the comparison of fiscal years 2019 and 2018, see "Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018" in Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, included in our 2019 Annual Report and incorporated by reference into this 2020 Annual Report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary source of liquidity during 2020 was available cash generated from operations. Our primary uses of cash and cash equivalents were to fund operations, debt service obligations, $55.7 million of repurchases of our common stock, capital expenditures, working capital and dividend payments. Our first significant debt principal payment of approximately $700 million, related to the maturity of our outstanding USD term loans under the Credit Agreement, is not due until due 2026.
We currently expect to pay a 5 cents per share dividend on a quarterly basis. However, the actual declaration of any cash dividends, as well as their amounts and timing, will be subject to the final determination of our Board of Directors based on factors including our future earnings and cash flow generation.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents and cash generated from operations, supplemented by our availability under our lines of credit, including our revolving credit facility under the Credit Agreement, will be sufficient to meet our working capital needs, interest payments, capital expenditures, potential dividend payments and other business requirements for at least the next twelve months. However, working capital cycles and/or future repurchases of our common stock and/or acquisitions may require additional funding, which may include future debt and/or equity offerings. Our long-term liquidity may be influenced by our ability to borrow additional funds, renegotiate existing debt and raise equity under terms that are favorable to us.
We may from time to time seek to repurchase our equity and/or to retire or repurchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for equity, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions, applicable restrictions under our various financing arrangements, and other factors.
During 2020, approximately 74% of our net sales were generated from non-U.S. operations, and we expect a large portion of our net sales to continue to be generated outside of the U.S. As a result, our foreign subsidiaries will likely continue to hold a substantial portion of our cash. We expect to manage our worldwide cash requirements based on available funds among the many subsidiaries through which we conduct business and the cost effectiveness with which those funds can be accessed. We may transfer cash from certain international subsidiaries to U.S. and/or other international subsidiaries when we believe it is cost effective to do so.
We continually review our domestic and foreign cash profile, expected future cash generation and investment opportunities, which support our current designation of a portion of these funds as being indefinitely reinvested, and reassess whether there are demonstrated needs to repatriate a portion of these funds being held internationally. If, as a result of our review, we determine that all or a portion of the funds require repatriation, we may be required to accrue additional taxes. Of our $292 million of cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020, $156 million was held by our foreign subsidiaries. In 2020, domestic cash was primarily used for debt service obligations, repurchases of our common stock and dividend payments. See Note 11, Income Taxes, to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this 2020 Annual Report for further discussion of income taxes on remaining undistributed foreign earnings.
The following is a summary of our cash flows used in operating, investing and financing activities of continuing operations during the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Operating Activities
The increase in net cash flows provided by operating activities of $105 million was driven primarily by higher cash operating profits (net loss adjusted for non-cash items), including $73.6 million of lower interest payments and the payment of contingent consideration liability in the first quarter of 2019 of $30.9 million, offset by a $5.0 million payment associated with the creation and initial funding of the Element Solutions Foundation in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Investing Activities
The decrease in net cash flows provided by investing activities was primarily driven by the Arysta Sale in 2019, which proceeds totaled $4.28 billion, partially offset by the payment related to the Kester Acquisition in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Financing Activities
During 2020, we used cash on-hand to repurchase shares of our common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $55.7 million, pay dividend payments of $12.4 million and fund $46.2 million of financing fees. The financing fees consisted of a make-whole premium of $33.6 million associated with the full redemption of our 5.875% USD Notes due 2025 and $12.5 million in debt issuance costs associated with our 3.875% USD Notes due 2028. During 2019, cash flows used in financing activities were primarily driven by the pay down of approximately $4.60 billion of then existing debt with a combination of proceeds of the Arysta Sale and the drawdown of a $750 million term loan under the Credit Agreement. These cash inflows were also used to fund repurchases of our common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $507 million. In addition, $40.5 million was used to fund the repurchase and extinguishment fees related to our debt pay down and to fund the debt issuance costs associated with the Credit Agreement. Cash outflows from borrowings under our revolving credit facility were $24.9 million million in 2019.
Pension Plans
We maintain "Domestic Pension Plans," which consist of a non-contributory domestic defined benefit pension plan and Supplemental Executive Retirement Plans (SERPs). These plans are closed to new participants and plan benefits associated with all current participants have been frozen. We also maintain "Foreign Pension Plans" in countries such as Germany and Taiwan, which include a mixture of retirement, death benefit and longevity plans, among others, all of which have been deemed immaterial, individually and in the aggregate.
The expected long-term rate of return on assets assumption is developed with reference to historical returns, forward-looking return expectations, the Domestic and Foreign Pension Plans' investment allocations, and peer comparisons. We used a long-term rate of return on plan assets of 5.1% and 1.7% for our Domestic and Foreign Pension Plans, respectively, to determine our net periodic pension expense for 2020. The discount rate used to value the pension obligation was developed with reference to a number of factors, including the current interest rate environment, benchmark fixed-income yields, peer comparisons and expected future pension benefit payments. Discount rates of 2.5% and 0.7% were established for the Domestic Pension Plan
and Foreign Pension Plans, respectively, at December 31, 2020, compared to rates of 3.3% and 1.0% established for those respective plans at December 31, 2019. We evaluate the Pension Plans' actuarial assumptions on an annual basis, including the expected long-term rate of return on assets and discount rates. A one percent increase in the discount rate would increase the pension plan expense by approximately $1.3 million and decrease the pension benefit obligation by approximately $28.2 million, whereas a one percent decrease in the discount rate would decrease the pension plan expense by approximately $1.7 million and increase pension benefit obligation by approximately $34.1 million.
Our Domestic Pension Plans' investment policies incorporate an asset allocation strategy that emphasizes long-term growth of capital and acceptable asset volatility as long as such volatility remains consistent with the volatility of the indexes of relevant markets. Our investment policies attempt to achieve a mix of approximately 90% of plan investments for liability-matching, 8% for long-term growth, and 2% for near-term benefit payments. The weighted average asset allocation of the Domestic Pension Plan was 55% limited partnership interests and managed equity funds, 34% fixed income holdings, 9% equity securities, and 2% cash at December 31, 2020.
The Domestic Pension Plans were underfunded by $14.2 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $22.0 million at December 31, 2019. The improvement in the funding position was primarily driven by a $28.5 million gain on plan assets partially offset by actuarial losses due to changes in plan assumptions and experience of $14.4 million and $7.2 million of interest costs.
The Foreign Pension Plans were underfunded by $21.5 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $20.6 million at December 31, 2019.
The Company is not required to make any material plan contributions in 2021. While we do not currently anticipate any, additional future material contributions may be required in order to maintain appropriate funding levels within our plans.
Financial Borrowings
Credit Facilities and Senior Notes
At December 31, 2020, we had $1.52 billion of indebtedness, net of unamortized discounts and debt issuance costs of $19.6 million, which primarily included:
•$800 million of 3.875% USD Notes due 2028; and
•$735 million of term debt arrangements outstanding under our term loans.
Availability under our revolving credit facility and various lines of credit and overdraft facilities totaled $349 million at December 31, 2020 (net of $5.5 million of stand-by letters of credit which reduce our borrowing capacity).
Covenants
At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the customary affirmative and negative covenants, events of default and other customary provisions of the Credit Agreement, as well as with the covenants included in the indenture governing the 3.875% USD Notes.