Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors. We discuss factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these differences below and elsewhere in this report, including those set forth under Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and under “Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Corporate Overview
We are the Lipid Management Company, a pharmaceutical company singularly focused on developing and commercializing affordable, oral, once-daily, non-statin medicines for patients struggling with elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, or LDL-C. Our team of lipid experts are dedicated to lowering bad cholesterol through the discovery, development and commercialization of innovative medicines and their combinations with established medicines. Our first two products were approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, European Medicines Agency, or EMA and Swiss Agency for Therapeutic Products, or Swissmedic, in 2020. Bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablets are oral, once-daily, non-statin, LDL-C lowering medicines for patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, or ASCVD, or heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, or HeFH.
On February 21, 2020, we announced that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, approved NEXLETOL as an adjunct to diet and maximally tolerated statin therapy for the treatment of adults with HeFH or established ASCVD who require additional lowering of LDL-C. The effect of NEXLETOL on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality has not been determined. NEXLETOL is the first oral, once-daily, non-statin LDL-C lowering medicine approved since 2002 for indicated patients. NEXLETOL became commercially available in the U.S. on March 30, 2020.
On February 26, 2020, we announced that the FDA approved NEXLIZET as an adjunct to diet and maximally tolerated statin therapy for the treatment of adults with HeFH or established ASCVD who require additional lowering of LDL-C. The effect of NEXLIZET on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality has not been determined. NEXLIZET is the first non-statin, LDL-C lowering fixed combination drug product ever approved. NEXLIZET became commercially available in the U.S. on June 4, 2020.
On April 6, 2020, we announced that the European Commission, or EC, approved NILEMDO (bempedoic acid) and NUSTENDI (bempedoic acid and ezetimibe) tablets for the treatment of hypercholesterolemia and mixed dyslipidemia. The decision is applicable to all 27 European Union member states plus the United Kingdom, Iceland, Norway and Liechtenstein. NILEMDO (bempedoic acid) and NUSTENDI (bempedoic acid and ezetimibe) are the branded product names for bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablets in Europe. NILEMDO is the first, oral, non-statin, LDL-C lowering medicine approved in Europe in almost two decades for indicated patients, and NUSTENDI is the first non-statin, LDL-C lowering combination medicine ever approved in Europe. In November 2020, we announced the commercial launch of NILEMDO and NUSTENDI in Germany. In December 2020, we announced the approval of NILEMDO and NUSTENDI in Switzerland. With respect to the United Kingdom, on January 1, 2021 all existing centralized marketing authorizations (which applied to our marketing authorizations for NILEMDO and NUSTENDI) were automatically converted to Great Britain marketing authorizations (under the Northern Ireland Protocol, centralized marketing authorizations remain valid for marketing products in Northern Ireland).
On April 17, 2020, we entered into a license and collaboration agreement, or the Otsuka Agreement, with Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., or Otsuka. Pursuant to the Otsuka Agreement, we granted Otsuka exclusive development and commercialization rights to NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET in Japan. Otsuka will be responsible for all development, regulatory, and commercialization activities in Japan. In addition, Otsuka will fund all clinical development costs associated with the program in Japan. We estimate this amount to total up to $100 million over the next few years. We received an upfront cash payment of $60 million in April 2020 and will receive up to an additional $450 million in total development and sales milestones. We will also receive tiered royalties ranging from 15 percent to 30 percent on net sales in Japan.
In 2019 we entered into a license and collaboration agreement with Daiichi Sankyo Europe GmbH, or DSE. Pursuant to the agreement, we have granted DSE exclusive commercialization rights to bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet in the European Economic Area and Switzerland, or the DSE Territory. DSE will be responsible for
commercialization in the DSE Territory. We remain responsible for clinical development, regulatory and manufacturing activities for the licensed products globally, including in the DSE Territory. On June 18, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the license and collaboration agreement, or LCA Amendment, with DSE. In June 2020, we completed the transfer of the MAAs for NILEMDO and NUSTENDI. Pursuant to the terms of the amendment, DSE paid us the second $150 million milestone based on completion of the NUSTENDI MAA transfer rather than the first product sale in the EU. Prior to the execution of the LCA Amendment, the milestone payment was due upon the first commercial sale in Europe. Additionally, we and DSE have agreed to expand the territory in which DSE has exclusive commercialization rights to NILEMDO and NUSTENDI to include Turkey. DSE’s designated affiliate in Turkey will be solely responsible, at its sole cost and expense, for all regulatory matters relating to such products in Turkey, including obtaining regulatory approval for such product in Turkey.
On June 26, 2019, we entered into a Revenue Interest Purchase Agreement, or RIPA, with Eiger II SA LLC, or Oberland, an affiliate of Oberland Capital LLC, and the Purchasers named therein. Pursuant to the RIPA, Oberland paid us $125.0 million on closing, less certain issuance costs and $25.0 million in March 2020 upon receiving regulatory approval of NEXLETOL. Subject to the RIPA, we are eligible for an additional $50.0 million at our option upon reaching certain sales thresholds. As consideration for the payments, Oberland has the right to receive certain revenue interests from us based on the net sales of certain products, once approved, which will be tiered payments initially ranging from 2.5% to 7.5% of our net sales in the covered territory. The initial mid-single digit repayment rate on U.S. revenue steps down to less than one percent rate upon certain revenue achievements. Esperion reacquires 100% revenue rights upon repayment completion. Refer to Note 11 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On November 16, 2020, we issued $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.00% convertible senior subordinated notes due 2025 to certain financial institutions as the initial purchasers of the convertible notes. An additional $30.0 million of additional convertible notes (collectively, the "Convertible Notes"), which were issued pursuant to the exercise of the initial purchasers' option to purchase such convertible notes, closed on November 16, 2020. In connection with the offering of the Convertible Notes, we entered into a prepaid forward stock repurchase transaction (“Prepaid Forward”) with a financial institution and entered into privately-negotiated capped call transactions with one of the initial purchasers of the Convertible Notes or its affiliate and certain other financial institutions. Pursuant to the Prepaid Forward, the Company used approximately $55.0 million and $46.0 million of the net proceeds from the offering of the Convertible Notes to fund the Prepaid Forward and the Capped Call, respectively. Refer to Note 12 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We are conducting a global cardiovascular outcomes trial, or CVOT, - known as Cholesterol Lowering via BEmpedoic Acid, an ACL-inhibiting Regimen (CLEAR) Outcomes. The trial is designed to evaluate whether treatment with bempedoic acid reduces the risk of cardiovascular events in patients who are statin averse and who have CVD or are at high risk for CVD. We initiated the CLEAR Outcomes CVOT in December 2016 and fully enrolled the study with over 14,000 patients in August 2019. The primary endpoint of the study is the effect of bempedoic acid on four types of major adverse cardiovascular events, or MACE (cardiovascular death, non-fatal myocardial infarction, non-fatal stroke, or coronary revascularization; also referred to as "four-component MACE"). CLEAR Outcomes is an event-driven trial and will conclude once the predetermined number of MACE endpoints occur. Based on estimated cardiovascular event rates, we expect to meet the target number of events in the second half of 2022. We intend to use positive results from this CVOT to support submissions for a CV risk reduction indication in the U.S., Europe and other territories.
We were incorporated in Delaware in January 2008, and commenced our operations in April 2008. Since our inception, we have focused substantially all of our efforts and financial resources on developing bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe tablet. In February 2020, the FDA approved NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET. NEXLETOL was commercially available in the U.S. on March 30, 2020 and NEXLIZET was commercially available in the U.S. on June 4, 2020. We have funded our operations to date primarily through proceeds from sales of preferred stock, convertible promissory notes and warrants, public offerings of common stock, the incurrence of indebtedness, through collaborations with third parties and revenue interest purchase agreements. We have incurred losses in each year since our inception.
We have never been profitable and our net losses were $143.6 million, $97.2 million and $201.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Substantially all of our net losses resulted from costs incurred in connection with research and development programs, selling, general and administrative costs associated with our operations. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, including, among others:
•commercializing NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET tablets in the U.S; and
•completing the clinical development activities for the CLEAR Outcomes CVOT.
Accordingly, we may need additional financing to support our continuing operations and further the development of our products. We may seek to fund our operations and further development activities through collaborations with third parties, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements, permitted debt financings, permitted royalty-based financings, permitted public or private equity offerings or through other sources. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy or continue operations. We will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
Product Overview
NEXLETOL is a first-in-class ATP Citrate Lyase, or ACL, inhibitor that lowers LDL-C by reducing cholesterol biosynthesis and up-regulating the LDL receptors. Completed Phase 3 studies conducted in more than 3,000 patients, with over 2,000 patients treated with NEXLETOL, demonstrated an average 18 percent placebo corrected LDL-C lowering when used in patients on moderate or high-intensity statins. NEXLETOL was approved by the FDA in February 2020 as an adjunct to diet and maximally tolerated statin therapy for the treatment of adults with HeFH or established ASCVD who require additional lowering of LDL-C.
NEXLIZET contains bempedoic acid and ezetimibe and lowers elevated LDL-C through complementary mechanisms of action by inhibiting cholesterol synthesis in the liver and absorption in the intestine. Phase 3 data demonstrated NEXLIZET lowered LDL-C by a mean of 38 percent compared to placebo when added on to maximally tolerated statins. NEXLIZET was approved by the FDA in February 2020 as an adjunct to diet and maximally tolerated statin therapy for the treatment of adults with HeFH or established ASCVD who require additional lowering of LDL-C.
NILEMDO is a first-in-class ACL inhibitor that lowers LDL-C by reducing cholesterol biosynthesis and up-regulating the LDL receptors. NILEMDO was approved by the EC in March 2020 for use in adults with primary hypercholesterolemia (heterozygous familial and non-familial) or mixed dyslipidemia, as an adjunct to diet in combination with a statin or statin with other lipid-lowering therapies in adult patients unable to reach LDL-C goals with the maximum tolerated dose of a statin, or alone or in combination with other lipid-lowering therapies as an adjunct to diet in adult patients who are statin-intolerant, or for whom a statin is contraindicated.
NUSTENDI contains bempedoic acid and ezetimibe and lowers elevated LDL-C through complementary mechanisms of action by inhibiting cholesterol synthesis in the liver and absorption in the intestine. NUSTENDI was approved by the EC in March 2020 for use in adults with primary hypercholesterolemia (heterozygous familial and non-familial) or mixed dyslipidemia, as an adjunct to diet in combination with a statin in adult patients unable to reach LDL-C goals with the maximum tolerated dose of a statin in addition to ezetimibe, alone in patients who are either statin-intolerant or for whom a statin is contraindicated, and are unable to reach LDL-C goals with ezetimibe alone, or as an adjunct to diet in adult patients already being treated with the combination of bempedoic acid and ezetimibe as separate tablets with or without statin.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $70.4 million in expenses related to our CLEAR Outcomes CVOT and other ongoing clinical studies.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred $108.9 million in expenses related to our CLEAR Outcomes CVOT, our open-label extension study, and our 1002-FDC-058 study.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we incurred $121.7 million in expenses related to the four studies in our global pivotal Phase 3 LDL-C lowering program, our CLEAR Outcomes CVOT, our 1002FDC-053 study, our open-label extension study, our 1002-FDC-058 study and our Phase 2 (1002-39) clinical study of bempedoic acid when added-on to an injectable proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitor, or PCSK9i, therapy in patients with hypercholesterolemia.
The COVID-19 Pandemic
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic, or the future outbreak of any other highly infectious or contagious diseases, may impact our business, including our CVOT and commercialization efforts will depend on continuously changing circumstances, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time, such as the duration of such pandemic including future waves of infection or the broad availability of an effective vaccine, the actions taken to contain the pandemic or mitigate its impact, and the direct and indirect economic effects of the pandemic and containment measures, among others. The ongoing fluidity of this situation precludes any prediction as to the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic but it could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. The COVID-19 pandemic may also have the effect of heightening the risks to which we are subject, including various aspects of our ongoing CVOT, the reliance on third parties
in our supply chain for materials and manufacturing of our drugs and drug candidates, disruptions in health regulatory agencies' operations globally, the volatility of our common stock, our ability to access capital markets, and our ability to successfully commercialize and generate revenue from our approved drugs.
We are continuing to assess the long-term impact of COVID-19 on our business operations in an effort to mitigate interruption to our commercialization of our approved drugs and other business activities and to ensure the safety and well-being of our employees, as well as the physicians and patients participating in our CVOT. Because COVID-19 infections have been reported throughout the U.S. and worldwide, certain national, state, and local governmental authorities have issued orders, proclamations, and/or directives aimed at minimizing the spread of COVID-19. Although some of these restrictions were eased or lifted, in response to local surges and new waves of infection, some countries, states, and local governments have reinstituted these restrictions, and additional, more restrictive orders, proclamations, and/or directives may be issued in the future. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented precautionary measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, partners, and patients, including encouraging all employees to work-from-home if able to perform their duties remotely, and requiring adherence to onsite occupancy limits and appropriate safety measures designed to comply with federal, state, and local guidelines.
Our ability to successfully launch, commercialize, and generate revenue from NEXLETOL, NEXLIZET, NILEMDO and NUSTENDI may be adversely affected by the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Physicians’ offices and other medical institutions continue to have limited access for non-patients, which includes our sales personnel. In addition, social distancing requirements and precautionary measures due to COVID-19 have impacted the ability of our sales personnel to interact in-person with customers. As a result, in many circumstances we have needed to limit our interactions with physicians and payors and adapt our launch strategies and tactics to a virtual model, including developing and deploying various technology-enabled platforms for virtual engagement such as remote detailing, digital and non-personal marketing channels, and social media. These circumstances may adversely affect the ability of our sales professionals to effectively market our approved drugs to physicians and the rates of uptakes for our approved drugs, which may have a negative impact on our sales and our market penetration. In addition, patient visits with physicians have decreased as a result of COVID-19, due to travel restrictions, social distancing requirements, prioritization of healthcare resources to address the pandemic, and/or fear of exposure to the virus, which could have a material adverse impact on new patient starts and overall patient treatment volume. Market disruption and rising unemployment caused by the COVID-19 pandemic may lead to delays in obtaining insurance coverage and reimbursement of newly approved products.
While it is not possible at this time to estimate the entirety of the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business or operations, the continued spread or future waves of COVID-19, measures taken by governments, actions taken to protect employees, and the broad impact of the pandemic on all business activities may materially and adversely affect our preclinical activities, clinical development progress, data and timelines, commercialization efforts including any revenue from sales, supply chain continuity, and general business operations, and our business, prospects, financial condition, and results of operations could be materially harmed as a result.
To date, we have not experienced any interruption of our supply of drug products needed to support our ongoing clinical study and product sales. We remain focused on maintaining a strong balance sheet, liquidity and financial flexibility and continue to monitor developments as we deal with the disruptions and uncertainties from a business and financial perspective relating to COVID-19. We will continue to work diligently with our partners and stakeholders to continue supporting patient access to our approved medicines, advancing our product under regulatory review as well as in our clinical studies to the extent safe to do so for patients, caregivers and healthcare practitioners, and ensuring the continuity of our manufacturing and supply chain. For additional information related to the potential impact of COVID-19 on our business, please read Part I-Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Operations Overview
Product sales, net
Product sales, net is related to our sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET. NEXLETOL was commercially available in the U.S. on March 30, 2020 and NEXLIZET was commercially available in the U.S. on June 4, 2020
Collaboration revenue
Collaboration revenue is related to our collaboration agreements with DSE and Otsuka. Collaboration revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily related to the $150.0 million milestone from the MAA transfer to DSE and the $60.0 million from the upfront payment with Otsuka. During the year ended December 31, 2019, collaboration revenue was primarily
related to the initial recognition of the $150.0 million upfront payment from our collaboration agreement with DSE. Under contracted supply agreements with ex-U.S. collaborators, we may manufacture and supply quantities of active pharmaceutical ingredient, or API, or bulk tablets reasonably required by ex-U.S. collaboration partners for the development or sale of licensed products in their respective territory. We recognize revenue when the collaboration partner has obtained control of the API or bulk tablets. We also receive royalties from the commercialization of such products, and records our share of the variable consideration, representing a percentage of net product sales, as collaboration revenue in the period in which such underlying sales occur and costs are incurred by the collaborators.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold is related to our net product sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and the cost of goods sold from our supply agreements with collaboration partners. Prior to the FDA approval of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET, expenses associated with the manufacturing of our products were recorded as research and development expense.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with the development of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet, which include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with consultants, contract research organizations, or CROs, and investigative sites that conduct our preclinical and clinical studies;
•the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical study materials and commercial product manufacturing supply prior to product approval, including the procurement of ezetimibe in our continued development of our bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet;
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and travel expenses;
•allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies; and
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. To date, substantially all of our research and development work has been related to bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablets. Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical studies, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors. Our direct research and development expenses consist principally of external costs, such as fees paid to investigators, consultants, central laboratories and CROs in connection with our clinical studies. We do not allocate acquiring and manufacturing clinical study materials, salaries, stock-based compensation, employee benefits or other indirect costs related to our research and development function to specific programs.
We will continue to incur research and development expenses in the foreseeable future as they relate to our ongoing CLEAR Outcomes CVOT and any other development programs or additional indications we choose to pursue. We cannot determine with certainty the duration and completion costs associated with the ongoing or future clinical studies of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablets. The duration, costs and timing associated with the development of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablets will depend on a variety of factors, including uncertainties associated with the results of our clinical studies and our ability to obtain regulatory approval outside the U.S. and Europe. For example, if a regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical studies beyond those that we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development or post-commercialization clinical studies of bempedoic acid or the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablets, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development or post-commercialization clinical studies of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablets.
In accordance with ASC 730-10-25-1, Research and Development, costs incurred in obtaining in-licenses are charged to research and development expense if the in-licensed technology has not reached commercial feasibility and has no alternative future use. Such licenses purchased by us require substantial completion of research and development, regulatory and marketing approval efforts in order to reach commercial feasibility and has no alternative future use.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily consist of salaries and related costs for personnel, including stock-based compensation, associated with our sales, executive, accounting and finance, commercial, operational and other administrative functions. Other general and administrative expenses include selling expenses, facility-related costs, communication expenses and professional fees for legal, patent prosecution, protection and review, consulting and accounting services.
We anticipate that our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase in the future in connection with the commercialization of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET, increases in our headcount, expansion of our information technology infrastructure, and increased expenses associated with being a public company and complying with exchange listing and Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, requirements. These increases will likely include higher legal, compliance, accounting and investor and public relations expenses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to our RIPA with Oberland and our Convertible Notes. Costs during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to our RIPA with Oberland.
Other Income
Other income, net, primarily relates to interest income and the accretion of premiums and discounts earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investment securities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis, including those related to our collaboration agreements and revenue interest liability. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, contractual milestones and other various factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to understanding our results and financial operations.
Product Sales, Net
We sell NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET to wholesalers in the U.S and, in accordance with ASC 606, recognizes revenue at the point in time when the customer is deemed to have obtained control of the product. The customer is deemed to have obtained control of the product at the time of physical receipt of the product at the customers’ distribution facilities, or free on board (“FOB”) destination, the terms of which are designated in the contract.
Product sales are recorded at the net selling price, which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established for (a) rebates and chargebacks, (b) co-pay assistance programs, (c) distribution fees, (d) product returns, and (e) other discounts and fees. Where appropriate, these estimates take into consideration a range of possible outcomes which are probability-weighted for relevant factors such as current contractual and statutory requirements, and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the applicable contract. The amount of variable consideration may be constrained and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Given the early stage of our commercial operations we have provided constraint of our variable consideration due to its potential consumption trends. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from estimates, we adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Liabilities for co-pay assistance, expected product returns, rebates, and distributor fees are classified as “Other accrued liabilities” in the balance sheets. Discounts, such as prompt pay discounts, and chargebacks are recorded as a reduction to trade accounts receivable, which is included in “Other prepaid and current assets” in the balance sheets.
Forms of Variable Consideration
Rebates and Chargebacks: We estimate reductions to product sales for Public Health Service Institutions, such as Medicaid, Medicare and Veterans' Administration ("VA") programs, as well as certain other qualifying federal and state government programs, and other group purchasing organizations. We estimate these reductions based upon our contracts with government agencies and other organizations, statutorily defined discounts and estimated payor mix. These organizations purchase directly from our wholesalers at a discount and the wholesalers charge us back the difference between the wholesaler price and the discounted price. Our liability for Medicaid rebates consists of estimates for claims that a state will make for a current quarter. We reserve for this discounted pricing based on expected sales to qualified healthcare providers and the chargebacks that customers have already claimed.
Co-pay assistance: Eligible patients who have commercial insurance may receive assistance from us to reduce the patient's out of pocket costs. We will buy down the difference between the amount of the eligible patient's co-pay when the drug is purchased at the pharmacy at a determined price. Liabilities for co-pay assistance are calculated by actual program participation from third-party administrators.
Distribution Fees: We have written contracts with our customers that include terms for distribution fees and costs for inventory management. We estimate and record distribution fees due to our customers based on gross sales.
Product Returns: We generally offer a right of return based on the product’s expiration date and certain spoilage and damaged instances. We estimate the amount of product sales that may be returned and record the estimate as a reduction of product sales in the period the related product sales is recognized. We estimate for expected returns based primarily on an ongoing analysis of sales information and visibility into the inventory remaining in the distribution channel.
Discounts: We provide product discounts, such as prompt pay discounts, to our customers. We estimate cash discounts based on terms in negotiated contracts and our expectations regarding future payment patterns.
Revenue Interest Liability
We have entered into a RIPA to support the commercialization and further development of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet and provide for other working capital needs. The revenue interest liability related to the RIPA is presented net of deferred issuance costs on the balance sheets. The Company imputes interest expense associated with this liability using the effective interest rate method and is presented as interest expense on the statements of operations. The effective interest rate is calculated based on the rate that would enable the debt to be repaid in full over the anticipated life of the arrangement. The interest rate on the liability may vary during the term of the agreement depending on a number of factors, including the level of forecasted net sales. The Company evaluates the interest rate quarterly based on its current net sales forecasts utilizing the prospective method. A significant increase or decrease in net sales will materially impact the revenue interest liability, interest expense and the time period for repayment. Issuance costs in connection with the RIPA are amortized to interest expense over the estimated term of the RIPA.
Convertible Notes
We account for convertible debt instruments that may be settled in cash or equity upon conversion by separating the liability and equity components of the instruments in a manner that reflects our nonconvertible debt borrowing rate. We determined the carrying amount of the liability component of the Convertible Notes by using estimates and assumptions that market participants would use in pricing a debt instrument. These estimates and assumptions are judgmental in nature and could have a significant impact on the determination of the debt component, and the associated non-cash interest expense.
The equity component is treated as a discount on the liability component of the Convertible Notes, which is amortized over the term of the Convertible Notes using the effective interest rate method. Debt issuance costs related to the Convertible Notes is allocated to the liability and equity components of the Convertible Notes based on their relative values. Debt issuance costs allocated to the liability component are amortized over the life of the Convertible Notes as additional non-cash interest expense. Transaction costs allocated to equity are netted with the equity component of the convertible debt instrument in stockholders’ equity.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information on new accounting standards and the impact, if any, on our financial position or results of operations, see Note 2 to our audited financial statements found elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Product sales, net
Product sales, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.0 million relating to our sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET. NEXLETOL was commercially available in the U.S. on March 30, 2020 and NEXLIZET was commercially available in the U.S. on June 4, 2020.
Collaboration revenue
Collaboration revenue recognized from our collaboration agreements for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $214.6 million compared to $148.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $66.2 million. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to $150.0 million for the milestone payment from DSE and $60.0 million for the upfront payment in the Otsuka collaboration agreement signed on April 17, 2020. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 was attributable to the initial recognition of the upfront payment from our collaboration agreement signed with DSE on January 2, 2019 and the ongoing performance obligation from the ongoing regulatory efforts for the MAA in the DSE Territory.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.4 million, primarily related to cost of goods sold from our supply agreements with collaboration partners and our net product sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET. NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET became commercially available in the U.S. on March 30, 2020 and June 4, 2020, respectively. Prior to the FDA approval of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET, expenses associated with the manufacturing of our products were recorded as research and development expense.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, were $146.9 million compared to $175.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $28.7 million. The decrease in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to a decline in costs related to the completion of enrollment of our CLEAR CVOT, which was fully
enrolled during the third quarter of 2019, and a decline in costs related to our regulatory submission activities completed in 2019, partially offset by $12.5 million in 2020 from the definitive agreement with Serometrix to in-license its oral, small molecule PCSK9 inhibitor program.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, were $199.6 million compared to $65.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately $133.8 million. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to salaries and benefits, including stock based compensation, from the build out of our customer-facing team and other costs to support the commercialization of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET in the U.S.
Interest expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $22.7 million, compared to $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to our RIPA with Oberland and our Convertible Notes, which we entered into in November 2020. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 was related to our RIPA with Oberland, which was entered into on June 26, 2019.
Other income, net
Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $0.5 million compared to $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily related to lower interest income on our cash, cash equivalents, and investments due to lower interest rates.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 may be found in the “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018” section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 27, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have funded our operations to date primarily through proceeds from sales of preferred stock, convertible promissory notes and warrants, public offerings of common stock, the incurrence of indebtedness, milestone payments from collaboration agreements and revenue interest purchase agreement. Pursuant to the license and collaboration agreement with DSE signed on January 2, 2019, we received an upfront cash payment of $150.0 million from DSE and a cash payment of $150.0 million upon the MAA transfer in June 2020 and are eligible for substantial additional sales and regulatory milestone payments and royalties. Pursuant to the RIPA with Oberland, we received an upfront cash payment of $124.4 million, net of issuance costs, in 2019, received an additional $25.0 million upon regulatory approval of NEXLETOL in 2020 and are eligible to receive $50.0 million at our option upon reaching certain net product sales thresholds. In return, Oberland will have a right to receive revenue interests based on net sales of our products. Pursuant to the license and collaboration agreement with Otsuka signed on April 17, 2020, we received an upfront cash payment of $60.0 million in April 2020 and are eligible for substantial additional development and sales milestone payments and royalties. In November 2020, we received net proceeds of $170.1 million, net of issuance costs, forward stock re-purchase and capped call transactions in connections with the issuance of our Convertible Notes. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future.
As of December 31, 2020, our primary sources of liquidity were our cash and cash equivalents which totaled $305.0 million. We invest our cash equivalents and investments in highly liquid, interest-bearing investment-grade securities and government securities to preserve principal.
The following table summarizes the primary sources and uses of cash for the periods presented below:
Operating Activities
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur, significant costs related to the commercialization of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and related to ongoing research and development, regulatory and other clinical study costs associated with the development of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablets.
Net cash used in operating activities totaled $85.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of the $150.0 million milestone payment from our collaboration agreement with DSE, $60.0 million from the Otsuka collaboration agreement and net product sales of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET offset by cash used to fund the commercialization activities of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET and the research and development costs related to bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablets, adjusted for non-cash expenses such as stock-based compensation expense, amortization of debt issuance costs, interest expense related to our RIPA with Oberland and Convertible Notes, depreciation and amortization and changes in working capital. Net cash used in operating activities totaled $70.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisting of the $150.0 million upfront payment from the DSE collaboration offset by cash used to fund the development of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet, adjusted for non-cash expenses such as stock-based compensation expense, interest expense related to our RIPA with Oberland, depreciation and amortization and changes in working capital.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities of $21.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of proceeds from the sale and maturities of highly liquid, interest bearing investment grade and government securities partially offset by $12.5 million for the purchase of in-process research and development to in-license intellectual property for our PCSK9 inhibitor program. Net cash provided by investing activities of $64.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of proceeds from the sale and maturities of highly liquid, interest bearing investment grade and government securities.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $201.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, related primarily to the $280.0 million in cash received from the Convertible Notes, $25.0 million in cash received from the RIPA with Oberland upon regulatory approval of NEXLETOL and $6.6 million in cash received from stock option exercises, offset by the prepayment of a forward stock repurchase of $55.0 million, $46.0 million from the purchase of capped call options related to the Convertible Notes and $8.4 million in debt issuance costs as described in Item 8, Note 11, Convertible Notes. Net cash provided by financing activities of $136.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, related primarily to the upfront cash received from the RIPA with Oberland.
Plan of Operations and Funding Requirements
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future in connection with our ongoing CLEAR Outcomes CVOT and commercial launch activities associated with NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET in the U.S. Pursuant to the license and collaboration agreement with DSE, we received an upfront cash payment of $150.0 million from DSE in the first quarter of 2019, $150.0 million in June 2020 upon transfer to DSE of MMA of NUSTENDI and are eligible for substantial additional sales and regulatory milestone payments and royalties. Pursuant to the RIPA with Oberland, we received an upfront cash payment of $125.0 million and received $25.0 million upon regulatory approval of NEXLETOL. We are eligible for an additional $50.0 million at our option upon reaching certain sales thresholds. In return, Oberland will have a right to receive revenue interest payments from us based on net sales of certain of our products. Pursuant to the license and
collaboration agreement with Otsuka, we received an upfront cash payment of $60.0 million from Otsuka in April 2020 and are eligible for substantial additional development and sales milestone payments and royalties. In November 2020, we received net proceeds of $170.1 million, net of issuance cost, forward stock re-purchase and capped call transactions in connections with our Convertible Notes. We estimate that current cash resources and proceeds to be received in the future for product sales, proceeds received under the DSE and Otsuka collaboration agreements and the RIPA with Oberland are sufficient to fund operations for the foreseeable future. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We may need to secure additional cash resources to continue to fund the commercialization and further development of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and ongoing commercialization of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet, and the extent to which we entered and may enter into collaborations with pharmaceutical partners regarding the development and commercialization of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the development and commercialization of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablets. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•our ability to successfully develop and commercialize NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET or other product candidates;
•the costs, timing and outcomes of our CLEAR Outcomes CVOT and other ongoing clinical studies of bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet;
•the time and cost necessary to obtain regulatory approvals for bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet outside the U.S. and Europe;
•our ability to establish any future collaboration or commercialization arrangements on favorable terms, if at all;
•our ability to realize the intended benefits of our existing and future collaboration and partnerships;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims; and
•the implementation of operational and financial information technology.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate U.S. substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of collaborations with third parties, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements, permitted debt financings, permitted royalty-based financings and equity offerings or other sources. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing, if available and permitted under the terms of our RIPA, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with pharmaceutical partners or royalty-based financing arrangements, such as the collaboration arrangement with DSE and Otsuka, and the RIPA with Oberland, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. For instance, as part of the RIPA with Oberland, Oberland has the right to receive certain revenue interests from us based on the net sales of certain products, and we have granted Oberland a senior security interest in certain of our assets. If our cash flows and capital resources are insufficient to allow us to make required payments, we may have to reduce or delay capital expenditures, sell assets or seek additional capital. If we raise funds by selling additional equity, such sale would result in dilution to our stockholders. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or permitted debt financings or through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements or permitted royalty-based financing arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market bempedoic acid and the bempedoic acid / ezetimibe combination tablet that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
In 2019, we entered into a RIPA with Oberland. Pursuant to the RIPA, Oberland paid us $125.0 million at closing, less certain issuance costs, and, subject to the terms and conditions of the RIPA, we received an additional $25.0 million upon regulatory approval of NEXLETOL in 2020 and our eligible to receive an additional $50.0 million at our option upon reaching certain sales thresholds. As consideration for the payments, Oberland has the right to receive certain revenue interests from us based on the net sales of certain products which will be tiered payments initially ranging from 2.5% to 7.5% of our net sales in
the covered territory (as detailed in the RIPA). The initial mid-single digit repayment rate on U.S. revenue steps down to less than one percent rate upon certain revenue achievements. Esperion reacquires 100% revenue rights upon repayment completion. We recorded the proceeds from the RIPA as a liability on the balance sheets and are accounting for the RIPA under the effective-interest method over the estimated life of the RIPA. Future payments under the RIPA may range from $5.4 million in the next year to a maximum total payment of $286.6 million beyond one year. Per the terms of the agreement, every $100 million of net sales generated, less than or equal to $250 million in an annual aggregate, would result in a repayment obligation of approximately $7.5 million at the stated repayment rate in the first year. In the future, as net sales thresholds set forth in the agreement are met and the repayment percentage rate changes, the amount of the obligation and timing of payment is likely to change. A significant increase or decrease in net sales will materially impact the revenue interest liability, interest expense and the time period for repayment. Refer to Note 11 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
We have entered into a contract manufacturing agreement with a third-party commercial manufacturing organization for the production of certain inventory supplies of NEXLETOL and NEXLIZET. The agreement has an initial term of three years and will renew automatically for successive periods of one year each unless terminated by either party. Under the agreement we are obligated to purchase minimum order commitments on a rolling twelve-month period for the batches of inventory supplies produced.
On November 16, 2020, we issued $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.00% convertible senior subordinated notes due 2025 to certain financial institutions as the initial purchasers of the convertible notes. An additional $30.0 million of additional convertible notes (collectively, the "Convertible Notes"), which were issued pursuant to the exercise of the initial purchasers' option to purchase such convertible notes, closed on November 18, 2020. Refer to Note 12 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On July 6, 2018, we signed the first amendment of the lease for our principal executive office in Ann Arbor, Michigan. The amended lease is to increase the current 7,941 rentable square feet of office space by 11,471 rentable square feet. The lease has a term of 60 months and provides for fixed monthly rent of $19,412 until the end of the 12th month, with scheduled increases on an annual basis and/or as provided in the lease agreement, and also provides for certain rent adjustments to be paid as determined by the landlord. In addition, we have also entered into various operating leases related to vehicle leases and other IT equipment.
The following table summarizes our future estimated minimum contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
There have been no material changes to our contractual obligations and commitments outside the ordinary course of business from those disclosed above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not currently have, nor did we have during the periods presented, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by Securities and Exchange Commission rules.