Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Business Strategy
Our business strategy is to grow and improve our profitability by:
•
Increasing customer relationships through the offering of excellent service and the distribution of that service through effective delivery systems;
•
Continuing to transform into a full service community bank by meeting the financial services needs of our customers;
•
Continuing to develop into a high performing financial institution, in part by increasing net interest and fee income and managing operating expenses efficiently;
•
Remaining within our risk management parameters; and
•
Employing affordable technology to increase profitability and improve customer service.
We intend to continue to pursue our business strategy, subject to changes necessitated by future market conditions and other factors. We also intend to continue focusing on the following:
•
Increasing customer relationships through a continued commitment to service and enhancing products and delivery systems. We will continue to increase customer relationships by focusing on customer satisfaction with regard to service, products, systems and operations. We have upgraded and expanded certain of our facilities, including our corporate center and added additional facilities to provide additional capacity to manage future growth and expand our delivery systems.
•
Continuing to develop into a high performing financial institution. We will continue to enhance profitability by focusing on increasing non-interest income as well as increasing commercial products, including commercial real estate lending, which often have a higher profit margin than more traditional products. We also will pursue lower-cost commercial deposits as part of this strategy.
•
Remaining within our risk management parameters. We place significant emphasis on risk management and compliance training for all of our directors, officers and employees. We focus on establishing regulatory compliance programs to determine the degree of such compliance and to maintain the trust of our customers and community.
•
Employing cost-effective technology to increase profitability and improve customer service. We will continue to upgrade our technology in an efficient manner. We have implemented new software for marketing purposes and have upgraded both our internal and external communication systems.
•
Continuing our emphasis on commercial real estate lending to improve our overall performance. We intend to continue to emphasize the origination of higher interest rate margin commercial real estate loans as market conditions, regulations and other factors permit. We have expanded our commercial banking capabilities by adding experienced commercial bankers, and enhancing our direct marketing efforts to local businesses.
•
Expanding our banking franchise through branching and acquisitions. We will attempt to use our stock holding company structure to expand our market footprint through de novo branching as well as through additional acquisitions of banks, savings institutions and other financial service providers in our primary market area. We will also consider establishing de novo branches or acquiring additional financial institutions in contiguous counties. We will continue to review and assess locations for new branches both within Monroe County and the counties around Monroe. There can be no assurance that we will be able to consummate any new acquisitions or establish any additional new branches. We may continue to explore acquisition opportunities involving other banks and thrifts, and possibly financial service companies, when and as they arise, as a means of supplementing internal growth, filling gaps in our current geographic market area and expanding our customer base, product lines and internal capabilities, although we have no current plans, arrangements or understandings to make any acquisitions.
•
Maintaining the quality of our loan portfolio. Maintaining the quality of our loan portfolio is a key factor in managing our growth. We will continue to use customary risk management techniques, such as independent internal and external loan reviews, risk-focused portfolio credit analysis and field inspections of collateral in overseeing the performance of our loan portfolio.
Critical Accounting Policies
We consider accounting policies that require management to exercise significant judgment or discretion or make significant assumptions that have, or could have, a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets or on income, to be critical accounting policies. We consider the following to be our critical accounting policies:
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is the estimated amount considered necessary to cover credit losses inherent in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. The allowance is established through the provision for loan losses which is charged against income. In determining the allowance for loan losses, management makes significant estimates and has identified this policy as one of our most critical. The methodology for determining the allowance for loan losses is considered a critical accounting policy by management due to the high degree of judgment involved, the subjectivity of the assumptions utilized and the potential for changes in the economic environment that could result in changes to the amount of the recorded allowance for loan losses.
As a substantial amount of our loan portfolio is collateralized by real estate, appraisals of the underlying value of property securing loans and discounted cash flow valuations of properties are critical in determining the amount of the allowance required for specific loans. Assumptions for appraisals and discounted cash flow valuations are instrumental in determining the value of properties. Overly optimistic assumptions or negative changes to assumptions could significantly impact the valuation of a property securing a loan and the related allowance determined. The assumptions supporting such appraisals and discounted cash flow valuations are carefully reviewed by management to determine that the resulting values reasonably reflect amounts realizable on the related loans.
Management performs a quarterly evaluation of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses. Consideration is given to a variety of factors in establishing this estimate including, but not limited to, current economic conditions, delinquency statistics, geographic and industry concentrations, the adequacy of the underlying collateral, the financial strength of the borrower, results of internal and external loan reviews and other relevant factors. This evaluation is inherently subjective, as it requires material estimates that may be susceptible to significant revision based on changes in economic and real estate market conditions.
The analysis of the allowance for loan losses has two components: specific and general allocations. Specific allocations are made for loans that are determined to be impaired. Impairment is measured by determining the present value of expected future cash flows or, for collateral-dependent loans, the fair value of the collateral adjusted for market conditions and selling expenses. The general allocation is determined by segregating the remaining loans by type of loan, risk weighting (if applicable) and payment history. We also analyze historical loss experience, delinquency trends, general economic conditions and geographic and industry concentrations. This analysis establishes factors that are applied to the loan groups to determine the amount of the general allocations. Actual loan losses may be significantly more than the allowance for loan losses we have established which could have a material negative effect on our financial results.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets. Goodwill is not amortized, but it is tested at least annually for impairment in the fourth quarter, or more frequently if indicators of impairment are present. If the estimated current fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, no additional testing is required and an impairment loss is not recorded. The Company uses market capitalization and multiples of tangible book value methods to determine the estimated current fair value of its reporting unit. Based on this analysis, no impairment was recorded in fiscal 2021 or fiscal 2020.
The other intangibles assets are assigned useful lives, which are amortized on an accelerated basis over their weighted-average lives. The Company periodically reviews the intangible assets for impairment as events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such asset may not be recoverable. Based on these reviews, no impairment was recorded in fiscal 2021 or fiscal 2020.
Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities. The Company records all derivatives on the balance sheet at fair value. The accounting for changes in the fair value of derivatives depends on the intended use of the derivative, whether the Company has elected to designate a derivative in hedging relationship and apply hedge accounting and whether the hedging relationship has satisfied the criteria necessary to apply hedge accounting. Derivatives designated and qualifying as a hedge of the exposure to changes in the fair value of an asset, liability, or firm commitment attributable to a particular risk, such as interest rate risk, are considered fair value hedges. Derivatives designated and qualifying as a hedge of the exposure to variability in expected future cash flows, or other types of forecasted transactions, are considered cash flow hedges. Derivatives may also be designated as hedges of the foreign currency exposure of a net investment in a foreign operation. Hedge accounting generally provides for the matching of the timing of gain or loss recognition on the hedging instrument with the recognition of the changes in the fair value of the hedged asset or liability that are attributable to the hedged risk in a fair value hedge or the earnings effect of the hedged forecasted transactions in a cash flow hedge. The Company may enter into derivative contracts that are intended to economically hedge certain of its risk, even though hedge accounting does not apply or the Company elects not to apply hedge accounting.
Employee Benefit Plans. The Bank maintains a noncontributory, defined benefit pension plan for all employees who have met age and length of service requirements. The Bank also maintains a defined contribution Section 401(k) plan covering eligible employees. The Company created an employee stock ownership plan (“ESOP”) for the benefit of employees who meet certain eligibility requirements. The Company makes cash contributions to the ESOP on an annual basis.
The Company maintains an equity incentive plan to provide for issuance or granting of shares of common stock for stock options or restricted stock. The Company has recorded stock-based employee compensation cost using the fair value method as allowed under generally accepted accounting principles. Management estimated the fair values of all option grants using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Management estimated the expected life of the options using the simplified method as allowed under generally accepted accounting principles. The risk-free rate was determined utilizing the treasury yield for the expected life of the option contract.
Fair Value Measurements. We group our assets at fair value in three levels, based on the markets in which the assets are traded and the reliability of the assumptions used to determine fair value. These levels are:
•
Level I - Valuation is based upon quoted prices for identical instruments traded in active markets.
•
Level II - Valuation is based upon quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active, and model-based valuation techniques for which all significant assumptions are observable in the market.
•
Level III - Valuation is generated from model-based techniques that use significant assumptions not observable in the market. These unobservable assumptions reflect the Company’s own estimates of assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset.
We base our fair values on the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. It is our policy to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when developing fair value measurements, in accordance with the fair value hierarchy in generally accepted accounting principles.
Fair value measurements for most of our assets are obtained from independent pricing services that we have engaged for this purpose. When available, we, or our independent pricing service, use quoted market prices to measure fair value. If market prices are not available, fair value measurement is based upon models that incorporate available trade, bid, and other market information. Subsequently, all of our financial instruments use either of the foregoing methodologies to determine fair value adjustments recorded to our financial statements. In certain cases, however, when market observable inputs for model-based valuation techniques may not be readily available, we are required to make judgments about assumptions market participants would use in estimating the fair value of financial instruments. The degree of management judgment involved in determining the fair value of a financial instrument is dependent upon the availability of quoted market prices or observable market parameters. For financial instruments that trade actively and have quoted market prices or observable market parameters, there is minimal subjectivity involved in measuring fair value. When observable market prices and parameters are not fully available, management judgment is necessary to estimate fair value. In addition, changes in the market conditions may reduce the availability of quoted prices or observable data. When market data is not available, we use valuation techniques requiring more management judgment to estimate the appropriate fair value measurement. Therefore, the results cannot be determined with precision and may not be realized in an actual sale or immediate settlement of the asset. Additionally, there may be inherent weaknesses in any calculation technique, and changes in the underlying assumptions used, including discount rates and estimates of future cash flows, that could significantly affect the results of current or future valuations.
Other-than-Temporary Investment Security Impairment. Securities are evaluated periodically to determine whether a decline in their value is other-than-temporary. Management utilizes criteria such as the magnitude and duration of the decline, in addition to the reasons underlying the decline, to determine whether the loss in value is other-than-temporary. The term “other-than-temporary” is not intended to indicate that the decline is permanent, but indicates that the prospect for a near-term recovery of value is not necessarily favorable, or that there is a lack of evidence to support a realizable value equal to or greater than the carrying value of the investment. Once a decline in value is determined to be other-than-temporary, the value of the security is reduced and a corresponding charge to earnings is recognized.
Deferred Income Taxes. We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. If current available information raises doubt as to the realization of the deferred tax assets, a valuation allowance is established. We consider the determination of this valuation allowance to be a critical accounting policy because of the need to exercise significant judgment in evaluating the amount and timing of recognition of deferred tax liabilities and assets, including projections of future taxable income. These judgments and estimates are reviewed on a continual basis as regulatory and business factors change. A valuation allowance for deferred tax assets may be required if the amount of taxes recoverable through loss
carryback declines, or if we project lower levels of future taxable income. Such a valuation allowance would be established through a charge to income tax expense which would adversely affect our operating results.
Comparison of Financial Condition at September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020
Total Assets. Total assets decreased $32.1 million, or 1.7%, to $1.9 billion at September 30, 2021, compared to September 30, 2020.
Cash and Due from Banks. Cash and due from banks increased $45.4 million, or 44.8%, to $146.8 million at September 30, 2021 from $101.4 million at September 30, 2020. The primary reason for the increase was forgiveness and repayment of PPP loans.
Interest-Bearing Deposits with Other Institutions. Interest-bearing deposits with other institutions decreased $42.4 million, or 77.79%, to $12.1 million at September 30, 2021 from $54.5 million at September 30, 2020. The primary reason for the decrease was a shift of funds to cash and due from banks.
Investment Securities Available for Sale and Held to Maturity. Investment securities available for sale increased $28.1 million, or 13.2%, to $240.6 million at September 30, 2021 from $212.5 million at September 30, 2020. The increase was due primarily to increases in US government Treasury securities of $75.0 million and corporate securities of $7.1 million, which were offset in part by decreases in US government agency securities of $6.0 million, US government mortgage backed securities of $36.4 million, obligations of states and political subdivisions of $8.6 million and other debt securities of $3.0 million. The Company had $21.5 million in US government mortgage backed securities which were classified as held to maturity at September 30, 2021.
Net Loans. Net loans decreased $77.1 million, or 5.5%, to $1.3 billion at September 30, 2021 from September 30, 2020. The primary reasons for the decrease were decreases in residential real estate loans, commercial loans, obligations of states and political subdivisions, auto loans, home equity loans and lines of credit and other loans, offset in part by increases in commercial real estate loans and construction loans. Commercial real estate loans increased by $81.5 million to $591.1 million at September 30, 2021 from $509.6 million at September 30, 2020. Commercial loans decreased $76.1 million to $63.5 million at September 30, 2021 from $139.6 million at September 30, 2020 due primarily declines in PPP loans of $54.1 million. Obligations of states and political subdivisions decreased by $23.1 million to $56.2 million at September 30, 2021 from $79.2 million at September 30, 2020. One- to four-family loans decreased by $29.9 million to $580.3 million at September 30, 2021 from $610.2 million at September 30, 2020. The Company sold $67.5 million in one- to four-family mortgage loans to the Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh during the fiscal year. Home equity loans and lines of credit decreased by $2.4 million to $38.4 million at September 30, 2021 from $40.8 million at September 30, 2020. Auto loans decreased $25.9 million to $13.9 million at September 30, 2021 from $39.8 million at September 30, 2020. The Company discontinued indirect auto lending in July 2018.
Deposits. Deposits increased by $92.4 million, or 6.0%, to $1.6 billion at September 30, 2021, primarily as a result of increases in interest bearing demand accounts, money market accounts, savings accounts and non-interest bearing demand accounts partially offset by a decrease in certificates of deposit. Overall, the changes in deposits at September 30, 2021 compared to September 30, 2020 included an increase in non-interest bearing demand accounts of $15.1 million, or 6.2%, an increase in interest bearing demand accounts of $276.4 million, or 100.6%, an increase in money market accounts of $26.4 million, or 6.6%, an increase in savings and club accounts of $28.0 million, or 17.4%, and a decrease in certificates of deposit of $253.6 million, or 54.7%. Included in the certificates of deposit was an increase of $6.8 million, or 3.1%, in brokered certificates of deposit. At September 30, 2021, the Company had $225.0 million of brokered certificates of deposit outstanding.
Borrowed Funds. Borrowed funds, short term and other, decreased $125.9 million, or 100.0%, to zero at September 30, 2021 from $125.9 million at September 30, 2020. All borrowed funds are from the FHLB.
Stockholders’ Equity. Stockholders’ equity increased by $10.4 million, or 5.5%, to $201.8 million at September 30, 2021 from $191.4 million at September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily due to net income of $16.4 million and other comprehensive income of $4.7 million partially offset by cash dividends paid of $4.7 million and common stock repurchases of $7.1 million.
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020
Net Income. Net income increased by $2.0 million, or 13.9%, to $16.4 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from $14.4 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a decrease in interest expense and a decrease in the provision for loan losses partially offset by a decrease in interest income, a decrease in noninterest income, and an increase in noninterest expense and an increase in income taxes.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income increased by $4.7 million, or 9.7%, to $52.9 million for fiscal year 2021 from $48.2 million for fiscal year 2020, primarily due to the decreases in interest expense from deposits and short-term borrowings, partially offset by the decrease in total interest income.
Interest Income. Interest income decreased $5.4 million, or 8.4%, to $58.7 million for fiscal year 2021 from $64.1 million for fiscal year 2020. The decrease resulted from a decrease of 28 basis points in the overall yield on interest earning assets to 3.28% from 3.57%, which had the effect of decreasing interest income by $3.3 million. Also contributing to the decrease was an $8.8 million decrease in average interest earning assets, which had the effect of decreasing interest income by $2.1 million. The decrease in average interest earning assets during 2021 compared to 2020 included decreases in average mortgage backed securities of $122.7 million and average FHLB stock of $8.6 million. These decreases were partially offset by increases in average loans of $6.4 million, average other assets of $105.4 million and average investment securities of $10.7 million. The average yield on loans decreased to 3.91% for the fiscal year 2021, from 4.01% for the fiscal year 2020. The average yields on investment securities decreased to 2.78% from 3.56% and the average yields on mortgage backed securities decreased to 1.55% for 2021 from 2.11% for the 2020 period.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $10.1 million, or 63.5%, to $5.8 million for fiscal year 2021 from $15.9 million for fiscal year 2020. The decrease in interest expense resulted from a 66 basis point decrease in the overall cost of interest bearing liabilities to 0.42% for fiscal 2021 from 1.08% for fiscal 2020 which had the effect of decreasing interest expense by $6.9 million along with a decrease in average interest bearing liabilities which had the effect of decreasing interest expense by $3.2 million. For fiscal 2021, average borrowed funds decreased $266.4 million compared to fiscal 2020. Average savings and club accounts increased by $31.6 million, average interest bearing demand deposit accounts increased $49.5 million, average money market accounts increased $51.8 million and average certificates of deposit decreased $59.5 million. The cost of money market accounts decreased to 0.16% for fiscal year 2021 from 0.73% for fiscal year 2020. The cost of interest bearing demand deposit accounts decreased to 0.10% for fiscal year 2021 from 0.29% for fiscal year 2020. The cost of savings and club accounts decreased to 0.05% for fiscal 2021 from 0.06% for fiscal 2020. The cost of certificates of deposit decreased to 0.86% from 1.57% and the cost of borrowed funds decreased to 1.86% from 1.87% for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Provision for Loan Losses. The Company establishes provisions for loan losses, which are charged to earnings, at a level necessary to absorb known and inherent losses that are both probable and reasonably estimable at the date of the financial statements. In evaluating the level of the allowance for loan losses, management considers historical loss experience, the types of loans and the amount of loans in the loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, the estimated value of any underlying collateral, peer group information and prevailing economic conditions. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available or as future events occur. After an evaluation of these factors, the Company made a provision of $2.7 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to a $3.3 million provision for the 2020 fiscal year. The allowance for loan losses was $18.1 million, or 1.33% of loans outstanding, at September 30, 2021, compared to $15.4 million, or 1.07% of loans outstanding, at September 30, 2020. As the economic effects continue to evolve due to COVID-19 restrictions, our customers may experience decreased cash flows, which may correlate to an inability to make timely loan payments. This, in turn may require further increases in our allowance for loan losses and lead to increases in the level of charge-offs in our loan portfolio.
Determining the amount of the allowance for loan losses necessarily involves a high degree of judgment. Management reviews the level of the allowance on a quarterly basis, and establishes the provision for loan losses based on the factors set forth in the preceding paragraph. Historically, the Bank’s loan portfolio has consisted primarily of one- to four-family residential mortgage loans. However, our current business plan calls for increases in commercial real estate loan originations. As management evaluates the allowance for loan losses, the increased risk associated with larger non-homogenous commercial real estate may result in large additions to the allowance for loan losses in future periods. Loans secured by commercial real estate generally expose a lender to greater risk of non-payment and loss than one- to four-family residential mortgage loans because repayment of the loans often depends on the successful operation of the property and the income stream of the underlying property. Additionally, such loans typically involve larger loan balances to single borrowers or groups of related borrowers compared to one- to four-family residential mortgage loans. Accordingly, an adverse development with respect to one loan or one credit relationship can expose us to greater risk of loss compared to an adverse development with respect to a one- to four-family residential mortgage loan.
Although we believe that we use the best information available to establish the allowance for loan losses, future additions to the allowance may be necessary, based on estimates that are susceptible to change as a result of changes in economic conditions and other factors. In addition, the FDIC, as an integral part of its examination process, will periodically review our allowance for loan losses. This agency may require us to recognize adjustments to the allowance, based on its judgments about information available to it at the time of its examination.
Non-Interest Income. Non-interest income decreased $1.8 million, or 13.3%, to $11.5 million for the year ended September 30, 2021, from $13.3 million for the comparable 2020 period. The decrease was primarily due to decreases in gain on sale of investments, net of $2.5 million, loan swap fees of $642,000, earnings on bank owned life insurance of $90,000 and insurance commissions of $186,000. These decreases were offset, in part, by increases in service fees on deposit accounts of $167,000, service charges and fees on loans of $476,000, gain on sale of loans, net of $707,000, trust and investment fees of $150,000 and other noninterest income of $100,000. Gain on sale of investments, net included a one-time gain of $2.5 million related to a deleveraging
strategy the Company executed in the fiscal fourth quarter of 2020. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, the Company identified approximately $123.0 million of higher cost FHLB advances with a weighted average coupon of approximately 2.0%. The Company utilized the proceeds from the sale of approximately $89.0 million of investment securities along with approximately $34.0 million of cash to prepay the identified FHLB advances. The gain from the sale of the investment securities approximated the prepayment penalty for the prepayment of the FHLB advances.
Non-Interest Expense. Non-interest expense increased $1.2 million, or 3.0%, to $41.8 million for fiscal year 2021 from $40.6 million for the comparable period in 2020. The primary reasons for the increase in noninterest expense were increases in compensation and employee benefits of $2.0 million, occupancy and equipment of $137,000, professional fees of $201,000, data processing of $263,000, advertising of $155,000 FDIC insurance premiums of $364,000 and other expenses of $995,000. These increases were partially offset by decreases in prepayment on FHLB advances of $2.5 million and gain on foreclosed real estate of $623,000. Foreclosed real estate included a one-time deferred income credit related to a former foreclosed real estate property of $534,000. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, the Company identified approximately $123.0 million of higher cost FHLB advances with a weighted average coupon of approximately 2.0%. The Company utilized the proceeds from the sale of approximately $89.0 million of investment securities along with approximately $34.0 million of cash to prepay the identified FHLB advances. The gain from the sale of the investment securities approximated the prepayment penalty for the prepayment of the FHLB advances.
Income Taxes. Income tax expense of $3.5 million was recognized for fiscal year 2021 compared to an income tax expense of $3.2 million recognized for fiscal year 2020. The effective tax rate for the year ended September 30, 2021 was 17.5% compared to 18.1% for the 2020 period.
Average Balance Sheets for the Years Ended September 30, 2021 and 2020
The following tables set forth average balance sheets, average yields and costs, and certain other information for the periods indicated. All average balances are daily average balances, the yields set forth below include the effect of deferred fees and discounts and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income.
(1)
Non-accruing loans are included in the outstanding loan balances.
(2)
Interest income on loans includes net amortized costs on loans totaling $204,000 in 2021 and $1.4 million in 2020.
(3)
Held to maturity securities are reported as amortized cost. Available for sale securities are reported at fair value.
(4)
Yields on tax exempt securities have been calculated on a fully tax equivalent basis assuming a tax rate of 21%.
(5)
Represents the difference between interest earned and interest paid, divided by average total interest earning assets.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table presents the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income for the years indicated. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The net column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume.
Management of Market Risk
General. The majority of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. Consequently, our most significant form of market risk is interest rate risk. Our assets, consisting primarily of loans, having longer maturities than our liabilities, consisting primarily of deposits and borrowings. As a result, a principal part of our business strategy is to manage interest rate risk and reduce the exposure of our net interest income to changes in market interest rates. Accordingly, our Board of Directors has approved guidelines for managing the interest rate risk inherent in our assets and liabilities, given our business strategy, operating environment, capital, liquidity and performance objectives. Senior management monitors the level of interest rate risk on a regular basis and the asset/liability committee meets quarterly to review our asset/liability policies and interest rate risk position. We have sought to manage our interest rate risk in order to minimize the exposure of our earnings and capital to changes in interest rates.
Net interest income, which is the primary source of the Company’s earnings, is impacted by changes in interest rates and the relationship of different interest rates. To manage the impact of the rate changes, the balance sheet should be structured so that repricing opportunities exist for both assets and liabilities at approximately the same time intervals. The Company uses net interest simulation to assist in interest rate risk management. The process includes simulating various interest rate environments and their impact on net interest income. As of September 30, 2021, the level of net interest income at risk in a 200 basis points increase or a 100 basis point decrease was within the Company’s policy limit of a decline less than 10% of net interest income.
The following table sets forth the results of the twelve month projected net interest income model as of September 30, 2021.
The above table indicates that as of September 30, 2021, in the event of a 400 basis point instantaneous increase in interest rates, the Company would experience an 11.9%, or $5.9 million, increase in net interest income. In the event of a 100 basis point decrease in interest rates, the Company would experience a 6.3%, or $3.1 million, decrease in net interest income.
Another measure of interest rate sensitivity is to model changes in the economic value of equity through the use of immediate and sustained interest rate shocks. The following table illustrates the economic value of equity model results as of September 30, 2021.
The preceding table indicates that as of September 30, 2021, in the event of an immediate and sustained 400 basis point increase in interest rates, the Company would experience a 3.6%, or $12.5 million, increase in the present value of equity. If rates were to decrease 100 basis points, the Company would experience a 17.7%, or $61.9 million, decrease in the present value of equity.
Certain shortcomings are inherent in the methodologies used in the above interest rate risk measurements. Modeling changes in net interest income requires the making of certain assumptions regarding prepayment and deposit decay rates, which may or may not reflect the manner in which actual yields and costs respond to changes in market interest rates. While management believes such assumptions are reasonable, there can be no assurance that assumed prepayment rates and decay rates will approximate actual future loan prepayment and deposit withdrawal activity. Moreover, the net interest income table presented assumes that the composition of interest sensitive assets and liabilities existing at the beginning of a period remains constant over the period being measured and also assumes that a particular change in interest rates is reflected uniformly across the yield curve regardless of the duration to maturity or repricing of specific assets and liabilities. Accordingly, although the net interest income table provides an indication of the Company’s interest rate risk exposure at a particular point in time, such measurement is not intended to and does not provide a precise forecast of the effect of changes in market interest rates on net interest income and will differ from actual results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We maintain liquid assets at levels we consider adequate to meet both our short-term and long-term liquidity needs. We adjust our liquidity levels to fund deposit outflows, repay our borrowings and to fund loan commitments. We also adjust liquidity as appropriate to meet asset and liability management objectives.
Our primary sources of liquidity are deposits, amortization and prepayment of loans and mortgage-backed securities, maturities of investment securities and other short-term investments, and earnings and funds provided from operations, as well as access to FHLB advances and other borrowings. While scheduled principal repayments on loans and mortgage-backed securities are a relatively predictable source of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by market interest rates, economic conditions, and rates offered by our competition. We set the interest rates on our deposits to maintain a desired level of total deposits.
A portion of our liquidity consists of cash and cash equivalents and borrowings, which are a product of our operating, investing and financing activities. At September 30, 2021, $158.9 million of our assets were invested in cash and cash equivalents. Our primary sources of cash are principal repayments on loans, proceeds from the maturities of investment securities, principal repayments of mortgage-backed securities and increases in deposit accounts. There were $100.0 million in short-term investment securities (maturing in one year or less) at September 30, 2021. As of September 30, 2021, we had no borrowings outstanding from the FHLB-Pittsburgh. We have access to FHLB advances of up to approximately $726.3 million.
At September 30, 2021, we had $254.4 million in loan commitments outstanding, which included $166.5 million in undisbursed construction loans, $50.0 million in unused home equity lines of credit and $86.3 million in commercial lines of credit. Certificates of deposit due within one year of September 30, 2021 totaled $158.8 million, or 75.6% of certificates of deposit. If these maturing deposits do not remain with us, we will be required to seek other sources of funds, including other certificates of deposit and borrowings. Depending on market conditions, we may be required to pay higher rates on such deposits or other borrowings than we currently pay on the certificates of deposit due on or before September 30, 2021. We believe, however, based on past experience that a significant portion of our certificates of deposit will remain with us. We have the ability to attract and retain deposits by adjusting the interest rates offered.
As reported in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, our cash flows are classified for financial reporting purposes as operating, investing or financing cash flows. Net cash provided by operating activities was $19.4 million and $19.8 million for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These amounts differ from our net income because of a variety of cash receipts and disbursements that did not affect net income for the respective periods. Net cash provided by investing activities was $31.8 million and $15.4 million in fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively, principally reflecting our loan and investment security activities in the respective periods. Cash proceeds from principal repayments, maturities and sales of investment securities amounted to $111.4 million and $168.8 million in the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Deposit and borrowing cash flows have traditionally comprised most of our financing activities which resulted in net cash (used for) provided by financing activities of $(48.1) million in fiscal year 2021, and $68.5 million in fiscal year 2020.
We also have obligations under our post retirement plan as described in Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The post retirement benefit payments represent actuarially determined future payments to eligible plan participants. We froze our pension plan in fiscal year 2017.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. In the normal course of operations, we engage in a variety of financial transactions that, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles are not recorded in our financial statements. These transactions involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit, interest rate and liquidity risk. Such transactions are used primarily to manage customers’ requests for funding and take the form of loan commitments and lines of credit. For information about our loan commitments, letters of credit and unused lines of credit, see Note 10 of the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company also uses derivative financial instruments to manage interest rate risk. For information about the Company’s derivatives and hedging activities, see Note 17 of the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
For fiscal year 2021, we did not engage in any off-balance-sheet transactions other than loan origination commitments and standby letters of credit in the normal course of our lending activities. The Company used derivative financial instruments as part of its interest rate hedging activities in 2021.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The financial statements and related notes of ESSA Bancorp have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). GAAP generally requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without consideration for changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The impact of inflation is reflected in the increased cost of our operations. Unlike industrial companies, our assets and liabilities are primarily monetary in nature. As a result, changes in market interest rates have a greater impact on performance than the effects of inflation.