Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion and other items in this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements and information that are based on management’s beliefs, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, management. When used in this document, the words “believe,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “project,” “forecast,” “plan,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Although management believes that the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable, it can give no assurance that these expectations will prove to have been correct. These statements are subject to numerous risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements in this report. Certain of these risks are summarized in this report under Item 1A. Risk Factors, which you should read carefully in connection with our forward-looking statements. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those anticipated. We undertake no obligation to release publicly any revisions to these forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date hereof or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
Overview
We are a growth-oriented independent oil and gas company engaged in the economic acquisition and development of oil and gas reserves through activities that include the acquisition, drilling and development of undeveloped leases, asset and corporate
acquisitions and mergers. Our operations are all in the upstream segment of the oil and natural gas industry and all our properties are onshore in the United States. At present, our assets are located in the Midland Basin of west Texas and the Eagle Ford Trend of south Texas.
Earthstone is the sole managing member of Earthstone Energy Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (together with its wholly-owned consolidated subsidiaries, “EEH”), with a controlling interest in EEH. Earthstone, together with its wholly-owned subsidiary, Lynden Corp, and Lynden Corp’s wholly-owned consolidated subsidiary, Lynden US and also a member of EEH, consolidates the financial results of EEH and records a noncontrolling interest in the Consolidated Financial Statements representing the economic interests of EEH’s members other than Earthstone and Lynden US (collectively, the “Company” “our,” “we,” “us,” or similar terms).
Midland Basin Acquisition
On January 7, 2021, Earthstone Energy, Inc. (“Earthstone” or the “Company”), Earthstone Energy Holdings, LLC, a subsidiary of the Company (“EEH” and collectively with Earthstone, the “Buyer”), Independence Resources Holdings, LLC (“Independence”), and Independence Resources Manager, LLC (“Independence Manager” and collectively with Independence, the “Seller”) consummated the transactions contemplated in the Purchase and Sale Agreement dated December 17, 2020 (the “Purchase Agreement”) that was previously reported on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on December 22, 2020. The Seller was unaffiliated with the Company. At the closing of the Purchase Agreement, among other things, EEH acquired (the “Acquisition”) all of the issued and outstanding limited liability company interests in certain wholly owned subsidiaries of Independence and Independence Manager (collectively, the “Acquired Entities”) for aggregate consideration consisting of the following: (i) an aggregate amount of cash from EEH equal to approximately $131.2 million (the “Cash Consideration”) and (ii) 12,719,594 shares of the Company’s Class A Common Stock issued to Independence (such shares, the “Acquisition Shares,” and such issuance, the “Stock Issuance”). As a result of the Stock Issuance, Earthstone is no longer considered a controlled company within the meaning of the NYSE rules.
Amendment to Credit Agreement - In preparation for the IRM Acquisition, on December 17, 2020, Earthstone, EEH, as Borrower, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (“Wells Fargo”), as Administrative Agent, the guarantors party thereto, and the lenders party thereto (the “Lenders”) entered into an amendment (the “Amendment”) to the credit agreement dated November 21, 2019, by and among EEH, as Borrower, Earthstone, as Parent, Wells Fargo, as Administrative Agent and Issuing Bank, BOKF, NA dba Bank of Texas, as Issuing Bank with respect to Existing Letters of Credit, Royal Bank of Canada, as Syndication Agent, Truist Bank, as successor by merger to SunTrust Bank, as Documentation Agent, and the Lenders party thereto (together with all amendments or other modifications, the “Credit Agreement”). The Amendment was effective upon the closing of the IRM Acquisition. Among other things, the Amendment (i) joined certain financial institutions as additional lenders, increased the borrowing base from $240.0 million to $360.0 million, (ii) increased the interest rate on outstanding borrowings; and (iii) adjusted some of the financial covenants.
Liquidity Update
As of March 1, 2021, we had $10.1 million in cash and $227.5 million of long-term debt outstanding under our Credit Agreement, as amended, with a borrowing base of $360 million. With the $132.5 million of undrawn borrowing base capacity and $10.1 million in cash, we had total liquidity of approximately $142.6 million.
Areas of Operation
At present, our primary efforts are concentrated in the Midland Basin of west Texas, a high oil and liquids rich resource basin that provides us with multiple horizontal targets, extensive production histories, long-lived reserves and historically high drilling success rates.
Midland Basin
We believe that the Midland Basin continues to have attractive economics and we expect to continue growing our footprint through development drilling, acreage trades, asset acquisitions, and corporate merger and acquisition opportunities.
We continue to be active in acreage trades and acquisitions in the Midland Basin which generally allow for longer laterals, increased operated inventory and greater operating efficiency.
During 2020, we completed and began producing from 9 gross / 9 net operated wells and 15 gross / 3.5 net non-operated wells. We exited 2020 with 5 gross / 3.7 net wells that were drilled and awaiting completion. We recently completed these wells and anticipate turning them to sales before the end of March 2021.
We recently commenced our 2021 drilling program with the deployment of a rig in Midland County. After drilling on a three-well pad in the Hamman project, we expect to drill a four-well pad on the recently acquired IRM Spanish Pearl project. We
anticipate moving the rig to Upton County and drilling 10-11 wells. Consistent with previously released guidance, we anticipate drilling 16 gross / 14.8 net operated wells and spudding an additional 5 gross / 3.7 net operated wells during 2021.
Additionally, we are focused on efficiently integrating the recently acquired IRM assets into our operations. As a result of the IRM Acquisition, we added 43,400 additional net acres in the Midland Basin of which 99% is operated and 1% is non-operated, as well as adding 70 potential gross horizontal drilling locations on core acreage located in Midland and Ector counties.
Impairments
We recorded impairments in 2020 as follows:
(1)Impairments in unproved properties resulting from acreage deemed expired (not planned to be renewed).
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
(1)Barrels of oil equivalent have been calculated on the basis of six thousand cubic feet (Mcf) of natural gas equals one barrel of oil equivalent (BOE).
NM - Not meaningful
Oil revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2020, oil revenues decreased by approximately $51.6 million or 30% compared to 2019. Of the decrease, $55.1 million was attributable to lower realized prices, partially offset by $3.5 million due to increased sales volumes. Our average realized price per Bbl decreased from $55.71 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $37.85 or 32% for the year ended December 31, 2020. We had a net increase in the volume of oil sold of 93 MBbls or 3%, primarily due to new wells brought online offset by production shut-ins we initiated in May 2020 due to the domestic collapse of oil prices.
Natural gas revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2020, natural gas revenues increased by $4.7 million or 119% compared to 2019. Of the increase, $3.0 million was attributable to increased sales volumes and $1.7 million was due to higher realized prices. Our average realized price per Mcf increased 43% from $0.82 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.18 for the year ended December 31, 2020. In the prior year, lack of sufficient pipeline transportation resulted in low natural gas prices, which improved in 2020. The total volume of natural gas produced and sold increased 2,522 MMcf or 53% primarily due to new wells brought online offset by the production shut-ins we initiated in May 2020.
Natural gas liquids revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2020, natural gas liquids revenues were relatively flat as compared to 2019 as a $2.3 million increase attributable to higher sales volumes was mostly offset by a $2.1 million decrease due to lower realized prices. The volume of natural gas liquids produced and sold increased by 176 MBbls or 17%, primarily due to new wells brought online offset by voluntary production shut-ins in May 2020.
Lease operating expense (“LOE”)
LOE includes all costs incurred to operate wells and related facilities for both operated and non-operated properties. In addition to direct operating costs such as labor, repairs and maintenance, re-engineering and workovers, equipment rentals, materials and supplies, fuel and chemicals, LOE includes product marketing and transportation fees, insurance and overhead charges provided for in operating agreements.
LOE remained relatively flat, increasing by $0.4 million or 2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to costs reduction efforts implemented during 2020, offset by increased production in 2020.
Production and ad valorem taxes
Production and ad valorem taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $2.5 million or 21% compared to 2019, as the impact of increased volume was more than offset by the impact of decreased commodity prices. As a percentage of revenues from oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids, production taxes remained relatively flat in 2020 compared to the prior year.
Impairment
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded non-cash impairments totaling $64.5 million which consisted of $25.3 million to proved oil and natural gas properties, $21.6 million to unproved oil and natural gas properties and $17.6 million to goodwill. No impairments were recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019. See Note 7. Oil and Natural Gas Properties in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of how impairments are measured.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization (“DD&A”)
DD&A increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 by $27.2 million, or 39% compared to 2019, primarily due to reserve reductions resulting from depressed commodity prices (lower reserve quantities leads to higher DD&A per Boe), partially offset by a first quarter 2020 impairment charge of $25.3 million which resulted in a decreased depletable oil and natural gas properties base.
General and administrative expense (“G&A”)
These expenses consist primarily of employee remuneration, professional and consulting fees and other overhead expenses. G&A increased by $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 relative to the comparable period in 2019, primarily due to a $1.4 million increase in non-cash stock-based compensation expense related to awards granted in January 2020, offset by $0.8 million in reductions in cash-based expenses resulting from cost reduction efforts implemented in 2020.
Transaction costs
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded transaction costs primarily due to legal, consulting and other fees of approximately $1.0 million related to the business combination which was consummated on January 7, 2021 and $0.3 million related to other potential transactions, offset by net reimbursements of $0.7 million related to the business combination (the “Bold Transaction”) pursuant to the Bold Contribution Agreement (as defined below) which closed on May 9, 2017. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded transaction costs totaling approximately $1.1 million primarily due to the Bold Transaction.
Gain on sale of oil and gas properties, net
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we sold certain oil and gas properties located in the Midland Basin, recording gains totaling $0.2 million and $3.6 million, respectively. See Note 3. Acquisitions and Divestitures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense includes commitment fees, amortization of deferred financing costs, and interest on outstanding indebtedness. Interest expense decreased from $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower effective interest rates, as well as lower outstanding borrowings compared to the prior year. See Note 13. Long-Term Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Write-off of deferred financing costs
During the year ended December 31, 2019, in connection with the termination of the prior credit agreement, $1.2 million of remaining unamortized deferred financing costs were expensed and included in Write-off of deferred financing costs in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. See Note 13. Long-Term Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Gain (loss) on derivative contracts, net
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a net gain on derivative contracts of $59.9 million, consisting of net realized gains on settlements of $56.0 million and unrealized mark-to-market gains of $3.9 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a net loss on derivative contracts of $44.0 million, consisting of unrealized mark-to-market losses of $59.8 million, partially offset by net realized gains on settlements of $15.9 million.
Income tax benefit (expense)
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded total income tax benefit of $0.11 million which included (1) deferred income tax expense for Lynden US of $0.15 million as a result of its share of the distributable income from EEH, (2) deferred income tax benefit for Earthstone of $0.61 million as a result of its share of the distributable loss from EEH, which was offset by a valuation allowance as future realization of the net deferred tax asset cannot be assured and (3) current income tax expense of $0.55 million, offset by deferred income tax benefit of $0.51 million related to the Texas Margin Tax. Lynden Corp incurred no material income or loss, or related income tax expense or benefit, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a total income tax expense of $1.7 million which included (1) deferred income tax expense for Lynden US of $0.1 million as a result of its share of the distributable income from EEH, (2) deferred income tax expense for Earthstone of $0.4 million as a result of its share of the distributable income from EEH, which was used to reduce the valuation allowance recorded against its deferred tax asset as future realization of the net deferred tax asset cannot be assured and (3) deferred income tax expense of $1.6 million related to the Texas Margin Tax. Lynden Corp incurred no material income or loss, or related income tax expense or benefit, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have significant undeveloped acreage and future drilling locations. Drilling horizontal wells, generally consisting of 7,500 to 12,000-foot lateral lengths, in the Midland Basin is capital intensive. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.5 million in cash and $115 million of long-term debt outstanding under our Credit Agreement with a borrowing base of $240 million. With the $125 million of undrawn borrowing base capacity and $1.5 million in cash, we had total liquidity of approximately $126.5 million. Subsequent to year-end, Earthstone closed on its previously announced acquisition of IRM and amended the Credit Agreement. As of March 1, 2021, we had $10.1 million in cash and $227.5 million of long-term debt outstanding under our Credit Agreement, as amended, with a borrowing base of $360 million. With the $132.5 million of undrawn borrowing base capacity and $10.1 million in cash, we had total liquidity of approximately $142.6 million.
As oil prices have recovered recently from their 2020 lows, we are preparing to resume drilling operations with the deployment of a rig late in the first quarter of 2021 and we expect to spend $90-$100 million based on our current 2021 drilling plan. We believe we will have sufficient liquidity with cash flows from operations and borrowings under the Credit Agreement to meet our cash requirements for the next 12 months.
Working Capital
Working Capital (presented below) was a deficit of $20.8 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to a deficit of $39.9 million as of December 31, 2019, representing an improvement of $19.2 million. The improvement was primarily due to the reduction of liabilities resulting from reduced drilling activity. The components of working capital are presented below:
We expect that changes in receivables and payables related to our pace of development, production volumes, changes in our hedging activities, realized commodity prices and differentials to NYMEX prices for our oil and natural gas production will continue to be the largest variables affecting our working capital.
We expect to finance future development activities with cash flows from operating activities, borrowings under the Credit Agreement and, various means of corporate and project financing. Additionally, we may continue to partially finance our drilling activities through the sale of participating rights to financial institutions or industry participants, and we could structure such arrangements on a promoted basis, whereby we may earn working interests in reserves and production greater than our proportionate share of capital costs.
In July 2019, we entered into a Wellbore Development Agreement (“WDA”) with a non-affiliated industry partner. This WDA reduced our working interest in certain wells in Reagan County. The industry partner paid a promoted (proportionately higher) share of the capital expenditures on eight wells, to earn 35% of the working interest in these wells.
Capital Expenditures
Our accrual basis capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Hedging Activities
The following table sets forth our outstanding derivative contracts at December 31, 2020. When aggregating multiple contracts, the weighted average contract price is disclosed.
(1)The basis differential price is between WTI Midland Argus Crude and the WTI NYMEX.
(2)The basis differential price is between W. Texas (WAHA) and the Henry Hub NYMEX.
On January 7, 2021, upon closing of the IRM Acquisition, IRM had hedges in place for approximately 1,008,950 Bbls of oil at $41.07/Bbl.
Hedging Update
The following table sets forth our outstanding derivative contracts at March 4, 2021. When aggregating multiple contracts, the weighted average contract price is disclosed.
(1) The basis differential price is between WTI Midland Argus Crude and the WTI NYMEX.
(2) The swap is between WTI Roll and the WTI NYMEX.
(3) The basis differential price is between W. Texas (WAHA) and the Henry Hub NYMEX.
Obligations and Commitments
We had the following contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)2021 amount represents interest payable under the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2020.
(2)We have a non-cancelable fixed cost agreement of $0.7 million per year through May 2021 to reserve pipeline capacity of 10,000 MMBtu per day for gathering and processing related to certain Eagle Ford assets in south Texas. As the operator of the properties dedicated to this contract, the gross amount of obligation is provided; however, our net share is approximately 31%.
On January 7, 2021, upon closing of the IRM Acquisition, EEH became party to an office lease with an effective termination date of May 31, 2021, for which the remaining obligation is approximately $0.26 million.
Environmental Regulations
Our operations are subject to risks normally associated with the exploration for and the production of oil and natural gas, including blowouts, fires, and environmental risks such as oil spills or natural gas leaks that could expose us to liabilities associated with these risks.
In our acquisition of existing or previously drilled well bores, we may not be aware of prior environmental safeguards, if any, that were taken at the time such wells were drilled or during such time the wells were operated. We maintain comprehensive insurance coverage that we believe is adequate to mitigate the risk of any adverse financial effects associated with these risks.
However, should it be determined that a liability exists with respect to any environmental cleanup or restoration, the liability to cure such a violation could still accrue to us. No claim has been made, nor are we aware of any liability which we may have, as it relates to any environmental cleanup, restoration, or the violation of any rules or regulations relating thereto.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion of financial condition and results of operations is based upon the information reported in our consolidated financial statements. The preparation of these statements requires us to make certain assumptions and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. We base our assumptions and estimates on historical experience and other sources that we believe to be reasonable at the time. Actual results may vary from our estimates due to changes in circumstances, weather, politics, global economics, mechanical problems, general business conditions and other risks. We have outlined below certain of these policies as being of particular importance to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations and which require the application of significant judgment by our management.
Oil and Natural Gas Properties
We use the successful efforts method of accounting for oil and natural gas operations. Under this method, costs to acquire oil and natural gas properties, drill successful exploratory wells, drill and equip development wells, and install production facilities are capitalized. Exploration costs, including unsuccessful exploratory wells, geological and geophysical are charged to operations as incurred. Depreciation, depletion and amortization of the leasehold and development costs that are capitalized for proved oil and natural gas properties are computed using the units-of-production method, at the field level, based on total proved reserves and proved developed reserves, respectively, as estimated by independent petroleum engineers. Oil and natural gas properties are periodically assessed for impairment whenever changes in facts and circumstances indicate a possible significant deterioration in the future cash flows expected to be generated by an asset group, but at least annually. Individual assets are grouped for impairment purposes at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets, generally on a field-by-field basis. All of our properties are located within the continental United States.
Oil and Natural Gas Reserve Quantities
Reserve quantities and the related estimates of future net cash flows affect our periodic calculations of depletion, impairment of our oil and natural gas properties, and asset retirement obligations. Proved oil and natural gas reserves are the estimated quantities of oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids which geological and engineering data demonstrate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in future periods from known reservoirs under existing economic and operating conditions. Reserve quantities and future cash flows included in this report are prepared in accordance with guidelines established by the SEC and the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”). The accuracy of our reserve estimates is a function of:
•The quality and quantity of available data;
•The interpretation of that data;
•The accuracy of various mandated economic assumptions; and
•The judgments of the persons preparing the estimates.
Our proved reserves information included in this report is based on estimates prepared by our independent petroleum engineers, CG&A. The independent petroleum engineers evaluated 100% of our estimated proved reserve quantities and their related future net cash flows as of December 31, 2020. Estimates prepared by others may be higher or lower than our estimates. Because these estimates depend on many assumptions, all of which may differ substantially from actual results, reserve estimates may be different from the quantities of oil and natural gas that are ultimately recovered. We make revisions to reserve estimates throughout the year as additional information becomes available. We make changes to depletion rates, impairment calculations, and asset retirement obligations in the same period that changes to reserve estimates are made.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization
Our rate of recording DD&A is dependent upon our estimates of total proved and proved developed reserves, which estimates incorporate various assumptions and future projections. If the estimates of total proved or proved developed reserves decline, the rate at which we record DD&A expense increases, reducing our net income. Such a decline in reserves may result from lower commodity prices, which may make it uneconomic to drill for and produce higher cost fields. We are unable to predict changes in reserve quantity estimates as such quantities are dependent on the success of our exploitation and development program, as well as future economic conditions.
Impairment of Oil and Natural Gas Properties
We review the value of our oil and natural gas properties whenever management judges that events and circumstances indicate that the recorded carrying value of properties may not be recoverable. Impairments of producing properties are determined by comparing the pretax future net undiscounted cash flows to the net book value at the end of each period. If the net capitalized cost exceeds undiscounted future cash flows, the cost of the property is written down to “fair value,” which is determined based on expected future cash flows using discount rates commensurate with the risks involved, using prices and costs consistent with those used for internal decision making. Different pricing assumptions or discount rates could result in a different calculated impairment. We provide for impairments on significant undeveloped properties when we determine that the property will not be developed or a permanent impairment in value has occurred.
Asset Retirement Obligation
Our asset retirement obligations (“AROs”) consist primarily of estimated future costs associated with the plugging and abandonment of oil and natural gas wells, removal of equipment and facilities from leased acreage, and land restoration in accordance with applicable local, state and federal laws. The discounted fair value of an ARO liability is required to be recognized in the period in which it is incurred, with the associated asset retirement cost capitalized as part of the carrying cost of the oil and natural gas asset. The recognition of an ARO requires that management make numerous assumptions regarding such factors as the estimated probabilities, amounts and timing of settlements; the credit-adjusted risk-free rate to be used; inflation rates; and future advances in technology. In periods subsequent to the initial measurement of the ARO, we must recognize period-to-period changes in the liability resulting from the passage of time and revisions to either the timing or the amount of the original estimate of undiscounted cash flows. Increases in the ARO liability due to passage of time impact net income as accretion expense. The related capitalized cost, including revisions thereto, is charged to expense through DD&A over the life of the field.
Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activity
We are exposed to certain risks relating to our ongoing business operations, such as commodity price risk. Derivative contracts are utilized to economically hedge our exposure to price fluctuations and reduce the variability in our cash flows associated with anticipated sales of future oil and natural gas production. We follow FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”)
Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, to account for our derivative financial instruments. We do not enter into derivative contracts for speculative trading purposes. It is our policy to enter into derivative contracts only with counterparties that are creditworthy financial institutions deemed by management as competent and competitive. We did not post collateral under any of these contracts.
Our crude oil and natural gas derivative positions consist of swaps. Swaps are designed so that we receive or make payments based on a differential between fixed and variable prices for crude oil and natural gas. We have elected to not designate any of our derivative contracts for hedge accounting. Accordingly, we record the net change in the mark-to-market valuation of these derivative contracts, as well as all payments and receipts on settled derivative contracts, in “(Loss) gain on derivative contracts, net” on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. All derivative contracts are recorded at fair market value and are included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets as assets or liabilities.
Income Taxes and Uncertain Tax Positions
We are a U.S. company operating in Texas, as of December 31, 2020, as well as one foreign legal entity, Lynden Corp, which is a Canadian company. Consequently, our tax provision is based upon the tax laws and rates in effect in the applicable jurisdiction in which our operations are conducted and income is earned. The income tax rates imposed and methods of computing taxable income in these jurisdictions vary. Therefore, as a part of the process of preparing the consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate the income taxes in each of these jurisdictions. This process involves estimating the actual current tax exposure together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items, such as depreciation, amortization and certain accrued liabilities for tax and accounting purposes. Our effective tax rate for financial statement purposes will continue to fluctuate from year to year as our operations are conducted in different taxing jurisdictions.
Our corporate structure requires the filing of two separate consolidated U.S. Federal income tax returns and one Canadian income tax return resulting from Earthstone’s acquisition of Lynden Corp in 2016 (the “Lynden Arrangement”) that includes Lynden US, Earthstone, and Lynden Corp. As such, taxable income of Earthstone cannot be offset by tax attributes, including net operating losses, of Lynden US, nor can taxable income of Lynden US be offset by tax attributes of Earthstone. Earthstone and Lynden US record a tax provision, respectively, for their share of the book income or loss of EEH, net of the noncontrolling interest, as well as any standalone income or loss generated by each company. As EEH is treated as a partnership for U.S. Federal income tax purposes, it is not subject to income tax at the federal level and only recognizes the Texas Margin Tax.
On January 7, 2021, upon closing of the IRM Acquisition, the acquired entity, Independence Resources Management, LLC (along with its wholly owned subsidiaries, collectively “IRM”), became a wholly owned subsidiary of EEH. IRM’s results will be reported on the U.S. Return of Partnership Income (Form 1065) and will flow to EEH through Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). As IRM is treated as a Partnership, for federal and state income tax purposes, it is not subject to income taxes at the federal level. At the state level, IRM only operates in Texas and is subject to the Texas Margin Tax.
Our deferred tax expense or benefit represents the change in the balance of deferred tax assets or liabilities reported in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We apply the accounting standards related to uncertainty in income taxes. This accounting guidance clarifies the accounting for uncertainties in income taxes by prescribing a minimum recognition threshold that a tax position is required to meet before being recognized in the consolidated financial statements. It requires that we recognize in the consolidated financial statements the financial effects of a tax position, if that position is more likely than not of being sustained upon examination, including resolution of any appeals or litigation processes, based upon the technical merits of the position. It also provides guidance on measurement, classification, interest, penalties and disclosure. Our tax positions related to our pass-through status and state income tax liability, including deductibility of expenses, have been reviewed by our management and they believe those positions would more likely than not be sustained upon examination. Accordingly, we have not recorded an income tax liability for uncertain tax positions at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Revenue Recognition
We predominantly derive our revenue from the sale of produced oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids. Revenues are recognized when the recognition criteria of FASB ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, are met, which generally occurs at the point in which title passes to the customers. We receive payment from one to three months after delivery. At the end of each quarter, we estimate the amount of production delivered to purchasers and the price we will receive. Variances between our estimated revenue and actual payment are recorded in the month the payment is received. Historically, however, differences have been insignificant.
Accounting for Business Combinations
Our business has grown substantially through acquisitions, and our business strategy is to continue to pursue acquisitions as opportunities arise. We have accounted for all of our business combinations to date using the purchase method.
Under the purchase method of accounting, a business combination is accounted for at a purchase price based upon the fair value of the consideration given. The assets and liabilities acquired are measured at their fair value including the recognition of acquisition-related costs that are separate from the acquired net assets. The purchase price is allocated to the assets and liabilities based upon these fair values. The excess of the cost of an acquired entity, if any, over the net amounts assigned to assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill. The excess of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed over the cost of an acquired entity, if any, is allocated as a pro rata reduction of the amounts that otherwise would have been assigned to certain acquired assets.
Determining the fair values of the assets and liabilities acquired involves the use of judgment, since some of the assets and liabilities acquired do not have fair values that are readily determinable. Different techniques may be used to determine fair values, including market prices (where available), appraisals, and comparison to transactions for similar assets and liabilities, and present value of estimated future cash flows, among others. Since these estimates involve the use of significant judgment, they can change as new information becomes available.
Goodwill
We account for goodwill in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of the assets acquired net of the fair value of the liabilities assumed in an acquisition. ASC Topic 350 requires that goodwill be evaluated on an annual basis for impairment or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that could potentially result in an impairment.
We conduct a qualitative goodwill impairment assessment by examining relevant events and circumstances which could have a negative impact on our goodwill such as, industry and market conditions, including commodity prices, costs factors, and other company specific events. If we conclude that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then we do not have to perform the two-step impairment test. If after assessing the totality of events or circumstances described, we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the two-step goodwill test is performed. The two-step goodwill impairment test is also performed whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. If, after performing the two-step goodwill test, it is determined that the carrying value of goodwill is impaired, the amount of goodwill is reduced and a corresponding charge is made to earnings in the period in which the goodwill is determined to be impaired
Noncontrolling Interest
We account for noncontrolling interest in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 810, Consolidation, which requires the recording of a noncontrolling interest component of Net (loss) income, as well as a noncontrolling interest component within equity. Noncontrolling interest represents third-party equity ownership of EEH and is presented as a component of equity in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, as well as an adjustment to Net (loss) income in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, Earthstone and Lynden US held 46.4% of the outstanding membership interests in EEH while Bold Holdings, the noncontrolling party, held the remaining 53.6%. See further discussion in Note 9. Noncontrolling Interest in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 of this report for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards affecting us.