ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(Tabular dollar and unit amounts, except per unit data, are in millions)
Energy Transfer LP is a Delaware limited partnership whose common units are publicly traded on the NYSE under the ticker symbol “ET.”
The following discussion of our historical consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our historical consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report. This discussion includes forward-looking statements that are subject to risk and uncertainties. Actual results may differ substantially from the statements we make in this section due to a number of factors that are discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this report.
Unless the context requires otherwise, references to “we,” “us,” “our,” the “Partnership” and “ET” mean Energy Transfer LP and its consolidated subsidiaries, which include ETO, ETP GP, ETP LLC, Panhandle, Sunoco LP and Lake Charles LNG. References to the “Parent Company” mean Energy Transfer LP on a stand-alone basis.
OVERVIEW
Energy Transfer LP directly and indirectly owns equity interests in ETO, Sunoco LP and USAC, all of which are limited partnerships engaged in diversified energy-related services. Sunoco LP and USAC have publicly traded common units.
We control ETO through our ownership of its general partner.
The Parent Company’s principal sources of cash flow are derived from its direct and indirect investments in the limited partner and general partner interests in ETO. ETO’s earnings and cash flows are generated by its subsidiaries, including ETO’s investments in Sunoco LP and USAC. The amount of cash that ETO, Sunoco LP and USAC distribute to their respective partners, including the Parent Company, each quarter is based on earnings from their respective business activities and the amount of available cash, as discussed below.
In order to fully understand the financial condition and results of operations of the Parent Company on a stand-alone basis, we have included discussions of Parent Company matters apart from those of our consolidated group.
General
Our primary objective is to increase the level of our distributable cash flow to our Unitholders over time by pursuing a business strategy that is currently focused on growing our subsidiaries’ natural gas and liquids businesses through, among other things, pursuing certain construction and expansion opportunities relating to our subsidiaries’ existing infrastructure and acquiring certain strategic operations and businesses or assets. The actual amounts of cash that we will have available for distribution will primarily depend on the amount of cash our subsidiaries generate from their operations.
Our reportable segments are as follows:
•intrastate transportation and storage;
•interstate transportation and storage;
•midstream;
•NGL and refined products transportation and services;
•crude oil transportation and services;
•investment in Sunoco LP;
•investment in USAC; and
•all other.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic prompted several states and municipalities in which we operate to take extraordinary and wide-ranging actions to contain and combat the outbreak and spread of the virus, including mandates for many individuals to substantially restrict daily activities and for many businesses to curtail or cease normal operations. To the extent COVID-19 continues or worsens, governments may impose additional similar restrictions. As a provider of critical energy infrastructure, our business has been designated as a “critical infrastructure sector” and our employees as “essential critical infrastructure workers” pursuant to the Department of Homeland Security Guidance on Essential Critical Infrastructure Workforce(s). To date, our field operations have continued uninterrupted, and remote work and other COVID-19 related conditions have not significantly impacted our ability to maintain operations or caused us to incur significant additional expenses; however, we are unable to predict the magnitude or duration of current and potential future COVID-19 mitigation measures. As an essential business providing critical energy infrastructure, the safety of our employees and the continued operation of our assets are our top priorities and we will continue to operate in accordance with federal and state health guidelines and safety protocols. We have implemented several new policies and provided employee training to help maintain the health and safety of our workforce.
Pending Enable Acquisition
On February 17, 2021, the Partnership announced its entry into a definitive merger agreement to acquire Enable. Under the terms of the merger agreement, Enable’s common unitholders will receive 0.8595 of an ET common unit in exchange for each Enable common unit. In addition, each outstanding Enable Series A preferred unit will be exchanged for 0.0265 of an ET Series G preferred unit, and ET will make a $10 million cash payment for Enable’s general partner. The transaction is subject to the approval of Enable’s unitholders and other customary regulatory approvals.
ET Contribution of SemGroup Assets to ETO
On December 5, 2019, ET completed the acquisition of SemGroup. During the first and second quarters of 2020, ET contributed former SemGroup assets to ETO through sale and contribution transactions.
ETO Series F and Series G Preferred Units Issuance
On January 22, 2020, ETO issued 500,000 of its 6.750% Series F Preferred Units at a price of $1,000 per unit and 1,100,000 of its 7.125% Series G Preferred Units at a price of $1,000 per unit. The net proceeds were used to repay amounts outstanding under ETO’s revolving credit facility and for general partnership purposes.
ETO January 2020 Senior Notes Offering and Redemption
Utilizing proceeds from the January 2020 Senior Notes Offering, ETO redeemed its $400 million aggregate principal amount of 5.75% Senior Notes due September 1, 2020, its $1.05 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.15% Senior Notes due October 1, 2020, its $1.14 billion aggregate principal amount of 7.50% Senior Notes due October 15, 2020, its $250 million aggregate principal amount of 5.50% Senior Notes due February 15, 2020, ET’s $52 million aggregate principal amount of 7.50% Senior Notes due October 15, 2020 and Transwestern’s $175 million aggregate principal amount of 5.36% Senior Notes due December 9, 2020. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Recent Financing Transactions” below for more information on the January 2020 Senior Notes Offering.
Lake Charles LNG
On March 30, 2020, Shell announced that it would not proceed with a proposed equity interest in the Lake Charles LNG liquefaction project due to adverse market factors affecting Shell's business following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. We intend to continue to develop the project, possibly in conjunction with one or more equity partners, and we plan to evaluate a variety of alternatives to advance the project, including the possibility of reducing the size of the project from three trains (16.45 million tonnes per annum of LNG capacity) to two trains (11.0 million tonnes per annum). The project as currently designed is fully permitted by federal, state and local authorities, has all necessary export licenses and benefits from the infrastructure related to the existing regasification facility at the same site, including four LNG storage tanks, two deep water docks and other assets. In light of the existing brownfield infrastructure and the advanced state of the development of the project, we plan to continue to pursue the project on a disciplined, cost effective basis, and ultimately we will determine whether to make a final investment decision to proceed with the project based on market conditions, capital expenditure considerations and our success in securing equity participation by third parties as well as long-term LNG offtake commitments on satisfactory terms.
Sunoco LP November 2020 Senior Notes Offering and Repurchase
On November 9, 2020, Sunoco LP completed a private offering of $800 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.500% senior notes due 2029. Sunoco LP used the proceeds to fund the tender offer on its 4.875% $1 billion senior notes due 2023. Approximately 56% of the 2023 senior notes were tendered. On January 15, 2021, Sunoco LP repurchased the remaining outstanding portion of its 2023 senior notes.
Regulatory Update
Interstate Natural Gas Transportation Regulation
Rate Regulation
Effective January 2018, the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”) changed several provisions of the federal tax code, including a reduction in the maximum corporate tax rate. On March 15, 2018, in a set of related proposals, the FERC addressed treatment of federal income tax allowances in regulated entity rates. The FERC issued a Revised Policy Statement on Treatment of Income Taxes (“Revised Policy Statement”) stating that it will no longer permit master limited partnerships to recover an income tax allowance in their cost-of-service rates. The FERC issued the Revised Policy Statement in response to a remand
from the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in United Airlines v. FERC, in which the court determined that the FERC had not justified its conclusion that a pipeline organized as a master limited partnership would not “double recover” its taxes under the current policy by both including an income-tax allowance in its cost of service and earning a return on equity calculated using the discounted cash flow methodology. On July 18, 2018, the FERC issued an order denying requests for rehearing and clarification of its Revised Policy Statement. In the rehearing order, the FERC clarified that a pipeline organized as a master limited partnership will not be precluded in a future proceeding from arguing and providing evidentiary support that it is entitled to an income tax allowance and demonstrating that its recovery of an income tax allowance does not result in a double-recovery of investors' income tax costs. On July 31, 2020, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit issued an opinion upholding the FERC’s decision denying a separate master limited partnership recovery of an income tax allowance and its decision not to require the master limited partnership to refund accumulated deferred income tax balances. In light of the rehearing order’s clarification regarding individual entities’ ability to argue in support of recovery of an income tax allowance and the court’s subsequent opinion upholding denial of an income tax allowance to a master limited partnership, the impacts that FERC's policy on the treatment of income taxes may have on the rates ETO can charge for FERC-regulated transportation services are unknown at this time.
Even without application of the FERC’s recent rate making-related policy statements and rulemakings, the FERC or our shippers may challenge the cost-of-service rates we charge. The FERC’s establishment of a just and reasonable rate is based on many components, including ROE and tax-related components, although changes in these components may tend to decrease our cost-of-service rate, other components in the cost-of-service rate calculation may increase and result in a newly calculated cost-of-service rate that is less than, the same as, or greater than the prior cost-of-service rate. Moreover, we receive revenues from our pipelines based on a variety of rate structures, including cost-of-service rates, negotiated rates, discounted rates and market-based rates. Many of our interstate pipelines, such as ETC Tiger Pipeline, LLC, Midcontinent Express and Fayetteville Express, have negotiated market rates that were agreed to by customers in connection with long-term contracts entered into to support the construction of the pipelines. Other systems, such as FGT, Transwestern and Panhandle, have a mix of tariff rate, discount rate, and negotiated rate agreements. The revenues we receive from natural gas transportation services we provide pursuant to cost-of-service based rates may decrease in the future as a result of the Revised Policy Statement, changes to ROE methodology, or other FERC policies, combined with the reduced corporate federal income tax rate established in the Tax Act. The extent of any revenue reduction related to our cost-of-service rates, if any, will depend on a detailed review of all of ETO’s cost-of-service components and the outcomes of any challenges to our rates by the FERC or our shippers.
On July 18, 2018, the FERC issued a final rule establishing procedures to evaluate rates charged by the FERC-jurisdictional gas pipelines in light of the Tax Act and the FERC’s Revised Policy Statement. By order issued January 16, 2019, the FERC initiated a review of Panhandle’s existing rates pursuant to Section 5 of the NGA to determine whether the rates currently charged by Panhandle are just and reasonable and set the matter for hearing. Panhandle filed a cost and revenue study on April 1, 2019 and an NGA Section 4 rate case on August 30, 2019. The Section 4 and Section 5 proceedings were consolidated by order of the Chief Judge on October 1, 2019. A hearing in the combined proceedings commenced on August 25, 2020 and adjourned on September 15, 2020. By order dated January 19, 2021, the Chief Judge has extended the deadline for the initial decision to March 26, 2021.
Pipeline Certification
The FERC issued a Notice of Inquiry on April 19, 2018 (“Pipeline Certification NOI”), thereby initiating a review of its policies on certification of natural gas pipelines, including an examination of its long-standing Policy Statement on Certification of New Interstate Natural Gas Pipeline Facilities, issued in 1999, that is used to determine whether to grant certificates for new pipeline projects. We are unable to predict what, if any, changes may be proposed as a result of the Pipeline Certification NOI that will affect our natural gas pipeline business or when such proposals, if any, might become effective. Comments in response to the Pipeline Certification NOI were due on or before July 25, 2018. We do not expect that any change in this policy would affect us in a materially different manner than any other natural gas pipeline company operating in the United States.
Interstate Common Carrier Regulation
The FERC utilizes an indexing rate methodology which, as currently in effect, allows common carriers to change their rates within prescribed ceiling levels that are tied to changes in the Producer Price Index for Finished Goods, or PPI-FG. Many existing pipelines utilize the FERC liquids index to change transportation rates annually. The indexing methodology is applicable to existing rates, with the exclusion of market-based rates. The FERC’s indexing methodology is subject to review every five years. In a December 2020 order, FERC determined that during the five-year period commencing July 1, 2021 and ending June 30, 2026, common carriers charging indexed rates will be permitted to adjust their indexed ceilings annually by PPI-FG plus 0.78 percent. Requests for rehearing of the December 2020 order were filed on January 19, 2021, and remain pending before FERC. Accordingly, the FERC’s final determination of the index rate coupled with the anticipated and subsequent appeals of the December 2020 order could adversely impact the final determination of the FERC approved index.
FERC has also implemented changes related to its treatment of federal income taxes. The change in treatment impacts two rate components. Those components are the allowance for income taxes and the amount for accumulated deferred income taxes. These changes will primarily impact any cost-of-service related filing and our revenues associated with any cost-based service could be adversely affected by future FERC or judicial rulings. However, we believe that these impacts, if any, will be minimal.
Trends and Outlook
Recent market disruptions involving the COVID-19 pandemic have negatively impacted our earnings and cash flows from operations and may continue to do so. Reduced demand for natural gas, NGLs, refined products and/or crude oil caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and low WTI crude oil prices may result in the continued shut-in of production from U.S. oil and gas wells, which in turn may result in decreased volumes transported on our pipeline systems and decreased overall utilization of our midstream services.
With respect to commodity prices, natural gas prices have strengthened in recent months as a reduction in crude oil production has led to decreased supplies of associated natural gas from these wells. Meanwhile, crude oil prices saw a sharp decline as a result of actions by foreign oil-producing nations and a decrease in global demand as result of the COVID-19 pandemic but have subsequently risen and stabilized. We cannot predict the future impacts, or the duration of such impacts, from the COVID-19 pandemic.
The outlook for commodity prices is mixed and could have a varying impact on our business. Reduced demand and increased supply of crude oil has resulted in an increase in worldwide crude oil storage inventories, which is expected to keep crude oil prices depressed for the near term. With respect to natural gas markets, a relatively more moderate decrease in demand, coupled with the previously mentioned decreases in gas production associated with wells drilled to produce crude oil, have more than counterbalanced the reduction in demand. The overall outlook for our midstream services will depend, in part, on the timing and extent of recovery in the commodity markets.
While we anticipate that current and projected commodity prices and the related impact to activity levels in both the upstream and midstream sectors will impact our business, we cannot predict the ultimate magnitude of that impact and expect it to be varied across our operations, depending on the region, customer, type of service, contract term and other factors.
While the vast majority of our counterparties are investment grade rated companies, recent market disruptions increased the likelihood that some of our counterparties may be forced to file for bankruptcy protection. However, we believe that the recent increases in commodity prices, along with recent expense-cutting initiatives by many companies, have generally strengthened the credit profile for the majority of our producer counterparties.
Ultimately, the extent to which our business will be impacted by recent market developments depends on the factors described above as well as future developments beyond our control, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. In response to these market events and uncertainties, we reduced 2020 growth capital spending, and we expect to continue to a lower level of growth capital spending going forward. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for additional information on our forecasted capital expenditures. In 2020, we also reduced operating expenses, and we expect that our operating expenses going forward will continue to be lower relative to pre-2020 levels. While current market volatility makes the near-term unpredictable, we believe that overall the long-term demand for our services will continue given the essential nature of the midstream natural gas, NGLs, refined products and crude oil businesses, although we cannot predict any possible changes in such demand with reasonable certainty.
We currently have ample liquidity to fund our business and we do not anticipate any liquidity concerns in the immediate future (see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below). In addition, while the trading price of ET common units declined significantly during the first nine months of 2020, thereby making equity capital market transactions less attractive in the near term, we continue to have access to the debt capital markets on generally favorable terms. In the event we seek additional equity or debt capital, our blended cost of capital for equity and debt is expected to be modestly higher in the near term; however, we will continue to evaluate growth projects and acquisitions as such opportunities may be identified in the future in light of this higher cost of capital.
In addition to the trends and outlook discussed above with respect to the Partnership’s existing business and finances, we also anticipate that the Partnership will continue to increase its focus on the development of alternative energy projects aimed at continuing to reduce its environmental footprint throughout its operations. In February 2021, the Partnership announced the creation of a new group focused on these efforts. The Partnership also recently announced its first-ever dedicated solar power contract, which will reduce the Partnership’s environmental footprint by integrating alternative energy sources when economically beneficial.
Results of Operations
We report Segment Adjusted EBITDA and consolidated Adjusted EBITDA as measures of segment performance. We define Segment Adjusted EBITDA and consolidated Adjusted EBITDA as total Partnership earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, depletion, amortization and other non-cash items, such as non-cash compensation expense, gains and losses on disposals of assets, the allowance for equity funds used during construction, unrealized gains and losses on commodity risk management activities, inventory valuation adjustments, non-cash impairment charges, losses on extinguishments of debt and other non-operating income or expense items. Segment Adjusted EBITDA and consolidated Adjusted EBITDA reflect amounts for unconsolidated affiliates based on the same recognition and measurement methods used to record equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates. Adjusted EBITDA related to unconsolidated affiliates excludes the same items with respect to the unconsolidated affiliate as those excluded from the calculation of Segment Adjusted EBITDA and consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, such as interest, taxes, depreciation, depletion, amortization and other non-cash items. Although these amounts are excluded from Adjusted EBITDA related to unconsolidated affiliates, such exclusion should not be understood to imply that we have control over the operations and resulting revenues and expenses of such affiliates. We do not control our unconsolidated affiliates; therefore, we do not control the earnings or cash flows of such affiliates. The use of Segment Adjusted EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA related to unconsolidated affiliates as an analytical tool should be limited accordingly.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA, as reported for each segment in the table below, is analyzed for each segment in the section titled “Segment Operating Results.” Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure used by industry analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies to assess the financial performance and the operating results of the Partnership’s fundamental business activities and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitution for net income, income from operations, cash flows from operating activities or other GAAP measures.
As discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” the Partnership’s consolidated financial statements for all periods presented have been retrospectively adjusted to reflect the change in the accounting policy related to certain barrels of crude oil.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Consolidated Results
Adjusted EBITDA (consolidated). For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year, Adjusted EBITDA decreased 5.5%, primarily due to the impacts of lower volumes and market prices among several of our core operating segments resulting primarily from COVID-19 related demand reductions. These decreases were partially offset by an increase of $136 million from our NGL and refined products transportation and services segment primarily due to higher throughput volumes, an increase of $68 million from our midstream segment primarily due to the restructuring and assignment of certain gathering and processing contracts, and an increase of $74 million from our investment in Sunoco LP segment primarily due to increased gross profit per gallon sold and a decrease in operating costs. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA was also offset by a net increase of approximately $569 million from recent acquisitions and assets placed in service.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense increased primarily due to additional depreciation from assets recently placed in service and recent acquisitions.
Interest Expense, Net of Interest Capitalized. Interest expense, net of interest capitalized, decreased primarily due to the following:
•interest expenses recognized by the Partnership (excluding Sunoco LP and USAC) decreased by $8 million due to lower borrowing costs on both recently refinanced and floating rate debt, and higher capitalized interest offsetting a higher consolidated debt balance;
•an increase of $2 million recognized by USAC was primarily due to a full year of interest expense incurred in the current period on its senior notes 2027 issued in March 2019, partially offset by reduced borrowings and lower weighted average interest rates under its credit agreement; and
•an increase of $2 million recognized by Sunoco LP due to a slight increase in average long-term debt.
Impairment Losses. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Partnership recognized goodwill impairments totaling $2.2 billion and fixed asset impairments totaling $58 million, primarily due to decreases in projected future cash flows as a result of overall market demand decline. In addition, USAC recognized a goodwill impairment of $619 million as well as an equipment impairment of $8 million based on changes in market conditions.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Partnership recognized goodwill impairments totaling $21 million primarily due to changes in assumptions related to projected future revenues and cash flows. Also during the year ended December 31, 2019, Sunoco LP recognized a $47 million write-down on assets held for sale related to its ethanol plant in Fulton, New York, and USAC recognized a $6 million fixed asset impairment related to certain idle compressor assets.
Losses on Interest Rate Derivatives. Our interest rate derivatives are not designated as hedges for accounting purposes; therefore, changes in fair value are recorded in earnings each period. Losses on interest rate derivatives decreased by $38 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year primarily due to a $400 million reduction in notional amount of outstanding forward-starting interest rate derivatives, which was partially offset by lower average interest rates and expenses related to the early termination and settlement of forward-starting interest rate derivatives.
Unrealized Gains (Losses) on Commodity Risk Management Activities. The unrealized gains and losses on our commodity risk management activities include changes in fair value of commodity derivatives and the hedged inventory included in designated fair value hedging relationships. Information on the unrealized gains and losses within each segment are included in “Segment Operating Results” below, and additional information on the commodity-related derivatives, including notional volumes, maturities and fair values, is available in “