Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those described in or implied by these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of innovative therapies for the treatment of liver and cardio-metabolic diseases. Our lead product candidate, BIO89-100, a specifically engineered glycoPEGylated analog of FGF21, is currently being developed for the treatment of NASH and for the treatment of SHTG. NASH is a severe form of NAFLD, characterized by inflammation and fibrosis in the liver that can progress to cirrhosis, liver failure, HCC and death. There are currently no approved products for the treatment of NASH. In September 2020, we announced positive topline data from the Phase 1b/2a trial of BIO89-100 in NASH. We plan to initiate a Phase 2b trial in NASH patients in the first half of 2021. In December 2020, we initiated a paired-biopsy open-label cohort as part of the Phase 1b/2a trial in NASH patients assessing histology endpoints with topline data anticipated by the end of 2021. SHTG is a condition identified by severely elevated levels of triglycerides (greater than or equal to 500 mg/dL), which is associated with an increased risk of NASH, cardiovascular events and acute pancreatitis. We initiated our Phase 2 trial (ENTRIGUE) in SHTG patients in the third quarter of 2020 and expect to report topline data in the second half of 2021.
We commenced operations in 2018 and have devoted substantially all of our resources to raising capital, acquiring our initial product candidate, identifying and developing BIO89-100, licensing certain related technology, conducting research and development activities (including preclinical studies and clinical trials) and providing general and administrative support for these operations. Prior to our initial public offering (“IPO”), we had funded our operations primarily from the issuance and sale of capital stock. In November 2019, we completed our IPO pursuant to which we issued 6,100,390 shares of our common stock at a price of $16.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $87.7 million from the IPO.
In July 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 3,047,040 shares of our common stock, including 397,440 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of their option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $27.50 per share. We raised a total of $83.8 million in gross proceeds from the offering, or approximately $78.2 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriters’ discounts and commissions of $5.0 million and offering costs of approximately $0.6 million.
In September 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 3,025,000 shares of our common stock, at a public offering price of $28.00 per share. We raised a total of $84.7 million in gross proceeds from the offering, or approximately $79.5 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $4.6 million and offering costs of approximately $0.6 million.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments totaled $204.6 million. Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments together with the proceeds available under our term loan facility will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements through the second quarter of 2023.
We have incurred net losses since our inception. Our net losses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $49.5 million and $57.4 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $123.1 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses as we advance BIO89-100 and any future product candidates through clinical trials, seek regulatory approval for BIO89-100 and any future product candidates, expand our clinical, regulatory, quality, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities, protect our intellectual property, prepare for and, if approved, proceed to commercialization of BIO89-100 and any future product candidates, expand our general and administrative support functions, including hiring additional personnel, and incur additional costs associated with operating as a public
company. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted and may continue to disrupt our business and delay our preclinical and clinical programs and timelines. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our future operating results and financial condition is uncertain. We initiated our Phase 2 trial (ENTRIGUE) in SHTG patients in the third quarter of 2020 as well as a new paired-biopsy open-label histology cohort as part of the Phase 1b/2a trial in the fourth quarter of 2020. The COVID-19 surge observed late in the fourth quarter of 2020 and the first quarter of 2021 has impacted enrollment in these studies. We plan to initiate a Phase 2b trial in NASH patients in the first half of 2021. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays, which could prevent or delay us from obtaining approval for BIO89-100. For more information regarding risks related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, please see the risk factor entitled “The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has resulted and may in the future result in significant disruptions to our clinical trials or other business operations, which could have a material adverse effect on our business,” in Part I. Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. To the extent the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic adversely affects our business and financial results, it may also have the effect of heightening many of the other risks set forth under “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Components of Results of Operations
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our lead product candidate, BIO89-100. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of external costs related to preclinical and clinical development, including costs related to acquiring patents and intellectual property, expenses incurred under license agreements and agreements with contract research organizations and consultants, costs related to acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials, including under agreements with contract manufacturing organizations and other vendors, costs related to the preparation of regulatory submissions and expenses related to laboratory supplies and services, as well as personnel costs. Personnel costs consist of salaries, employee benefits and share-based compensation for individuals involved in research and development efforts.
We expense all research and development expenses in the periods in which they are incurred. We accrue for costs incurred as the services are being provided by monitoring the status of specific activities and the invoices received from our external service providers. We adjust our accrued expenses as actual costs become known.
Payments associated with licensing agreements to acquire licenses to develop, use, manufacture and commercialize products that have not reached technological feasibility and do not have alternate commercial use are expensed as incurred. Where contingent milestone payments are due to third parties under research and development arrangements or license agreements, the milestone payment obligations are expensed when the milestone results are probable and estimable, which is generally upon achievement of milestones.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of BIO89-100 and continue to invest in research and development activities. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming, and the successful development of BIO89-100 and any future product candidates is highly uncertain. To the extent that BIO89-100 continues to advance into larger and later stage clinical trials, our expenses will increase substantially and may become more variable. The actual probability of success for BIO89-100 or any future product candidate may be affected by a variety of factors, including the safety and efficacy of our product candidates, investment in our clinical programs, manufacturing capability and competition with other products. As a result, we are unable to determine the timing of initiation, duration and completion costs of our research and development efforts or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of BIO89-100 or any future product candidate.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, expenses for outside professional services, including legal, human resource, audit and accounting services, consulting costs and allocated facilities costs. Personnel and related costs consist of salaries, benefits and share-based compensation for personnel in executive, finance and other administrative functions. Facilities costs consist of rent and maintenance of facilities. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we increase the size of our administrative function to support the growth of our business and support our continued research and development activities.
Other Expenses, Net
Other expenses, net primarily consists of the revaluation of our convertible preferred stock liability, prior to extinguishment upon our IPO.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods presented (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes the period-over-period changes in research and development expenses for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Research and development expenses increased by $14.9 million, or 70%, to $36.2 million in 2020 compared to $21.3 million in 2019. The change was primarily due to an increase of $8.2 million in clinical development costs as a result of our ongoing Phase 1b/2a study in NASH and the initiation of our Phase 2 trial (ENTRIGUE) in SHTG patients in the third quarter of 2020, as well as our new paired-biopsy histology cohort as part of the Phase 1b/2a trial in the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $5.7 million in contract manufacturing costs as a result of the manufacture of additional supplies for our ongoing clinical trials, including our clinical trials initiated in the second half of 2020 and an increase of $3.2 million in personnel-related costs, including share-based compensation, due to higher headcount. The increases were partially offset by a decrease of $2.4 million in preclinical costs. The timing of such preclinical costs is dependent upon the status and stage of our clinical trials.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $7.9 million, or 149%, to $13.2 million in 2020 compared to $5.3 million in 2019. The change was primarily due to an increase of $4.2 million in personnel-related costs, including share-based compensation, driven by higher headcount, an increase of $2.5 million in professional services including legal and accounting consulting service fees and an increase of $1.4 million in insurance related costs. The increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.3 million in travel related expenses.
Other Expenses, Net
Other expenses, net decreased by $30.4 million to $0.2 million in 2020 compared to $30.6 million in 2019. In 2019, other expenses, net consisted primarily of the revaluation of our convertible preferred stock liability which was extinguished upon our IPO in November 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have incurred significant net losses and negative cash flows from operations. As of December 31, 2020, we had available cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $204.6 million and an accumulated deficit of $123.1 million. Prior to our IPO, we funded our operations from the issuance and sale of capital stock. In connection with our IPO, we issued and sold an aggregate of 6,100,390 shares of common stock at a price of $16.00 per share. We received proceeds of $87.7 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering costs.
In April 2020, we entered into a secured term loan facility with an aggregate committed principal amount of up to $15.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had not drawn any amount under the term loan facility.
In July 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 3,047,040 shares of our common stock, including 397,440 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of their option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $27.50 per share. Upon completion of the offering, we received gross proceeds of $83.8 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
In September 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 3,025,000 shares of our common stock, at a public offering price of $28.00 per share. Upon completion of the offering, we received gross proceeds of $84.7 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures related to our lead product candidate, BIO89-100. We plan to increase our research and development expenses substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue the clinical development of our current and future product candidates. At this time, due to the inherently unpredictable nature of clinical development, we cannot reasonably estimate the costs we will incur and the timelines that will be required to complete development, obtain marketing approval, and commercialize our current product candidate or any future product candidates. For the same reasons, we are also unable to predict when, if ever, we will generate revenue from product sales or our current or any future license agreements which we may enter into or whether, or when, if ever, we may achieve profitability. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success, and development costs can differ materially from expectations. In addition, we cannot forecast the timing and amounts of milestone, royalty and other revenue from licensing activities, which future product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Based on our research and development plans, we expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments together with the proceeds available under our term loan facility, will be sufficient to fund our operations through the second quarter of 2023. However, our operating plans and other demands on our cash resources may change as a result of many factors, and we may seek additional funds sooner than planned. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in acquiring additional funding at levels sufficient to fund our operations or on terms favorable to us.
Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the following:
•
the progress, timing, scope, results and costs of our clinical trials of BIO89-100 and preclinical studies or clinical trials of other potential product candidates we may choose to pursue in the future, including the ability to enroll patients in a timely manner for our clinical trials;
•
the costs and timing of obtaining clinical and commercial supplies and validating the commercial manufacturing process for BIO89-100 and any other product candidates we may identify and develop;
•
the cost, timing and outcomes of regulatory approvals;
•
the timing and amount of any milestone, royalty or other payments we are required to make pursuant to current or any future collaboration or license agreements;
•
costs of acquiring or in-licensing other product candidates and technologies;
•
the terms and timing of establishing and maintaining collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements;
•
the costs associated with attracting, hiring and retaining additional qualified personnel as our business grows;
•
our efforts to enhance operational systems and hire additional personnel to satisfy our obligations as a public company, including enhanced internal controls over financial reporting; and
•
the cost of preparing, filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights.
We expect to continue to generate substantial operating losses for the foreseeable future as we expand our research and development activities. We will continue to fund our operations primarily through utilization of our current financial resources and through additional raises of capital to advance our current product candidate through clinical development, to develop, acquire or in-license other potential product candidates and to fund operations for the foreseeable future. However, there is no assurance that such funding will be available to us or that it will be obtained on terms favorable to us or will provide us with sufficient funds to meet our objectives. Any failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and on our ability to pursue our business plans and strategies.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through partnerships or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our product candidates, future revenue streams or research programs or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our then-existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing when needed, we may have to delay, reduce the scope of or suspend one or more of our clinical trials or preclinical studies, research and development programs or commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $46.2 million, which consisted of a net loss of $49.5 million and a net change of $1.0 million in our net operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by non-cash charges of $4.3 million. The change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $3.6 million increase in prepaid and other current assets due to the timing of payments as well as increased scale of operations and the initiation of clinical trials in the second half of 2020, offset in part by a $2.6 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses as we grew our operations. The non-cash charges are primarily comprised of $3.8 million in share-based compensation, $0.3 million in amortization of premium on available-for-sale securities and $0.2 million in amortization of debt issuance costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $25.5 million, which consisted of a net loss of $57.4 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $31.0 million and a net change of $0.9 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges are primarily comprised of the revaluation of our convertible preferred stock liability of $30.6 million and $0.4 million in share-based compensation. The change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $2.9 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses as we grew our operations, offset in part by a $2.0 million increase in other current assets and other assets due to the timing of payments.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $106.8 million, which consisted of $118.9 million in purchases of available-for-sale securities and $0.1 million in purchases of property and equipment, offset in part by $12.2 million in proceeds from maturities of available-for-sale securities.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities consisted of purchases of property and equipment.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020 net cash provided by financing activities was $157.9 million, which consisted of $157.7 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock from our public offerings and $0.4 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options and employee share purchase plan (“ESPP”) purchases, offset in part by a $0.2 million payment of debt issuance costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2019 net cash provided by financing activities was $107.7 million, which consisted of $87.7 million in net proceeds from our initial public offering and $20.0 million in net proceeds from the issuance and sale of our convertible preferred stock.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
We are a smaller reporting company, as defined by Rule 12b-2 under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 and in Item 10(f)(1) of Regulation S-K, and are not required to provide the information under this item.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC, and do not have any holdings in variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Polices and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent
assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
We record accrued expenses for estimated preclinical and clinical trial and research expenses related to the services performed but not yet invoiced pursuant to contracts with research institutions, contract research organizations and clinical manufacturing organizations that conduct and manage preclinical studies, and clinical trials, and research services on our behalf. Payments for these services are based on the terms of individual agreements and payment timing may differ significantly from the period in which the services were performed. Our estimates are based on factors such as the work completed, including the level of patient enrollment. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activity to the extent reasonably possible and make judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. Our estimates of accrued expenses are based on the facts and circumstances known at the time. If we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued expenses. To date, we have not experienced significant changes in our estimates of preclinical studies and clinical trial accruals.
Share-Based Compensation
We measure compensation expense related to share-based awards granted to employees, directors, and non-employee service providers, including stock options, based on the estimated fair value. We estimate the fair value of the awards on the date of grant, and the resulting share-based compensation, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of the share-based awards, which have graded vesting, is recognized as an expense using the straight-line method over the requisite service period of each award, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards. We recognize forfeitures as they occur.
We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option awards that requires the use of subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of share-based awards. These assumptions include:
•
Expected volatility-Since we have limited trading history for our common stock due to our short trading history, the expected volatility is estimated based on the volatility of comparable publicly traded biotechnology companies during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of the options granted. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty.
•
Expected term-The expected term of options granted to employees and directors is determined using the “simplified” method. Under this approach, the expected term is presumed to be the midpoint between the weighted-average vesting term and the contractual term of the option. The simplified method makes the assumption that the employee will exercise share options evenly over the period when the share options are vested and ending on the date when the share options would expire. The expected option term for options granted to non-employees is estimated on a grant-by-grant basis.
•
Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon bonds in effect on the grant date for periods with an equivalent expected term as the option.
•
Expected dividend-We have never paid dividends and have no foreseeable plans to pay dividends on our shares of common stock. Therefore, we use an expected dividend of zero.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility and expected term utilized for our share-based compensation calculations on a prospective basis.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing under Part II Item 8 for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one yet, of their potential impact on our financial condition of results of operations.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies.
We have elected to use this extended transition period to enable us to comply with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements and our interim consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements.