Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion, particularly information with respect to our outlook, key trends and uncertainties, our plans and strategy for our business, and our performance and future success, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” For more information regarding key factors affecting our performance, see “Key Factors Affecting Our Performance” below. We have omitted discussion of 2018 results where it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in Part II, Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Business
Etsy operates two-sided online marketplaces that connect millions of passionate and creative buyers and sellers. Our mission is to “Keep Commerce Human,” and we’re committed to using the power of business and technology to strengthen communities and empower people around the world.
Our primary marketplace, Etsy.com, is the global destination for unique and creative goods. The Etsy marketplace connects creative artisans and entrepreneurs with thoughtful consumers looking for items that are intended to be special, reflect their sense of style, or represent a meaningful occasion. Our sellers are the heart and soul of Etsy, and our technology platform allows our sellers to turn their creative passions into economic opportunity. We have a seller-aligned business model: we make money when our sellers make money. We offer Etsy sellers a marketplace with millions of buyers along with a range of seller tools and services that are specifically designed to help our creative entrepreneurs generate more sales and scale their businesses.
We are focused on attracting potential buyers to the Etsy marketplace for everyday items that have meaning and those “special” purchase occasions that happen throughout the year. We are also focused on deepening our engagement with our existing buyers by inspiring purchases across our many retail categories and special occasions. Special purchases for use in the everyday include handmade or vintage unique clothing, accessories, household items, or furniture that the buyer wants to reflect her sense of style. Special purchase occasions can occur many times throughout the year and include shopping for special occasions that reflects an individual’s unique style; gifting that demonstrates thought and care; and celebrations that express creativity and fun. Buyers tell us that they come to Etsy because Etsy sellers offer items that they can’t find anywhere else.
On August 15, 2019, we acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of Reverb Holdings, Inc. (“Reverb”) for $270.4 million, net of cash acquired. The Reverb marketplace is a leading global online marketplace dedicated to buying and selling new, used, and vintage musical instruments, with a vibrant community of buyers and sellers all over the world. Reverb, now a wholly-owned subsidiary of Etsy, Inc., is included in all financial and other metrics from August 15, 2019 (the date of acquisition), unless otherwise noted.
Our revenue is diversified, generated from a mix of marketplace activities and other optional services we provide to sellers to help them generate more sales and scale their businesses.
Marketplace revenue is comprised of the fees a seller pays us for marketplace activities. Marketplace activities include listing an item for sale; completing transactions between a buyer and a seller, which includes, beginning in the second quarter of 2020, an additional transaction fee related to offsite advertising; and using our payments services to process payments, including foreign currency transactions. Etsy fees include the $0.20 listing fee for each item listed (for up to four months); the 5% transaction fee that an Etsy seller pays for each completed transaction, inclusive of shipping fees charged; where applicable, an additional transaction fee of 12% or 15% related to offsite advertising; and fees for Etsy Payments, our payment processing product.
Services revenue is comprised of the fees a seller pays us for our optional other services (“Services”). Services primarily include on-site advertising services, which allows sellers to pay for prominent placement of their listings in search results; and shipping labels, which allows sellers in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, and Australia to purchase discounted shipping labels.
Our strategy is focused on growing the Etsy marketplace in our seven core geographies and building a sustainable competitive advantage around four elements of our business that we believe differentiate us from our competitors, or what we call our “Right to Win.” The foundation of Etsy’s competitive advantage is our collection of our sellers’ unique items, which, we believe, when combined with best-in-class search and discovery, human connections, and a trusted brand, will enable us to continue to stand out among other e-commerce platforms and marketplaces. Our investments in product, marketing, and talent will be focused on capitalizing on these four elements of our business. Ultimately, the goal of our long-term strategy is to drive more new buyers to the website, give existing buyers reasons to come back more often, encourage buyers to spend more per order, and fuel success for our sellers. We see a number of similarities between the levers of growth for the Etsy and Reverb marketplaces, including improving search and discovery, making selling and buying easier, and building a global brand and user community.
While current macroeconomic conditions have had a dramatic effect on the global economy and on our business, these impacts have led us to reaffirm our long-term strategy and strengthen our commitment to it.
Year Financial Highlights
As of December 31, 2020, our marketplaces connected 4.4 million active sellers and 81.9 million active buyers in nearly every country in the world. In the year ended December 31, 2020, sellers generated GMS of $10.3 billion of which approximately 61% came from purchases made on mobile devices. We are a global company and approximately 36% of our GMS in the year ended December 31, 2020 came from transactions where either a seller or a buyer was located outside of the United States.
Total revenue was $1.7 billion in the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by strong growth in both Marketplace and Services revenue. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded net income of $349.2 million, and non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA of $549.1 million. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Cash and cash equivalents, and short-term investments were $1.7 billion as of December 31, 2020. Etsy has $650.0 million aggregate principal amount of 0.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2027 (the “2020 Notes”), $650.0 million aggregate principal amount of 0.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the “2019 Notes”), and $43.9 million aggregate principal amount of 0% Convertible Senior Notes due 2023 (the “2018 Notes” and together with the 2020 Notes and the 2019 Notes, the “Notes”). Additionally, we have the ability to draw down on its $200.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we had positive operating cash flows of $679.0 million.
Other Operational Highlights
The impacts of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and on our business continue to evolve. Etsy’s performance for the year was extremely strong, with GMS growth of 106.7% and revenue growth of 110.9%. Factors contributing to this performance included our investments in our brand and marketplace; our agility in supporting our global seller community; our quick and successful transition to remote work; and guarding the health and safety of our team - all of which mitigated risk and maximized our financial performance. In addition, Etsy benefited from several tailwinds including the shift from offline to online shopping, specific competitive dynamics, retail business closures, new buyer cohorts, pent-up demand, emerging categories such as face masks, gifting trends, and government stimulus.
We have continued to invest in product development, making key improvements to the customer experience during the year. Highlights of our business initiatives during the year, including those related to COVID-19, are outlined below:
•Etsy assembled a COVID-19 task force in January and moved to a fully remote workforce for both Etsy and Reverb by early March. Despite this shift in working environment, our team remains highly productive. During this time we allocated resources to critical infrastructure improvements to more accurately categorize our inventory and are investing in longer-term initiatives such as search and frequency and are seeing encouraging data from our recent product launches.
•In living up to our mission to “Keep Commerce Human,” we introduced several initiatives during the year to support our seller community during this challenging time. These included waiving fees for our new Offsite Ads service, extending our free trial into May; a one-month grace period to give sellers extra time to pay their bills; a seller guide to managing an Etsy shop during COVID-19; and 24/7 member support to address any questions with their businesses, delivery times, and shipping issues.
•We completed the migration of seller listings to our new Offsite Ads, an iteration on our advertising offerings, to help sellers more effectively drive traffic to their listings. Etsy pays the upfront costs to promote Etsy sellers’ listings on multiple internet platforms without any upfront costs for sellers. We added enhancements to our Etsy Ads (formerly Promoted Listings) service, improving the relevance of ads in search and the speed of incorporating changes in a seller’s budget. We also made our Etsy Ads infrastructure more efficient, providing better search results while simultaneously using fewer cloud resources. To add to the seller experience, we launched performance graphs in the Etsy Ads dashboard, helping to make advertising on Etsy as easy as possible for our sellers.
•We adjusted our marketing strategies and spend for the Etsy marketplace during the year to respond quickly to the changing macro dynamics. Performance marketing spend adjusts naturally with demand, and we significantly increased our investments in marketing, launching several TV ad campaigns throughout the year, including both direct response ads and those designed to create an emotional connection with consumers, as well as holiday campaigns in the United Kingdom and Germany. Over the year we have made significant progress with full funnel marketing and optimization across channels.
•GMS excluding mask sales for the Etsy marketplace was $8.7 billion, up 84% year-over-year, and 8% of the Etsy marketplace’s overall GMS was from mask sales. The Etsy marketplace saw an influx of 60.7 million new buyers and reactivated buyers during the year, the latter being those who haven’t purchased in a year or more.
•We launched a buy now, pay later option for U.S. buyers through a partnership with Klarna, an online payments company, which offers buyers the flexibility to pay for an item in installments, making higher priced items more accessible.
•In search and discovery, we made additional progress by improving our query-listing matching and continuing to iterate on ranking algorithms to deliver more relevant recommendations further along in the purchase funnel and by leaning into saved searches and favorites to capture data on what buyers like and their tastes and preferences, which we believe we can leverage to make the site more organized and easier to search.
•We continued to strengthen the buyer experience by:
◦adding a more prominent “In Stock” indicator to increase buyer confidence that an item is not mass-produced;
◦collapsing the item information section on the listing page, allowing for buyers to more easily find items that interest them;
◦launching listing videos, which help sellers showcase their products to buyers in ways they previously could not with photos, showing their expertise in making and bringing their products to life, with approximately 3.2 million listing videos uploaded in 2020; and
◦improving shipping transparency and post-purchase experiences by helping buyers better understand when they should expect an item to arrive by expanding listing coverage of expected delivery dates.
•Reverb benefited from similar macroeconomic e-commerce tailwinds to Etsy, as well as a strong increase in GMS from new buyers, many of whom were novice musicians. We continued to execute on product and marketing initiatives to bolster Reverb’s two-sided marketplace. Beginning on August 4, 2020, Reverb increased its seller transaction fee for the first time from 3.5% to 5%, which will enable Reverb to increase investments in marketing, expand its global customer engagement team, and grow the capacity of its team that creates and enhances seller tools and services to increase visibility of seller shops and inventory.
Convertible Debt
In August 2020, we issued $650.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2020 Notes in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933 (the “Securities Act”). The initial conversion price of the 2020 Notes represented a premium of approximately 52.5% over the price of our common stock. The net proceeds from the sale of the 2020 Notes were $639.5 million after deducting the offering expenses. The 2020 Notes will mature on September 1, 2027, unless earlier converted or repurchased.
We used $74.7 million of the net proceeds from the 2020 Notes offering to enter into separate capped call instruments (“2020 Capped Call Transactions”) with the initial purchasers and/or their respective affiliates. The 2020 Capped Call Transactions effectively limit the premium for conversion of the 2020 Notes to 150% and are generally expected to reduce potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of the 2020 Notes and/or offset any payments we make upon conversion.
In addition, we paid $137.2 million in cash and issued approximately 7.3 million shares of Etsy’s common stock to repurchase $301.1 million aggregate principal amount of the outstanding 2018 Notes through privately negotiated transactions.
We intend to use the remainder of the net proceeds from the 2020 Notes offering for general corporate purposes. For more information on the 2020 Notes, 2020 Capped Call Transactions, and the 2018 Notes, see “Note 13-Debt” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Key Operating and Financial Metrics
We collect and analyze operating and financial data to evaluate the health and performance of our business and allocate our resources (such as capital, people, and technology investments). The financial results of Reverb have been included in our consolidated financial results from August 15, 2019 (the date of acquisition). We are providing Etsy.com standalone information in certain instances where particularly relevant. The key operating and financial metrics we use are:
(1) Unaudited
GMS
Gross merchandise sales (“GMS”) is the dollar value of items sold in our marketplaces within the applicable period, excluding shipping fees and net of refunds associated with canceled transactions. GMS does not represent revenue earned by us. GMS is largely driven by transactions in our marketplaces and is not directly impacted by Services activity. However, because our revenue and cost of revenue depend significantly on the dollar value of items sold in our marketplace, we believe that GMS is an indicator of the success of our sellers, the satisfaction of our buyers, and the health, scale, and growth of our business. We track “Paid GMS” for the Etsy marketplace and define it as Etsy.com GMS that is attributable to our performance marketing efforts, which excludes most of our marketing investments focused on brand awareness like TV and digital video.
GMS increased $5.3 billion, or 106.7%, to $10.3 billion in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. On a currency-neutral basis (excluding the direct impact of currency translation on GMS from goods that are not listed in U.S. dollars) GMS growth for the year ended December 31, 2020 would have been 105.7%, or approximately 100 basis points lower than the reported 106.7% growth. Supporting this growth in GMS, active sellers increased 61.7% to 4.4 million, driven by strong growth in both international and U.S. sellers, and active buyers increased 76.7% to 81.9 million at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. In the year ended December 31, 2020, GMS from new buyers grew 105% year-over-year and represented approximately 16% of overall GMS, a slight decrease compared to last year. In the year ended December 31, 2020, GMS from existing buyers grew 107% year-over-year and represented approximately 84% of overall GMS, a slight increase compared to last year. While it is difficult to predict how our business will be impacted as the COVID-19 pandemic runs its course and abates, we currently expect a contraction of mask sales as masks become more widely available, and a deceleration of new buyer growth as businesses return to on-site operations and as mask sales contract.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA represents our net income adjusted to exclude: interest and other non-operating expense, net; provision (benefit) for income taxes; depreciation and amortization; stock-based compensation expense; foreign exchange loss (gain); acquisition-related expenses; non-ordinary course disputes; loss on extinguishment of debt; and restructuring and other exit income. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information regarding our use of Adjusted EBITDA, including its limitations as a financial measure, and for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Active Sellers
An active seller is a seller who has incurred at least one charge from us in the last 12 months. Charges include Marketplace and Services revenue fees discussed in “Note 1-Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies -Revenue Recognition” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. A seller is separately identified in each of our marketplaces by a unique e-mail address; a single person can have multiple seller accounts and can count as a distinct active seller in each of our marketplaces. We succeed when sellers succeed, so we view the number of active sellers as a key indicator of the awareness of our brand, the reach of our platform, the potential for growth in GMS and revenue, and the health of our business.
Active Buyers
An active buyer is a buyer who has made at least one purchase in the last 12 months. A buyer is separately identified in each of our marketplaces by a unique e-mail address; a single person can have multiple buyer accounts and can count as a distinct active buyer in each of our marketplaces. We generate revenue when buyers order items from sellers, so we view the number of active buyers as a key indicator of our potential for growth in GMS and revenue, the reach of our platform, awareness of our brand, the engagement and loyalty of buyers, and the health of our business.
Mobile GMS
Mobile GMS is GMS that results from a transaction completed on a mobile device, such as a tablet or a smartphone. Mobile GMS excludes orders initiated on mobile devices but ultimately completed on a desktop. When calculating the percentage of mobile GMS, we do not take into account refunds associated with canceled transactions. We believe that mobile GMS indicates our success in converting mobile activity into mobile purchases and demonstrates our ability to grow GMS and revenue.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, mobile GMS increased as a percentage of total GMS to approximately 61% up from approximately 58% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Mobile GMS growth during the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 116%, with mobile web and mobile app GMS each continuing to grow faster than desktop GMS during the year.
International GMS
International GMS is GMS from transactions where either the billing address for the seller or the shipping address for the buyer at the time of sale is outside of the United States. When calculating percent international GMS, we do not take into account refunds associated with canceled transactions. We believe that international GMS shows the level of engagement of our community outside the United States and demonstrates our ability to grow GMS and revenue.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, international GMS remained flat as a percentage of total GMS at approximately 36%. International GMS was up approximately 105% in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by our fastest growing international trade route, international domestic, which is GMS generated between a non-U.S. buyer and a non-U.S. seller both in the same country, and by GMS between U.S. buyers and international sellers. International domestic GMS grew approximately 185% in 2020 compared with 2019. The increase in international GMS included increases related to changes in foreign currency rates year-over-year. On a currency-neutral basis international GMS growth for the year ended December 31, 2020 would have been 102%.
Currency-Neutral GMS Growth
We calculate currency-neutral GMS growth by translating current period GMS for goods sold that were listed in non-U.S. dollar currencies into U.S. dollars using prior year foreign currency exchange rates.
As reported and currency-neutral GMS growth for the periods presented below is as follows and include the operations of Reverb since August 15, 2019 (the date of acquisition):
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” Our primary marketplace, Etsy.com, is the largest driver of our business and thus the following key factors affecting our performance most significantly relate to the Etsy marketplace.
Growth and Retention of Active Buyers and Active Sellers on the Etsy Marketplace
Our success depends in part on the growth and retention of our active buyers and active sellers. Our revenue is driven by the number of active buyers, buyer engagement, active sellers, seller engagement, and our ability to maintain a trusted marketplace. We believe two of our most significant opportunities to drive growth in our primary marketplace are to bring new buyers to Etsy.com and encourage existing Etsy buyers to purchase more frequently. We are particularly focused on increasing our number of habitual buyers, or buyers who have spent $200 or more and made purchases on six or more purchase days in the year. We are also focused on keeping our best sellers on the platform and helping them grow their businesses by enhancing the seller tools and services that help drive buyer demand.
During 2020, the Etsy marketplace had 38 million new Etsy buyers, or buyers who made their first-ever purchase on Etsy, compared to 19 million new Etsy buyers in 2019. GMS from new buyers was up 94% year-over-year and represented approximately 16% of overall Etsy.com GMS, in line with last year. Etsy.com GMS from existing buyers grew 101% year-over-year in 2020 and represented approximately 84% of overall Etsy.com GMS, in line with last year. Repeat purchases demonstrate the loyalty of Etsy buyers. In 2020, on the Etsy marketplace, approximately 48% of our active buyers made purchases on two or more days in the previous 12 months, up from 41% in 2019.
Habitual buyers represented approximately 8% of Etsy.com’s active buyers as of December 31, 2020. Habitual buyers grew to 6.5 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of 157% compared to 2019. We aim to increase repeat purchases and habitual buyers by inspiring purchases in additional categories and on additional occasions, building trust in the Etsy brand, and removing friction from the buying experience to improve conversion rates.
To analyze our retention rates on the Etsy marketplace, we measure repeat activity by active buyers and active sellers.
Services Growth
We have a seller-aligned business model: we make money when our sellers make money. Our goal is to enhance the seller tools and services that will drive buyer demand. To achieve this, we continue to invest our resources in developing a cohesive platform of paid services and free tools specifically designed to help our creative entrepreneurs generate more sales and scale their businesses. We believe we can grow our optional paid services in three ways: expand the utility of existing services, expand the geographic reach of existing services, and launch new services offerings. As of December 31, 2020, on the Etsy marketplace, 22% of active sellers used on-site advertising services, and 22% of active sellers in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, and Australia used Etsy Shipping Labels.
Investment in Marketing
We are focusing on initiatives to drive traffic to Etsy and shape perceptions of the Etsy marketplace as the go-to shopping destination for everyday items that have meaning and those “special” purchase occasions that happen throughout the year. In 2018, we ran our first-ever Etsy television advertising campaign in the United States and also began to test offline marketing campaigns. We continued these marketing campaigns during 2019 and 2020, expanding our campaigns to the United Kingdom and Germany. During 2020 we leaned more heavily into upper funnel strategies through TV, digital video, and paid social. In 2020, we ran several campaigns and broadened our U.S. reach to include both direct response ads and those designed to create an emotional connection with consumers and make Etsy top-of-mind. We believe these campaigns can increase brand awareness, visits, and purchase intent. In 2020, Paid GMS was 20% of total Etsy.com GMS and grew 158% compared to 2019.
In 2020, we spent $500.8 million on marketing expenses, or 29.0% of revenue, up 132.3% over 2019. In 2019, we spent $215.6 million on marketing expenses, or 26.3% of revenue, up 36.4% over 2018. We increased digital marketing spend, which excludes brand marketing channels such as TV, by 157% in 2020 to $344.7 million, including $332.2 million of which was spend for the Etsy marketplace, up 157% from 2019.
Investment in Technology
Our engineering team has built a sophisticated platform that enables millions of Etsy sellers and buyers to smoothly transact across borders, languages and devices. We have made, and will continue to make, significant investments in our platform to attract buyers and sellers to the Etsy marketplace and enhance their experience.
We completed our principal migration to Google Cloud in February 2020, and our technology infrastructure allows us to scale our efforts across the platform. As the COVID-19 pandemic shifted consumer shopping habits to more online commerce, traffic volume increased dramatically and the cloud migration enabled us to dynamically flex our infrastructure. In addition to its flexible capacity, we also believe that the cloud will enhance our overall infrastructure by providing faster processing speed, improved page load time, and more nimble technology on an as-needed basis. We expect to continue to enhance our search and discovery capabilities and leverage our machine learning technology to deliver an even more personalized shopping experience in the future.
In 2020, we spent $180.1 million on product development expenses, or 10.4% of revenue, up 47.8% over 2019, and in 2019 we spent $121.9 million on product development expenses, or 14.9% of revenue, up 25.3% over 2018. We plan to continue to invest in innovation to address the needs of our community and increase our efforts to recruit and hire employees to work on our engineering teams.
Investment in Connected Experience-Mobile and Desktop
We want to engage buyers wherever they are and to provide an enjoyable and accessible shopping experience regardless of the format. Mobile is integrated into everything that we do, and expanding our mobile capabilities is an important focus area. Our mobile websites and mobile apps include search and discovery, curation, personalization, augmented reality, and social shopping features, optimized for a personal mobile experience. Etsy.com mobile GMS was 62% of total Etsy.com GMS in 2020, up from 59% in 2019. We are focused on increasing conversion rates. Mobile web contributes the largest share of traffic, followed by desktop and our mobile app. We believe growth in percentage of mobile app visits could be a tailwind to future conversion rate gains, as our mobile app channel has the highest conversion rate, followed by desktop and mobile web.
International Growth
Our growth will depend in part on international sellers and international buyers constituting an increasing portion of our community. Our vision is global and local. Our websites are available in many languages and supports buyers and sellers in nearly every country in the world. In 2018, we entered into a referral agreement with DaWanda GmbH (“DaWanda”), a privately held Germany-based marketplace for gifts and handmade items. As part of this agreement, DaWanda agreed to encourage its community of buyers and sellers to migrate to the Etsy platform. The referral agreement with DaWanda allowed us to grow our international business by expanding our footprint in Central Europe, particularly in Germany, one of our core geographic markets.
On a consolidated basis, international GMS was 36% of total GMS in both 2020 and 2019.
In 2020, 43% of Etsy sellers were located outside the United States. Cross-border transactions is the largest component of international GMS and we remain committed to reducing barriers such as language and currency so that sellers and buyers from different countries can easily connect and transact. For the Etsy marketplace, GMS generated between a non-U.S. buyer and a non-U.S. seller both in the same country grew approximately 182% in 2020 compared with 2019, making it the fastest growing category of international GMS. The Reverb marketplace has a smaller percent of international GMS relative to the Etsy marketplace.
We see significant opportunity to deliver a more localized shopping experience to non-U.S. buyers in the future. This opportunity may include making investments in the elevation of local products and sellers in search, improving non-English search, and providing more localized marketing and campaigns.
Our Company Culture
Our success depends, in part, on our ability to attract, retain, and motivate exceptional employees who share our dedication to our community and our mission to “Keep Commerce Human.” We believe that our action-oriented, values-based and purpose-driven work culture is a competitive advantage in attracting and retaining top talent. We are focused on employee engagement, which is linked with high performance, retention, innovation, and growth. We are also committed to fostering a diverse and inclusive workplace because we firmly believe that diverse backgrounds, thoughts, and experiences are beneficial to innovation, decision making, and our business as a whole.
For further information related to our approach to Human Capital see “Item 1. Business-Our Impact Strategy and Progress.”
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue is diversified, generated from a mix of marketplace activities and other optional services we provide to sellers to help them generate more sales and scale their businesses.
Marketplace revenue is comprised of the fees a seller pays us for marketplace activities. Marketplace activities include listing an item for sale; completing transactions between a buyer and a seller, which includes, beginning in the second quarter of 2020, an additional transaction fee related to offsite advertising; and using our payments services to process payments, including foreign currency transactions. Etsy fees include the $0.20 listing fee for each item listed (for up to four months), the 5% transaction fee that an Etsy seller pays for each completed transaction, inclusive of shipping fees charged, where applicable, an additional transaction fee of 12% or 15% related to offsite advertising, and fees for Etsy Payments, our payment processing product.
Services revenue is comprised of the fees a seller pays us for our optional other services. Services primarily include on-site advertising services, which allows sellers to pay for prominent placement of their listings in search results; and shipping labels, which allows sellers in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, and Australia to purchase discounted shipping labels.
Our revenue recognition policies are discussed under “Note 1-Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of the cost of interchange and other fees for credit card processing services, credit card verification service fees, and credit card chargebacks to support payments revenue, and costs of refunds made to buyers that we are not able to collect from sellers. Cost of revenue also includes expenses associated with the usage of cloud infrastructure, including employee-related expenses, hosting and bandwidth costs, and depreciation and amortization. Our cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue may change over time as our revenue mix changes; for example, to the extent that payments revenue increases as a percentage of revenue, there may be a dampening effect on our gross margin, as our payments services are lower margin products compared to our other offerings.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of marketing, product development, and general and administrative expenses. Employee compensation-related expenses are the most significant component of the product development and general and administrative expense categories. We include stock-based compensation expense in the applicable operating expense category based on the respective equity award recipient’s function.
Marketing: Marketing expenses primarily consist of direct marketing expenses, which largely includes digital marketing and television ad and digital video expenses. Digital marketing, also referred to as performance marketing, primarily consists of targeted promotional campaigns through electronic channels, such as product listing ads, search engine marketing, social channels, and affiliate programs, which are focused on buyer acquisition and retargeting. To a lesser extent, direct marketing expenses also include brand marketing, public relations and communications, marketing partnerships, and customer relationship management. Marketing expenses also include employee compensation-related expenses to support our marketing initiatives.
Product development: Product development expenses consist primarily of employee compensation-related expenses for our engineering, product management, product design, and product research activities. Additional expenses include consulting costs related to the development, quality assurance, and testing of new technology and enhancement of our existing technology.
General and administrative: General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee compensation-related expenses for our general corporate functions. General and administrative expenses also include costs associated with the use of facilities and equipment, including depreciation and amortization and office overhead, bad debt expense, and certain professional services expenses.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net consists of loss on extinguishment of debt, interest expense, interest and other income, and foreign exchange (loss) gain. Loss on extinguishment of debt relates to the partial repurchase of our 2018 Notes in 2020. Interest expense consists primarily of non-cash interest and amortization of debt issuance costs related to our 2018 Notes, 2019 Notes, and 2020 Notes. As part of the adoption of ASU 2016-02-Leases in the first quarter of 2019, interest expense includes interest associated with our Brooklyn headquarters lease, and, to a lesser extent, interest on our hosting and computer equipment leases, both accounted for as finance leases. Prior to 2019, interest expense included interest associated with the build-to-suit accounting treatment of our Brooklyn headquarters lease, and, to a lesser extent, interest on our hosting and computer equipment leases, accounted for as capital lease obligations. Interest and other income is primarily comprised of interest and dividend income from our investment accounts.
(Provision) Benefit for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate and the (provision) benefit for income taxes is subject to significant variation due to several factors, including variability in accurately predicting our pre-tax income or loss and the mix of jurisdictions to which they relate, taxable income and loss in each jurisdiction, changes in our stock price, audit-related developments, acquisitions, changes in our deferred tax assets and liabilities and their valuation, foreign currency gains (losses), changes in statutes, regulations, case law, and administrative practices, principles, and interpretations related to tax, including changes to the global tax framework, competition, and other laws and accounting rules in various jurisdictions, and relative changes of expenses or losses for which tax benefits are not recognized. Additionally, the effective tax rate can be more or less volatile based on the magnitude of pre-tax income or loss. For example, the impact of discrete items and non-deductible expenses on the effective tax rate is greater when pre-tax income is lower.
Although management believes its tax positions and related provisions reflected in the consolidated financial statements are fully supportable, it recognizes that these tax positions and related provisions may be challenged by various tax authorities. These tax positions and related provisions are reviewed on an ongoing basis and are adjusted as additional facts and information become available, including progress on tax audits, changes in interpretation of tax laws, developments in case law and closing of statutes of limitations. To the extent that the results differ from our original or adjusted estimates, the effect will be recorded in (provision) benefit for income taxes.
The (provision) benefit for income taxes involves a significant amount of management judgment regarding interpretation of relevant facts and laws in the jurisdictions in which we operate. Future changes in applicable laws, projected levels of taxable income and tax planning could change the effective tax rate and tax balances recorded by us. In addition, tax authorities periodically review income tax returns filed by us and can raise issues regarding our filing positions, timing and amount of income and deductions, and the allocation of income among the jurisdictions in which we operate. A significant period of time may elapse between the filing of an income tax return and the ultimate resolution of an issue raised by a revenue authority with respect to that return. Any adjustments as a result of any examination may result in additional taxes or penalties against us. If the ultimate result of these audits differ from original or adjusted estimates, they could have a material impact on our tax provision and results of operations.
Results of Operations
The following tables show our results of operations for the periods presented and express the relationship of line items as a percentage of revenue for those periods. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of future results.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Revenue increased $907.2 million, or 110.9%, to $1.7 billion in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, of which 75.5% consisted of Marketplace revenue and 24.5% consisted of Services revenue.
During the second quarter of 2020, Etsy transitioned from its combined “Etsy Ads” on-site and offsite advertising to two separate advertising offerings: Offsite Ads, with 12% or 15% transaction fees reported in Marketplace revenue, and Etsy Ads, the new name for our on-site advertising product (formerly Promoted Listings), with advertising fees reported in Services revenue.
Marketplace revenue increased $709.5 million, or 119.5%, to $1.3 billion in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This growth was substantially all due to an increase in the volume of GMS on our marketplaces for the year ended December 31, 2020 to a total of $10.3 billion, and the balance was due to pricing related to the introduction of our new Offsite Ads transaction fee in May 2020. A significant majority of the growth in volume of GMS was driven by the Etsy marketplace. The balance was due to our acquisition of Reverb in the third quarter of 2019, whose revenue consisted principally of Marketplace revenue.
Within the increase in volume of GMS, transaction revenue increased 103.9%, payments revenue increased 120.1%, and listing fee revenue grew 65.4% year-over-year. The share of Etsy.com GMS processed through our Etsy Payments platform was 92% for the year ended December 31, 2020, up from 89% for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the transition of sellers in eligible countries to the platform.
Services revenue increased $197.8 million, or 88.0%, to $422.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The growth in Services revenue was primarily driven by an increase of 83.5% in on-site advertising revenue, which represented a significant majority of the overall Services revenue growth, and, to a lesser extent, an increase in shipping label revenue of 147.7% from the prior year. The increase in advertising revenue was primarily due to higher click volume on Etsy Ads (formerly Promoted Listings). At December 31, 2020, 22% of Etsy active sellers used Etsy advertising services, up from 17% in 2019. The increase in shipping label revenue was primarily driven by an increase in label volume, the majority of which is driven by the increase in GMS.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased $193.7 million, or 71.5%, to $464.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by increased costs related to overall volume increases on our marketplaces, including payments fees and cloud-related hosting and bandwidth costs. We gained leverage as cost of revenue did not increase as fast as revenue. The increase in our gross margin from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to the shift to Offsite Ads in the second quarter of 2020, which drives revenue growth without an equal offset in cost of revenue as the expense is recorded in marketing.
Operating Expenses
There were a total of 1,414 employees on December 31, 2020, compared with 1,240 on December 31, 2019. We expect an increase in employee compensation-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, in 2021 primarily driven by headcount increases to support the growth in our business.
Marketing
Marketing expenses increased $285.2 million, or 132.3%, to $500.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of increased spend in digital marketing, and, to a lesser extent, television ad campaigns. The increase in digital marketing was largely due to increased site traffic and the shift to our Offsite Ads offering beginning in the second quarter of 2020. Paid GMS was 20% of overall Etsy.com GMS in the year ended December 31, 2020, up from paid GMS of 15% in the year ended December 31, 2019, which is a result of higher return on ad spend due to favorable competitive dynamics and the launch of Offsite Ads. Etsy began charging sellers an offsite advertising transaction fee on May 4, 2020; 9% of Etsy GMS was subject to an Offsite Ads transaction fee in the second half of 2020.
Product development
Product development expenses increased $58.2 million, or 47.8%, to $180.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of increased employee compensation-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, mainly driven by an increase in average headcount at Etsy and the acquisition of Reverb. Additionally, we gained leverage as product development expenses did not increase as fast as revenue.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $34.9 million, or 28.8%, to $156.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increased employee compensation-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, mainly driven by an increase in average headcount at Etsy and the acquisition of Reverb. General and administrative expenses increased to a lesser extent due to bad debt expense, which increased as a result of the growth in our business, but at a slower rate than revenue, and digital service tax, which was new in 2020. Additionally, we gained leverage as general and administrative expenses did not increase as fast as revenue. We expect an increase in stock-based compensation expense in 2021, related to continued growth in the business and to long-term equity incentive awards, which will be granted in the first quarter of 2021 to Josh Silverman, Etsy’s President and Chief Executive Officer.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net was $58.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, which increased $50.2 million from $8.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in expense was primarily due to an increase in non-cash interest expense and a non-cash loss on extinguishment of debt of $16.9 million related to the partial repurchase of the 2018 Notes. The increase in non-cash interest expense was primarily driven by our 2019 Notes, which were issued in September 2019 and had 12 month of interest expense in 2020, and to a lesser extent our 2020 Notes, which were issued in August 2020 and had approximately four months of interest expense in 2020. Additionally, there was an increase in foreign exchange loss primarily due to the change in U.S. dollar, Euro, Pound Sterling, and Canadian dollar exchange rates on our intercompany and other non-functional currency cash balances as well as a decrease in interest and dividend income related to our investment accounts and primarily driven by a decrease in interest rates in 2020 as compared to 2019. Following the adoption of ASU 2020-06 in the first quarter of 2021, we expect a decrease in non-cash interest expense related to the Notes as there would not be any further amortization of the debt discount due to its derecognition. For more information on the adoption of ASU 2020-06, see “Note 1-Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(Provision) Benefit for Income Taxes
Our income tax provision and benefit for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $16.5 million and $15.2 million, respectively.
The primary drivers of our income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 was tax expense of $63.6 million on income before income taxes, partially offset by tax benefits from employee stock-based compensation of $45.4 million.
The primary drivers of our income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2019 were tax benefits from employee stock-based compensation of $16.3 million, and a benefit related to research and development tax credit of $9.9 million, partially offset by tax expense of $11.5 million on income before income taxes.
Seasonality
Etsy sellers experience increased sales and use more Services during the fourth-quarter holiday shopping season. This has resulted in increased GMS and revenue for us during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, which can compare to lower GMS and revenue in the first quarter of the following fiscal year. For example, revenue in the first quarter of 2020 decreased when compared with revenue in the fourth quarter of 2019. We expect this seasonality to continue in future years. Our cost of revenue and marketing expenses also follow this trend, with the highest costs corresponding with the fourth quarter and lower costs in the first quarter of each fiscal year. As our growth rates moderate, the impact of these seasonality trends on our results of operations may become more pronounced.
Our quarterly revenue increased sequentially quarter-to-quarter for all periods within 2020, other than the first quarter of 2020, generally corresponding to our GMS performance in the same periods. We cannot assure you that this pattern of sequential revenue and GMS growth will continue. We believe that it is generally more meaningful to compare year-over-year results than sequential quarter-over-quarter results.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA
In this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we provide Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure that represents our net income adjusted to exclude: interest and other non-operating expense, net; provision (benefit) for income taxes; depreciation and amortization; stock-based compensation expense; foreign exchange loss (gain); acquisition-related expenses; non-ordinary course disputes; restructuring and other exit income; and loss on extinguishment of debt. Below is a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
We have included Adjusted EBITDA because it is a key measure used by our management and Board of Directors to evaluate our operating performance and trends, allocate internal resources, prepare and approve our annual budget, develop short- and long-term operating plans, determine incentive compensation, and assess the health of our business. As our Adjusted EBITDA increases, we are able to invest more in our platform.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our business as it removes the impact of certain non-cash items and certain variable charges.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect other non-operating expenses, net of other non-operating income, including net interest expense;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not consider the impact of stock-based compensation expense;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not consider the impact of foreign exchange loss (gain);
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect acquisition-related expenses;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not consider the impact of non-ordinary course disputes;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not consider the impact of restructuring and other exit income;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not consider the impact of the loss on extinguishment of debt; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including net income and our other GAAP results.
The following table reflects the reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated:
(1) Included in interest and other non-operating expense, net is primarily non-cash interest expense, including amortization of debt issuance costs, related to our convertible debt offerings, which were entered into in March 2018, September 2019, and August 2020.
(2) Included in depreciation and amortization is depreciation expense related to our headquarters lease, which is accounted for as a finance lease. Additionally, the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include amortization expense of acquired intangible assets and developed technology related to the acquisition of Reverb in the third quarter of 2019.
(3) See “Results of Operations-Other Expense, net” for more information on the fluctuation in foreign exchange loss (gain) in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(4) Acquisition-related expenses are expenses related to our acquisition of Reverb. For further information, see “Note 5-Business Combinations” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(5) During the third quarter of 2020, we repurchased $301.1 million aggregate principal amount of its outstanding 2018 Notes. We recognized a non-cash loss on extinguishment of debt of $16.9 million as a result. For more information see “Note 13-Debt ” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and cash equivalents, and short-term investments were $1.7 billion as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, we have $39.1 million in long-term investments that we can liquidate at short notice and with minimal penalties if needed. We also have the ability to draw down on our $200.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we had positive operating cash flows of $679.0 million. We believe that this capital structure, as well as the nature and framework of our business will allow us to meet all debt covenants, sustain our business operations, and be able to react to changing macroeconomic conditions.
The following table shows our cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, long-term investments, and net working capital as of the dates indicated:
As of December 31, 2020, a majority of our cash and cash equivalents, which were primarily held in cash deposits and money market funds, were held in the United States for future investments, working capital funding, and general corporate purposes. We fund our international operations from our funds held in the United States on an as-needed basis.
We invest in short- and long-term instruments, including fixed-income funds and U.S. Government and agency securities aligned with our investment strategy. These investments are intended to allow us to preserve our principal, maintain the ability to meet our liquidity needs, deliver positive yields across a balanced portfolio, and continue to provide us with direct fiduciary control. In accordance with our investment policy, all investments have maturities no longer than 37 months, with the average maturity of these investments maintained at 12 months or less.
See “Contractual Obligations” below for a detailed description of our material cash commitments as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, we have the ability to repurchase up to $250 million of our common stock under our board approved stock repurchase program.
Sources of Liquidity
In August 2020, we issued the 2020 Notes in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to the Securities Act. The initial conversion price of the 2020 Notes represented a premium of approximately 52.5% over the price of our common stock. The net proceeds from the sale of the 2020 Notes were $639.5 million after deducting the offering expenses. Based on the terms of the 2020 Notes, we have the option to pay or deliver cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination thereof, when a conversion notice is received. The 2020 Notes will mature on September 1, 2027, unless earlier converted or repurchased. Based on the daily closing prices of our stock during the quarter ended December 31, 2020, holders of the 2020 Notes are not eligible to convert their 2020 Notes during the first quarter of 2021.
In September 2019, we issued the 2019 Notes pursuant to the Securities Act. The initial conversion price of the 2019 Notes represented a premium of approximately 47.5% over the price of Etsy's common stock. The net proceeds from the sale of the 2019 Notes were $639.5 million after deducting initial purchasers’ discount and offering expenses. Based on the terms of the 2019 Notes, we have the option to pay or deliver cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination thereof, when a conversion notice is received. Based on the daily closing prices of our stock during the quarter ended December 31, 2020, holders of the 2019 Notes are eligible to convert their 2019 Notes during the first quarter of 2021. The 2019 Notes will mature on October 1, 2026, unless earlier converted or repurchased.
On February 25, 2019, we entered into a $200.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility pursuant to a Credit Agreement with several lenders (the “2019 Credit Agreement”). The 2019 Credit Agreement will mature in February 2024. The 2019 Credit Agreement includes a letter of credit sublimit of $30.0 million and a swingline loan sublimit of $10.0 million. At December 31, 2020, we did not have any borrowings under the 2019 Credit Agreement.
In March 2018, we issued the 2018 Notes pursuant to the Securities Act. The initial conversion price of the 2018 Notes represented a premium of approximately 37.5% over the price of Etsy’s common stock. The net proceeds from the sale of the 2018 Notes were $335.0 million after deducting initial purchasers’ discount and offering expenses. Based on the terms of the 2018 Notes, we have the option to pay or deliver cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination thereof, when a conversion notice is received. The 2018 Notes will mature on March 1, 2023, unless earlier converted or repurchased. During the third quarter of 2020, we paid $137.2 million in cash and issued approximately 7.3 million shares of Etsy’s common stock to repurchase $301.1 million aggregate principal amount of its outstanding 2018 Notes through privately negotiated transactions. Concurrently, we repurchased 1.3 million shares of Etsy’s common stock for $166.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, $43.9 million aggregate principal of the 2018 Notes remained outstanding. This transaction was accounted for as an extinguishment of debt, and we recognized a non-cash loss on extinguishment of $16.9 million. Based on the daily closing prices of our common stock during the quarter ended December 31, 2020, holders of the 2018 Notes are eligible to convert their 2018 Notes during the first quarter of 2021.
For more information on the 2020 Notes, 2019 Notes, 2019 Credit Agreement, and 2018 Notes, see “Note 13-Debt” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and short- and long-term investments, together with cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated operating cash needs for at least the next 12 months. While this belief is based on our current expectations and assumptions in light of current macroeconomic conditions, our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including the rate of our GMS and revenue growth, the amount and timing of our investments in marketing, product development, future acquisitions and investments, and our stock repurchase program, as well as those described in “Key Factors Affecting Our Performance” above and in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Historical Cash Flows
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operations are largely dependent on the amount of revenue generated on our platform, as well as associated cost of revenue and other operating expenses. Our primary source of cash from operating activities is cash collections from our customers. Net cash provided by operating activities in each period presented has been influenced by changes in working capital.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $679.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by cash net income of $554.8 million as a result of increased revenue generated on our platform, and changes in our operating assets and liabilities that provided $124.2 million in cash, primarily driven by volume and payment timing of accrued expenses in the period.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $206.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by cash net income of $196.9 million as a result of increased revenue generated on our platform, and changes in our operating assets and liabilities that provided $10.0 million in cash, driven by the timing of payables offset by prepayments made in the period and collections of accounts receivable.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Our primary investing activities consist of cash paid for acquisitions, sales and purchases of short- and long-term marketable securities, and capital expenditures, including investments in capitalized website development and internal-use software and purchases of property and equipment to support our overall business growth.
Net cash used in investing activities was $11.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily attributable to $7.1 million in capital expenditures, including $5.7 million for website development and internal-use software as we continued to invest in projects adding new features and functionality to the Etsy platform.
Net cash used in investing activities was $488.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily attributable to $270.4 million in cash paid to acquire Reverb, net purchases of marketable securities of $200.7 million, and $15.3 million in capital expenditures, including $7.8 million for website development and internal-use software as we continued to invest in projects adding new features and functionality to the Etsy platform and focused on growth investments, such as our migration to Google Cloud.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Our primary financing activities include proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes, repurchases of common stock, settlement of convertible senior notes, payments related to capped call transactions, payment of tax obligations on vested equity awards, proceeds from exercise of stock options, payments of debt issuance costs, payments on finance lease obligations.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $119.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily attributable to proceeds from the issuance of the 2020 Notes of $650.0 million and proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $25.3 million, partially offset by stock repurchases of $268.7 million, partial repurchase of the 2018 Notes of $137.2 million, payments of $74.7 million for the 2020 Capped Call Transactions, and payment of tax obligations on vested equity awards of $47.7 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $359.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily attributable to proceeds from the issuance of the 2019 Notes of $650.0 million and proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $9.8 million, partially offset by stock repurchases of $177.0 million, payments of $76.2 million for the 2019 Capped Call Transactions, payment of tax obligations on vested equity awards of $32.5 million, payment of debt issuance costs of $11.9 million and payments on finance lease obligations of $10.8 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K, in 2020, 2019, or 2018.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our future fixed contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Finance lease obligations consist of obligations under finance leases for computer and hosting equipment and the portion of our headquarters in Brooklyn, New York that is accounted for as a finance lease.
Operating lease obligations consist of obligations under non-cancelable operating leases for a portion of our headquarters in Brooklyn, New York and for our offices in San Francisco, Hudson (New York), Chicago, and Dublin.
Debt obligations consist of the 2020 Notes, 2019 Notes, and 2018 Notes which will mature on September 1, 2027, October 1, 2026, and March 1, 2023, respectively, unless earlier converted or repurchased.
Interest payments consist of interest due in connection with our 2020 Notes and 2019 Notes.
Purchase obligations consist of commitments related to cloud computing and other support services. For those agreements with variable terms, we do not estimate what the total obligation may be beyond any minimum quantities and/or pricing.
In addition, we have uncertain tax positions of $23.7 million and non-income tax related contingency reserves of $8.0 million, which amounts are not reflected in the table as the ultimate resolution and timing are uncertain. These non-income tax contingency reserves include $4.5 million due to the acquisition of Reverb, which is wholly offset by an indemnification asset of $3.4 million and a deferred tax asset of $1.1 million.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, equity, revenue, expenses, and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with stock-based compensation; income taxes, including the evaluation of uncertain tax positions; purchase price allocations for business combinations, valuation of the acquired intangibles purchased in a business combination, and valuation of goodwill and intangible assets; leases, including determining the incremental borrowing rate; and fair value of convertible senior notes are material in nature due to the subjectivity associated with them and have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting estimates. For further information on our critical accounting policies related to revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, income taxes, business combinations, goodwill, intangible assets, leases and fair value of financial instruments, see “Note 1-Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) are awarded to employees and members of our Board of Directors and are measured at fair value at each grant date. Stock-based compensation cost for stock options is measured on the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award using a Black-Scholes pricing model and recognized as an expense over the employee’s or director’s requisite service period on a straight-line basis. Our Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the expected volatility of the price of our common stock and the expected term of the option. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and these assumptions either increase or decrease, our stock-based compensation expense could materially differ in the future.
•Expected Volatility: As we do not have a sufficient trading history for our common stock, the expected stock price volatility for our common stock is estimated by taking the average historical price volatility for Etsy and certain industry peers based on daily price observations over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock option grants. Industry peers, which we have selected, consist of several public companies in the industry similar in size, stage of life cycle, and financial leverage. We expect to begin using the volatility of our own common stock share price beginning in the second quarter of 2021, as we believe we will then have a sufficient amount of historical information.
•Expected Term: The expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We base our expected term for awards issued to employees or members of our Board of Directors on the simplified method, which represents the average period from vesting to the expiration of the stock option. We expect to begin using our historical share option exercise experience to estimate the expected term of our stock option grants beginning in the second quarter of 2021.
For these assumptions, the weighted-average used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model in order to determine the fair value of stock options granted in the periods indicated were as follows:
We expect to continue to grant stock options and RSUs in the future, and, to the extent that we do, our stock-based compensation expense recognized in future periods will likely increase.
Income Taxes
We account for uncertainty in income taxes using a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities. The amount recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate audit settlement. The tax positions are reviewed on an ongoing basis and are adjusted as additional facts and information become available, including progress on tax audits, changes in interpretation of tax laws, developments in case law and closing of statutes of limitations. While we believe our tax positions are fully supportable, they may be challenged by various tax authorities. If actual results were to be materially different than estimated, it could result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements in future periods.
Business Combinations, Intangible Assets, and Goodwill
Etsy acquired Reverb on August 15, 2019 in a business combination. Determining the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed required management to use significant judgment and estimates, including estimates of future revenue and adjusted earnings before interest and taxes and discount rates. Our estimates of fair value were based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. If actual results were to be materially lower than originally estimated, it could result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements in future periods.
The goodwill recorded represented the excess of the aggregate fair value of the consideration transferred for the business combination over the fair value of the assets acquired, net of liabilities assumed. It is subject to an annual impairment test, and if we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then we are required to perform a quantitative assessment for impairment.
As of the annual impairment testing date in 2019, we determined that the estimated fair value of the Reverb reporting unit was not substantially in excess of its carrying value, due to the proximity of the acquisition date. Accordingly, we prepared a
quantitative assessment, in which determining the fair value requires management to use significant judgment and estimates, including estimates of future revenue and adjusted earnings before interest and taxes and the discount rate. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ materially from estimates. If actual results were to be materially lower than estimated, it could result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements in future periods.
As of the annual impairment testing date in 2020, we concluded that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the Reverb reporting unit is less than its carrying amount and therefore determined that no quantitative analysis was required. If actual results were to be materially lower than estimated it could result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements in future periods.
We did not recognize any goodwill impairment during the three years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Leases
Leases with a term greater than one year are recognized on the consolidated balance sheet as right-of-use (“ROU”) assets, lease obligations and, if applicable, long-term lease obligations. Lease obligations and their corresponding ROU assets are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected lease term. As the interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable, we utilize the appropriate incremental borrowing rate, which is the rate incurred to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment.
Fair Value of Convertible Senior Notes
In accounting for the issuance of the Notes and the extinguishment of the 2018 Notes, discussed in “Liquidity and Capital Resources-Sources of Liquidity,” we used estimates and assumptions to calculate the carrying amounts of the liability and equity components by measuring the fair value of similar securities. The carrying amount of the liability component was calculated by measuring the fair value of a similar liability that does not have an associated convertible feature. To measure the fair value of a similar liability that does not have an associated convertible feature, we discounted the contractual cash flows of each of the Notes at an estimated interest rate for a comparable liability. The carrying amount of the equity component, representing the conversion option, which does not meet the criteria for separate accounting as a derivative as it is indexed to our own stock, was determined by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the par value of each of the Notes. See “Note 13-Debt” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding our recently issued accounting pronouncements and recently adopted accounting pronouncements, please see “Note 1-Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.