ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our historical performance, financial condition and future prospects should be read in conjunction with Part I, Item 1. “Business” and the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” References in this Annual Report to the “Partnership,” “we,” “our,” “us” or similar expressions refer to Enviva Partners, LP, including its subsidiaries. References to “our sponsor” refer to Enviva Holdings, LP, and, where applicable, its wholly owned subsidiaries Enviva MLP Holdco, LLC and Enviva Development Holdings, LLC. References to “our General Partner” refer to Enviva Partners GP, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Enviva Holdings, LP. References to “Enviva Management Company” refer to Enviva Management Company, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Enviva Holdings, LP, together with its affiliates that provide services to us. References to “our employees” refer to the employees of Enviva Management Company and its affiliates who provide services to the Partnership. Please read Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements on page 1 and Part 1, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for information regarding certain risks inherent in our business.
For a discussion of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on February 26, 2020.
Basis of Presentation
In April 2019, we acquired from our sponsor all of the Class B units of Enviva Wilmington Holdings, LLC (the “Hamlet JV,” and such acquisition, the “Hamlet Drop-Down”). The Hamlet JV owns a wood pellet production plant in Hamlet, North Carolina (the “Hamlet plant”). We are the managing member of the Hamlet JV, which is partially owned by John Hancock Life Insurance Company (U.S.A.) and certain of its affiliates (collectively, where applicable, “John Hancock”). We accounted for the Hamlet JV as a consolidated subsidiary, not as a joint venture, following the Hamlet Drop-Down. For more information regarding our rights and obligations with respect to the Hamlet JV, see Note 17, Partners’ Capital-Hamlet JV.
Business Overview
We are a Delaware limited partnership formed in 2013 to aggregate a natural resource, wood fiber and process it into a transportable form, wood pellets. We sell a significant majority of our wood pellets through long-term, take-or-pay off-take contracts with creditworthy customers in the United Kingdom, Europe and increasingly in Japan. We own and operate nine plants (collectively, “our plants”) with a combined production capacity of approximately 5.3 million metric tons (“MT”) of wood pellets per year (“MTPY”) in Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida and Mississippi, the production of which is fully contracted through 2025. We export wood pellets through our wholly owned dry-bulk, deep-water marine terminal at the Port of Chesapeake, Virginia (the “Chesapeake terminal”) and terminal assets at the Port of Wilmington, North Carolina (the “Wilmington terminal”) and from third-party deep-water marine terminals in Savannah, Georgia (the “Savannah terminal”), Mobile, Alabama (the “Mobile terminal”) and Panama City, Florida (the “Panama City terminal”). All of our facilities are located in geographic regions with low input costs and favorable transportation logistics. Owning these cost-advantaged assets, the output from which is fully contracted through 2025, in a rapidly expanding industry provides us with a platform to generate stable and growing cash flows. Our plants are sited in robust fiber baskets providing stable pricing for the low-grade fiber used to produce wood pellets. Our raw materials are byproducts of traditional timber harvesting, principally low-value wood materials, such as trees generally not suited for sawmilling or other manufactured forest products, and tree tops and limbs, understory, brush and slash that are generated in a harvest.
Our strategy is to fully contract the wood pellet production from our plants under long-term, take-or-pay off-take contracts with a diversified and creditworthy customer base. Our long-term off-take contracts typically provide for fixed-price deliveries that may include provisions that escalate the price over time and provide for other margin protection. During 2020, production capacity from our wood pellet production plants and wood pellets sourced from our affiliates and third parties were approximately equal to the contracted volumes under our existing long-term, take-or-pay off-take contracts. Our long-term, take-or-pay off-take contracts provide for a product sales backlog of $14.6 billion and have a total weighted-average remaining term of 12.8 years from February 1, 2021. Under our current product sales backlog, our plants are fully contracted through 2025. Assuming all volumes under the firm and contingent long-term off-take contracts held by our sponsor were included with our product sales backlog for firm and contingent contracted product sales, our product sales backlog would increase to $19.9 billion and the total weighted-average remaining term from February 1, 2021 would increase to 14.0 years.
Our customers use our wood pellets as a substitute fuel for coal in dedicated biomass or co-fired coal power plants. Wood pellets serve as a suitable “drop-in” alternative to coal because of their comparable heat content, density and form. Due to the
uninterruptible nature of our customers’ fuel consumption, our customers require a reliable supply of wood pellets that meet stringent product specifications. We have built our operations and assets to deliver and certify the highest levels of product quality and our proven track record of reliable deliveries enables us to charge premium prices for this certainty. In addition to our customers’ focus on the reliability of supply, they are concerned about the combustion efficiency of the wood pellets and their safe handling. Because combustion efficiency is a function of energy density, particle size distribution, ash/inert content and moisture, our customers require that we supply wood pellets meeting minimum criteria for a variety of specifications and, in some cases, provide incentives for exceeding our contract specifications.
Recent Developments
Georgia Biomass Acquisition
On July 31, 2020, we acquired all of the limited liability company interests in Georgia Biomass Holding LLC, a Georgia limited liability company (“Georgia Biomass”) and the indirect owner of a wood pellet production plant located in Waycross, Georgia (the “Waycross plant”), for total consideration of $164.0 million in cash, after accounting for certain adjustments (the “Georgia Biomass Acquisition”). The Waycross plant has been in operation since 2011 and has a production capacity of 800,000 MTPY. The Waycross plant terminals its production at a two-dome pellet export terminal with a storage capacity of 50,000 MT at the Port of Savannah, Georgia pursuant to a lease and associated terminal services agreement effective through 2028. Approximately 500,000 MTPY of the Waycross plant’s production is contracted under separate agreements to one of our existing customers through 2024. In August 2020, Georgia Biomass converted to a limited liability company organized under the laws of the State of Delaware under the name Enviva Pellets Waycross Holdings Sub, LLC (“Waycross”).
Greenwood Drop-Down
On July 1, 2020, we acquired from our sponsor all of the limited liability company interests in Enviva Pellets Greenwood Holdings II, LLC (“Greenwood Holdings II”), the indirect owner of Enviva Pellets Greenwood, LLC, which owns a wood pellet production plant in Greenwood, South Carolina (the “Greenwood plant”), for a purchase price of $129.7 million, after accounting for certain adjustments and assumption of a $40.0 million, third-party promissory note bearing interest at 2.5% per year that we assumed at closing (such transaction, the “Greenwood Drop-Down”). The Greenwood Drop-Down was an asset acquisition between entities under common control and accounted for on the carryover basis of accounting. Accordingly, the consolidated financial statements for the period beginning July 1, 2020 reflect the acquisition.
On the date of and in connection with the Greenwood Drop-Down, our sponsor assigned five biomass off-take contracts to us (collectively, the “Associated Off-Take Contracts”). The Associated Off-Take Contracts call for aggregate annual deliveries of 1.4 million MTPY and mature between 2031 and 2041. Our sponsor also assigned to us fixed-rate shipping contracts with aggregate annual shipping volume of 1.4 million MTPY. The Associated Off-Take Contracts were assigned to fully contract wood pellets produced by the Greenwood plant and Waycross plant. The shipping contracts were assigned to facilitate transportation of those produced wood pellets.
The Greenwood plant current production capacity is 500,000 MTPY of wood pellets and transports its production via rail service to our terminal assets at the Port of Wilmington, North Carolina. We expect to invest a total of $28.0 million to expand the Greenwood plant’s production capacity to 600,000 MTPY. We expect to complete the expansion, which is currently underway, by year-end 2021.
Greenwood Make-Whole Agreement
On the date of the Greenwood Drop-Down, we entered into a make-whole agreement with our sponsor, pursuant to which our sponsor agreed to reimburse us for any construction costs incurred for the planned expansion of the Greenwood plant in excess of $28.0 million.
Greenwood Management Services Fee Waiver
On the date of the Greenwood Drop-Down, we entered into an agreement with Enviva Management Company pursuant to which (1) an aggregate of approximately $37.0 million in management services and other fees that otherwise would be owed by us under our management services agreement (“MSA”) with Enviva Management Company will be waived with respect to the period from the closing of the Greenwood Drop-Down through the fourth quarter of 2021 and (2) Enviva Management Company will continue to waive certain management services and other fees during 2022 unless and until the Greenwood plant’s production volumes equal or exceed 50,000 MT in any calendar month, in each case, to provide cash flow support to us during the planned expansion of the Greenwood plant. During the year ended December 31, 2020, $18.0 million of MSA fees were waived, of which $9.9 million was included in cost of goods sold and $8.1 million was included in related-party management services fees in general and administrative expenses.
Tack-On Notes Issuance
On July 15, 2020, we issued an additional $150.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our 6.5% senior unsecured notes due January 15, 2026 (the “2026 Notes ”) at an offering price of 103.75% of the principal amount, which implied an effective yield to maturity of approximately 5.7%. We received net proceeds of approximately $153.6 million from the offering after deducting discounts and commissions and offering costs.
Private Placement of Common Units
On June 18, 2020, we entered into a Common Unit Purchase Agreement (the “Unit Purchase Agreement”) with certain investors to sell 6,153,846 common units in a private placement at a price of $32.50 per common unit for gross proceeds of $200.0 million (the “Private Placement”). We used the net proceeds of $190.8 million from the Private Placement to fund a portion of the consideration for each of the Greenwood Drop-Down and the Georgia Biomass Acquisition.
Pursuant to the Unit Purchase Agreement, we entered into a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with the investors in connection with the closing of the Private Placement, pursuant to which we agreed to file and maintain a registration statement (the “Shelf Registration Statement”) with respect to the resale of the common units on the terms set forth therein. The Registration Rights Agreement also provides certain investors with customary piggyback registration rights. On July 10, 2020, we filed the Shelf Registration Statement and on July 20, 2020, the Shelf Registration Statement was declared effective.
Financing Activities
Our net proceeds of $190.8 million from the Private Placement and the net proceeds of the tack-on offering of the 2026 Notes of $153.6 million were used primarily to pay for the $129.7 million purchase price for the Greenwood Drop-Down, and to pay $164.8 million of the purchase price for the Georgia Biomass Acquisition.
Mid-Atlantic Expansions
During 2019, we started construction to increase the aggregate wood pellet production capacity of our plants in Northampton, North Carolina (the “Northampton plant”), and Southampton, Virginia (the “Southampton plant”) (together, the “Mid-Atlantic Expansions”) by approximately 400,000 MTPY. In 2021, we completed the construction of the Mid-Atlantic Expansions and are in the process of ramping the expansions. As of December 31, 2020, we have paid approximately $120.0 million, and expect to pay approximately $10.0 million during 2021, in connection with the expansions.
Commitment to Achieve Carbon-Neutral Operations
Consistent with our mission to displace coal, grow more trees and fight climate change, we and our sponsor recently announced our commitment to become “net-zero” in GHG emissions from our operations by 2030. The product we manufacture helps reduce the lifecycle GHG emissions of our customers, but we believe we must also do our part within our operations to mitigate the impacts of climate change. We expect to accomplish neutrality with respect to our Scope 1 emissions (i.e., direct emissions from our manufacturing) by improving energy efficiency and adopting lower-carbon processes, as well as through investment in carbon offsets. We also plan to neutralize our Scope 2 emissions (i.e., indirect emissions from energy we purchase) by using 100% renewable energy by 2030 through the purchase of renewable electricity and/or onsite generation where practicable. Moreover, we will seek to proactively engage with our suppliers, transportation partners and other stakeholders to drive innovative improvements in our supply chain to reduce our Scope 3 emissions (i.e., indirect emissions in our value chain). We intend to report our Scopes 1, 2 and 3 emissions annually and fully meet the requirements of CDP (formerly known as the Carbon Disclosure Project) by 2022. Although it is difficult to project the incremental cost to our operations in 2030, we do not expect any material impact to our financial performance as a result of our efforts to achieve “net-zero” in GHG emissions from our operations.
Outbreak of the Novel Coronavirus
The outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) has significantly adversely impacted global markets and continues to present global public health and economic challenges. Although the full impact of COVID-19 is unknown and rapidly evolving, to date, our operations have not been materially impacted by the outbreak.
We have taken prescriptive safety measures including social distancing, hygienic policies and procedures and other steps recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (the “CDC”), and adopted the CDC’s risk management approach, since the beginning of the outbreak, and have established risk levels based on the degree to which the virus has spread in a given community and the nature of the work performed at that location. Within our field operations, we have continued operations largely as normal with the additional precautionary measures; however, we continue to monitor local data
on a daily basis and have prioritized putting the right plans, procedures and measures in place to mitigate the risk of exposure and infection and the related impacts to our business.
We specifically designed our operations and logistics systems with flexibility and redundancies so they are capable of effectively responding to unforeseen events. We operate a portfolio of nine wood pellet production plants geographically dispersed across the Southeast U.S. We export our product from a portfolio of five bulk terminals and transport it to our customers under long-term, fixed-price shipping contracts with multiple shipping partners. These operations currently are unaffected by COVID-19.
In March 2020, the United States declared the COVID-19 pandemic a national emergency, and several states and municipalities, including states in which we own assets or conduct business, have declared public health emergencies and taken extraordinary actions in response, including issuing “stay-at-home” orders and similar mandates (“Orders”) for many businesses to curtail or cease normal operations. To date, we have not been materially impacted by the Orders, which exempt or exclude businesses that have been designated essential critical infrastructure, such as ours, from various restrictions they impose.
As of December 31, 2020, we had liquidity, which included cash on hand and availability under our $350.0 million revolving credit facility of $229.7 million, and we have no debt maturities until 2023. Our wood pellet production capacity is committed under long-term, take-or-pay off-take contracts with fixed pricing and fixed volumes that are not impacted by the market prices of crude oil, natural gas, power or heat. Furthermore, most of our current deliveries are to Europe, where they fuel grid-critical base load, dispatchable generation facilities that provide power and heat required for local communities to navigate through their own COVID-19 responses. As of December 31, 2020, each of our customers is in compliance with their agreements with us, including payment terms.
We do, however, remain vigilant about the unfolding global crisis and continue to monitor and manage the potential health, safety, business and other risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Nonetheless, we have not experienced these issues in any significant way to date, and we have plans that we believe would mitigate their potential impact if we were to face such issues in the future.
Factors Impacting Comparability of Our Financial Results
Greenwood Drop-Down
The Greenwood Drop-Down was an asset acquisition between entities under common control and accounted for on the carryover basis of accounting. Accordingly, the consolidated financial statements for the period beginning July 1, 2020 reflect the acquisition. For more information regarding the Greenwood Acquisition, see Note 1, Description of Business and Basis of Presentation-Basis of Presentation-Enviva Pellets Greenwood and Note 3, Transactions Between Entities Under Common Control.
Georgia Biomass Acquisition
The Georgia Biomass Acquisition was recorded as a business combination and accounted for using the acquisition method. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed were recognized at fair value on the acquisition date of July 31, 2020, and the difference between the fair value of consideration transferred, which excludes acquisition-related costs, and the fair values of the identified net assets acquired, was recognized as goodwill. For more information regarding the Georgia Biomass Acquisition, see Note 1, Description of Business and Basis of Presentation-Georgia Biomass Holding LLC and Note 4, Acquisition.
Private Placement of Common Units
In June 2020, we issued 6,153,846 common units in a private placement offering for net proceeds of approximately $190.8 million, net of $9.2 million of issuance costs.
Hamlet Drop-Down
On April 2, 2019, we acquired from our sponsor all of the Class B units of Enviva Wilmington Holdings, LLC (the “Hamlet JV,” and such acquisition, the “Hamlet Drop-Down”). We are the managing member of the Hamlet JV, which is partially owned by John Hancock Life Insurance Company (U.S.A.) and certain of its affiliates (collectively, where applicable, “John Hancock”).
The Hamlet JV owns a wood pellet production plant in Hamlet, North Carolina (the “Hamlet plant”) and has a firm 15-year take-or-pay off-take contract to supply a customer with nearly 1.0 million MTPY of wood pellets following a ramp period through 2034. Prior to the Hamlet Drop-Down, we already had off-take contracts with the Hamlet JV to supply 470,000 MTPY of the volumes to be delivered pursuant to the 1.0 million MTPY contract; consequently, we acquired 500,000 MTPY in
incremental product sales volumes in connection with the Hamlet Drop-Down. The Hamlet plant became operational during the second quarter of 2019.
We accounted for the Hamlet JV as a consolidated subsidiary, not as a joint venture, following the Hamlet Drop-Down on April 2, 2019. We included all accounts of the Hamlet JV in our consolidated results as of April 2, 2019 as the Class B Units represent a controlling interest in the Hamlet JV. We are generally unrestricted in managing the assets and cash flows of the Hamlet JV; however, certain decisions, such as those relating to the issuance and redemption of equity interests in the Hamlet JV, guarantees of indebtedness and fundamental changes, including mergers and acquisitions, asset sales and liquidation and dissolution of the Hamlet JV, require the approval of the members of the Hamlet JV. For more information regarding the Hamlet Drop-Down, see Note 1, Description of Business and Basis of Presentation-Basis of Presentation-Enviva Wilmington, Holdings, LLC and Note 15, Related-Party Transactions-Drop-Down Agreements-Hamlet Drop-Down.
2026 Notes
During December 2019, we issued $600.0 million in principal amount of the 2026 Notes in private placements under Rule 144A and Regulation S of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). We received gross proceeds of approximately $601.8 million from the offerings and net proceeds of approximately $595.8 million after deducting commissions and expenses. We used the net proceeds from the offerings (1) to redeem our existing $355.0 million principal amount of 8.5% senior unsecured notes due 2021, including payment of the related redemption premium, (2) to repay borrowings under our senior secured revolving credit facility, including payment of the related accrued interest and (3) for general partnership purposes. Interest payments are due semi-annually in arrears on January 15 and July 15 of each year, commencing July 15, 2020.
As discussed above in “Recent Developments,” we issued an additional $150.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 2026 Notes in July 2020.
How We Generate Revenue
Overview
We primarily earn revenue by supplying wood pellets to our customers under off-take contracts, the majority of which are long-term in nature. Our off-take contracts are considered “take-or-pay” because they include a firm obligation of the customer to take a fixed quantity of product at a stated price and provisions that require that we be compensated in the case of a customer’s failure to accept all or a part of the contracted volumes or termination of a contract by a customer. Each of our long-term off-take contracts defines the annual volume of wood pellets that a customer is required to purchase and we are required to sell, the fixed price per MT for product satisfying a base net calorific value and other technical specifications. These prices are fixed for the entire term, and are subject to adjustments which may include annual inflation-based adjustments or price escalators, price adjustments for product specifications, as well as, in some instances, price adjustments due to changes in underlying indices. In addition to sales of our product under these long-term off-take contracts, we routinely sell wood pellets under shorter-term contracts, which range in volume and tenor and, in some cases, may include only one specific shipment. Because each of our off-take contracts is a bilaterally negotiated agreement, our revenue over the duration of such contracts does not generally follow observable current market pricing trends. Our performance obligations under these contracts include the delivery of wood pellets, which are aggregated into MT. We account for each MT as a single performance obligation. Our revenue from the sale of wood pellets we produce is recognized upon satisfaction of the performance obligation when control transfers to the customer at the time of loading wood pellets onto a ship.
Depending on the specific off-take contract, shipping terms under our long-term contracts are either Cost, Insurance and Freight (“CIF”), Cost and Freight (“CFR”) or Free On Board (“FOB”). Under a CIF contract, we procure and pay for shipping costs, which include insurance and all other charges, up to the port of destination for the customer. Under a CFR contract, we procure and pay for shipping costs, which include insurance (excluding marine cargo insurance) and all other charges, up to the port of destination for the customer. Shipping under CIF and CFR contracts after control has passed to the customer is considered a fulfillment activity rather than a performance obligation and associated expenses are accrued and included in the price to the customer. Under FOB contracts, the customer is directly responsible for shipping costs.
In some cases, we may purchase shipments of product from third-party suppliers and resell them in back-to-back transactions (“purchase and sale transactions”). We typically are the principal in such transactions because we control the wood pellets prior to transferring them to the customer and therefore recognize related revenue on a gross basis.
Other Revenue
Other revenue includes fees from customers related to cancellations, deferrals or accelerations of shipments and the Commercial Services.
We recognize third- and related-party terminal services revenue ratably over the contract term. Terminal services are performance obligations that are satisfied over time, as customers simultaneously receive and consume the benefits of the terminal services we perform. The consideration is generally fixed for minimum quantities and services above-minimum quantities are generally billed based on a per-MT rate.
Contracted Backlog
As of February 1, 2021, we had approximately $14.6 billion of product sales backlog for firm and contingent contracted product sales to our long-term off-take customers and have a total weighted-average remaining term of 12.8 years compared to approximately $10.6 billion and a total weighted-average remaining term of 11.4 years as of February 1, 2020. Contracted backlog represents the revenue to be recognized under existing contracts assuming deliveries occur as specified in the contracts. Contracted future product sales denominated in foreign currencies, excluding revenue hedged with foreign currency forward contracts, are included in U.S. Dollars at February 1, 2021 forward rates. The contracted backlog includes forward prices including inflation, foreign currency and commodity prices. The amount also includes the effects of related foreign currency derivative contracts. Please read Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Derivative Instruments” for more information regarding our foreign currency forward contracts.
Our expected future product sales revenue under our contracted backlog as of February 1, 2021 is as follows (in millions):
Assuming all volumes under the firm and contingent off-take contracts held by our sponsor were included with our product sales contracted backlog for firm and contingent contracted product sales, the total weighted-average remaining term as of February 1, 2021 would increase to 14.0 years and product sales contracted backlog would increase to $19.9 billion as follows (in millions):
Included in the product sales contracted backlog above are $2.9 billion of contingent contracts held by our sponsor.
Costs of Conducting Our Business
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold includes the costs to produce and deliver our wood pellets to customers, reimbursable shipping-related costs associated with specific off-take contracts with CIF or CFR shipping terms and costs associated with purchase and sale transactions. The primary expenses incurred to produce and deliver our wood pellets consist of raw material, production and distribution costs.
We have strategically located our plants in the Mid-Atlantic and Gulf Coast regions of the United States, geographic areas in which wood fiber sources are plentiful and readily available. We have short-term and long-term contracts to manage the supply of raw materials into our plants. Delivered wood fiber costs include stumpage as well as harvesting, transportation and, in some cases, size reduction services provided by our suppliers. The majority of our product volumes are sold under off-take contracts that include cost pass-through mechanisms to mitigate increases in raw material and distribution costs.
Production costs at our production plants consist of labor, energy, tooling, repairs and maintenance and plant overhead costs. Production costs also include depreciation expense associated with the use of our plants and equipment and any gain or loss on disposal of associated assets. Some of our off-take contracts include price escalators that mitigate inflationary pressure
on certain components of our production costs. In addition to the wood pellets that we produce at our owned and operated production plants, we selectively purchase additional quantities of wood pellets from third- and related-party wood pellet producers.
Distribution costs include all transportation costs from our plants to our port locations, any storage or handling costs while the product remains at port and shipping costs related to the delivery of our product from our port locations to our customers. Both the strategic location of our plants and our ownership or control of our deep-water terminals have allowed for the efficient and cost-effective transportation of our wood pellets. We seek to mitigate shipping risk by entering into long-term, fixed-price shipping contracts with reputable shippers matching the terms and volumes of our off-take contracts pursuant to which we are responsible for arranging shipping. Certain of our off-take contracts include pricing adjustments for volatility in fuel prices, which allow us to pass the majority of the fuel price-risk associated with shipping through to our customers.
Costs associated with purchase and sale transactions are included in cost of goods sold.
Raw material, production and distribution costs associated with delivering our wood pellets to our owned and leased marine terminals and third- and related-party wood pellet purchase costs are capitalized as a component of inventory. Fixed production overhead, including the related depreciation expense, is allocated to inventory based on the normal capacity of the production plants. These costs are reflected in cost of goods sold when inventory is sold. Distribution costs associated with shipping our wood pellets to our customers are expensed as incurred. Our inventory is recorded using the first-in, first-out method (“FIFO”). Given the nature of our inventory, the calculation of cost of goods sold is based on estimates used in the valuation of the FIFO inventory and in determining the specific composition of inventory that is sold to each customer.
Recoveries from customers for certain costs incurred at the discharge port under our off-take contracts are not considered a part of the transaction price, and therefore are excluded from product sales and included as an offset to cost of goods sold.
General and Administrative Expenses
We and our General Partner are party to the MSAs. Under the MSAs, direct or indirect internal or third-party expenses incurred are either directly identifiable or allocated to us. Our sponsor estimates the percentage of employee salaries and related benefits, third-party costs, office rent and expenses and any other overhead costs to be provided to us. Each month, our sponsor allocates the actual costs incurred using these estimates. Our sponsor also charges us for any directly identifiable costs such as goods or services provided at our request. We believe our sponsor’s assumptions and allocations have been made on a reasonable basis and are the best estimate of the costs that we would have incurred on a stand-alone basis.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
Adjusted Net Income
We define adjusted net income as net income excluding interest expense associated with incremental borrowings related to a fire that occurred in February 2018 at the Chesapeake terminal (the “Chesapeake Incident”) and Hurricanes Florence and Michael (the “Hurricane Events”), early retirement of debt obligation and acquisition and integration costs, adjusting for the effect of certain sales and marketing, scheduling, sustainability, consultation, shipping, and risk management services (collectively, “Commercial Services”), and including certain non-cash waivers of fees for management services provided to us by our sponsor (collectively, “MSA Fee Waivers”). We believe that adjusted net income enhances investors’ ability to compare the past financial performance of our underlying operations with our current performance separate from certain items of gain or loss that we characterize as unrepresentative of our ongoing operations.
Adjusted Gross Margin and Adjusted Gross Margin per Metric Ton
We define adjusted gross margin as gross margin excluding asset impairment and disposals, depreciation and amortization, changes in unrealized derivative instruments related to hedged items included in gross margin, non-cash unit compensation expenses and acquisition and integration costs, adjusting for the effect of Commercial Services and including MSA Fee Waivers. We define adjusted gross margin per metric ton as adjusted gross margin per metric ton of wood pellets sold. We believe adjusted gross margin and adjusted gross margin per metric ton are meaningful measures because they compare our revenue-generating activities to our operating costs for a view of profitability and performance on a total-dollar and a per-metric ton basis. Adjusted gross margin and adjusted gross margin per metric ton will primarily be affected by our ability to meet targeted production volumes and to control direct and indirect costs associated with procurement and delivery of wood fiber to our wood pellet production plants and our production and distribution of wood pellets.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define adjusted EBITDA as net income excluding depreciation and amortization, interest expense, income tax expense (benefit), early retirement of debt obligation, non-cash unit compensation expense, asset impairments and disposals, changes in unrealized derivative instruments related to hedged items included in gross margin and other income and expense,and acquisition and integration costs, adjusting for the effect of Commercial Services, and including MSA Fee Waivers. Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental measure used by our management and other users of our financial statements, such as investors, commercial banks and research analysts, to assess the financial performance of our assets without regard to financing methods or capital structure.
Distributable Cash Flow
We define distributable cash flow as adjusted EBITDA less maintenance capital expenditures, cash income tax expenses and interest expense net of amortization of debt issuance costs, debt premium, original issue discounts, interest expense associated with the redemption of the $355.0 million of aggregate principal amount of 6.5% senior unsecured notes due 2021 (the “2021 Notes”) and the impact from incremental borrowings related to the Chesapeake Incident and Hurricane Events. We use distributable cash flow as a performance metric to compare our cash-generating performance from period to period and to compare the cash-generating performance for specific periods to the cash distributions (if any) that are expected to be paid to our unitholders. We do not rely on distributable cash flow as a liquidity measure.
Limitations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted net income, adjusted gross margin, adjusted gross margin per metric ton, adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow are not financial measures presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). We believe that the presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information to investors in assessing our financial condition and results of operations. Our non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered as alternatives to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. Each of these non-GAAP financial measures has important limitations as an analytical tool because they exclude some, but not all, items that affect the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. You should not consider adjusted net income, adjusted gross margin, adjusted gross margin per metric ton, adjusted EBITDA or distributable cash flow in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
Our definitions of these non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies, thereby diminishing their utility. Please see below for a reconciliation of each of adjusted net income, adjusted gross margin and adjusted gross margin per metric ton, adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Revenue
Revenue related to product sales for wood pellets produced or procured by us increased to $830.5 million in 2020 from $674.3 million in 2019. The $156.3 million, or 23%, increase was primarily attributable to a 22% increase in product sales volumes for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $32.5 million in payments to us for adjusting deliveries under our take-or-pay off-take contracts, which otherwise would have been included in product sales. Other revenue also included $4.1 million from the Commercial Services during the year ended December 31, 2020. The $32.5 million and $4.1 million in other revenue was recognized under a breakage model based on when the pellets would have been loaded.
Cost of goods sold
Total cost of goods sold increased to $768.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $603.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $164.6 million, or 27%. The increase was primarily attributable to a 22% increase in sales volumes and a 4% increase in depreciation and amortization expense, mainly associated with the recent acquisitions, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross margin
Gross margin was $107.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $81.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $26.1 million, or 32%. The $26.1 million increase in gross margin was principally attributable to a 22% increase in product sales volumes, primarily offset by increases in depreciation and amortization expense associated with the recent acquisitions, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Adjusted gross margin and adjusted gross margin per metric ton
We earned an adjusted gross margin of $204.9 million, or $47.29 per MT, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $151.6 million, or $42.54 per MT, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in adjusted gross margin was primarily due to factors discussed above under the heading “Gross margin.”
Adjusted gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 excludes $4.3 million of incremental costs, which are unrepresentative of our ongoing operations, in connection with our evaluation of a third-party wood pellet production plant we considered purchasing (the “Potential Target”). When we commenced our review, the Potential Target had recently returned to operations following an extended shutdown during a bankruptcy proceeding with the intent of demonstrating favorable operations prior to proceeding to an auction sale process; however, the Potential Target had not yet established a logistics chain through a viable export terminal, given that the terminal through which the plant historically had exported was not operational at the time and was not reasonably certain to become operational in the future. Accordingly, as part of our diligence of the Potential Target, we developed an alternative logistics chain to bring the Potential Target’s wood pellets to market and began purchasing the production of the Potential Target for a trial period. The incremental costs associated with the establishment and evaluation of this new logistics chain primarily consist of barge, freight, trucking, storage and shiploading services. We have completed our evaluation of the alternative logistics chain and, therefore, do not expect to incur additional costs of this nature in the future.
During the quarter ended December 31, 2019, we received a non-refundable payment of $5.6 million from a customer in consideration for our performance during the quarter of certain sales and marketing, scheduling, sustainability, consultation, shipping and risk management services (collectively, “Commercial Services”) that were outside of the scope of our existing take-or-pay off-take contract. The customer had requested the Commercial Services, among other things, in order to avoid its exposure to market price volatility associated with its anticipated failure to take required deliveries of certain wood pellet volumes during the fourth quarter of 2019 and first half of 2020 pursuant to the off-take contract. The Commercial Services had a value to the customer of $5.6 million. We included the entire non-refundable payment of $5.6 million in our publicly stated guidance for 2019 in our press release issued October 30, 2019.
Under GAAP, we recognized $1.5 million of the $5.6 million payment as revenue during the fourth quarter of 2019, under the breakage model of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), and recorded the remaining $4.1 million as deferred revenue as of December 31, 2019, which was recognized as revenue during the first six months of 2020 in accordance with the original product sales schedule under the off-take contract. For presentation of our non-GAAP measures, we included the $4.1 million in adjusted net income, adjusted gross margin, adjusted gross margin per MT and adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019 as such amount relates to our performance of certain Commercial Services, which we completed and for which we were compensated in 2019. The $4.1 million increased adjusted net income, adjusted gross margin per MT and adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019 and decreased such measures by an equal amount during the first six months of 2020.
General and administrative expenses
Total general and administrative expenses were $45.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $36.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $9.0 million increase in total general and administrative expenses is primarily associated with increased acquisition and integration costs.
Interest expense
We incurred $44.9 million of interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 and $39.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in interest expense from the prior year was primarily attributable to an increase in borrowings as a result of our acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Early retirement of debt obligation
In 2019, we redeemed all $355.0 million of aggregate principal amount of 2021 Notes and recognized a $9.0 million loss in early retirement of debt obligation consisting of a $7.5 million debt redemption premium and $1.5 million for the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs, original issue discount and premium. The amounts were amortized over the term of the 2021 Notes and were expensed in December 2019 when we repaid $355.0 million of aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes.
Income Tax
We incurred $0.1 million of income tax expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to an entity acquired in the Georgia Biomass Acquisition.
Adjusted net income
We generated adjusted net income of $46.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $39.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net income and adjusted net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the factors described below under the heading “Adjusted EBITDA,” offset by approximately $6.5 million of acquisition and integration costs and approximately $23.0 million of incremental depreciation, amortization and interest expenses mainly associated with the recent acquisitions, as well as changes in certain non-cash expenses.
Adjusted EBITDA
We generated adjusted EBITDA of $190.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $141.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $49.0 million increase was primarily attributable to the factors described above under the heading “Adjusted gross margin per metric ton.”
Distributable cash flow
The following is a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to distributable cash flow:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity include cash and cash equivalent balances, cash generated from operations, borrowings under our revolving credit commitments and, from time to time, debt and equity offerings. Our primary liquidity requirements are to fund working capital, service our debt, maintain cash reserves, finance plant acquisitions and plant expansion projects, finance maintenance capital expenditures and pay distributions. We believe cash on hand, cash generated from our operations and the availability of our revolving credit commitments will be sufficient to meet our primary liquidity requirements. However, future capital expenditures, such as expenditures made in relation to plant acquisitions and/or plant expansion projects, and other cash requirements could be higher than we currently expect as a result of various factors. For example, COVID-19 has disrupted debt and equity capital markets and could restrict our access to, or increase the cost of capital from,
public financing activities. Additionally, our ability to generate sufficient cash from our operating activities depends on our future performance, which is subject to general economic, political, financial, competitive and other factors beyond our control.
Cash Distributions
To the extent we have sufficient cash from our operations after establishment of cash reserves and payment of fees and expenses, we intend to pay to holders of our common units cash distributions of at least the minimum quarterly distribution of $0.4125 per common unit per quarter, which equates to approximately $16.5 million per quarter, or approximately $66.0 million per year, based on the number of common units outstanding as of February 15, 2021.
Capital Requirements
We operate in a capital-intensive industry, which requires significant investments to maintain and upgrade existing capital. Our capital requirements primarily have consisted, and we anticipate will continue to consist, of the following:
•Maintenance capital expenditures, which are cash expenditures incurred to maintain our long-term operating income or operating capacity. These expenditures typically include certain system integrity, compliance and safety improvements; and
•Growth capital expenditures, which are cash expenditures we expect will increase our operating income or operating capacity over the long term. Growth capital expenditures include acquisitions or construction of new capital assets or capital improvements such as additions to or improvements on our existing capital assets as well as projects intended to extend the useful life of assets.
The classification of capital expenditures as either maintenance or growth is made at the individual asset level during our budgeting process and as we approve, execute and monitor our capital spending.
In 2021, we completed the construction of the Mid-Atlantic Expansions. As of December 31, 2020, we have paid approximately $120.0 million and expect to pay approximately $10.0 million during 2021.
We expect to invest a total of $28.0 million to expand the Greenwood plant’s production capacity to 600,000 MTPY. We expect to complete the expansion, which is currently underway, by year-end 2021.
We have commenced a series of projects (the “Multi-Plant Expansions”) at our Sampson plant, Hamlet plant and Cottondale plant, subject to receiving the necessary permits. We expect to invest approximately $50.0 million to de-bottleneck manufacturing processes, eliminate certain costs and increase production capacity. We expect to complete the Multi-Plant Expansions by the end of 2022.
As part of the planned expansion projects or otherwise as part of our ordinary system improvements, we will continue to invest in the purchase and installation of emissions control equipment, such as regenerative thermal oxidizers, cyclones and baghouses at our existing plants, where required for environmental compliance or as part of our environmental leadership strategy. The expenditure amounts mentioned above for the Mid-Atlantic Expansions, the Greenwood plant expansion and the Multi-Plant Expansions include the investment in emissions control equipment.
Our financing strategy is to fund acquisitions, drop-downs and major expansion projects with 50% equity and 50% debt.
Long-Term Debt
2026 Notes
On December 9 and December 12, 2019, Enviva Partners, LP, with its wholly owned subsidiary Enviva Partners Finance Corp., issued $550.0 million and $50.0 million, respectively, of the 2026 Notes in private placements under Rule 144A and Regulation S of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for a total combined aggregate principal amount outstanding of $600.0 million maturing in 2026. We received gross proceeds of approximately $601.8 million from the offerings and net proceeds of approximately $595.8 million after deducting commissions and expenses. We used the net proceeds from the offerings to (1) redeem our existing $355.0 million principal amount of 8.5% senior unsecured 2021 Notes, including payment of the related redemption premium, (2) repay borrowings under our senior secured revolving credit facility, including payment of the related accrued interest and (3) for general partnership purposes. Interest payments are due semi-annually in arrears on January 15 and July 15 of each year, commencing July 15, 2020.
In July 2020, we issued an additional $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Notes at an offering price of 103.75% of the principal amount (the “Additional Notes”). We received net proceeds of approximately $153.6 million from the Additional Notes offering after deducting discounts and commissions. We used the net proceeds from the Additional Notes
offering to fund a portion of the cash consideration for the Greenwood Drop-Down and Georgia Biomass Acquisition, to repay borrowings under our revolving credit facility and for general partnership purposes.
We may redeem all or a portion of the 2026 Notes at any time at the applicable redemption price, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any (subject to the right of holders of record on the relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the redemption date), and, in some cases, plus a make-whole premium.
We were in compliance with the covenants and restrictions associated with, and no events of default existed under, the indenture governing the 2026 Notes as of December 31, 2020. The 2026 Notes are guaranteed jointly and severally on a senior unsecured basis by our existing subsidiaries (excluding Enviva Partners Finance Corp.) that guarantee certain of our indebtedness and may be guaranteed by certain future restricted subsidiaries. For additional information on our senior secured credit facility, see Note 14, Long-Term Debt and Finance Lease Obligations.
2021 Notes
On December 9, 2019, we redeemed all $355.0 million of aggregate principal amount of 6.5% senior unsecured notes due 2021 (the “2021 Notes”) and recognized a $9.0 million loss on the early retirement of debt obligation consisting of a $7.5 million debt redemption premium and $1.5 million for the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs, original issue discount and premium. The amounts were amortized over the term of the 2021 Notes and were expensed in December 2019 when we repaid $355.0 million of aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes. The redemption of the 2021 Notes was funded from a portion of the net proceeds from the issuance of the 2026 Notes.
Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility
We have a $350.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility that matures on October 18, 2023.
Borrowings under the revolving credit commitments thereunder bear interest, at our option, at either a Eurodollar rate or at a base rate, in each case, plus an applicable margin. The applicable margin will fluctuate between 1.75% per annum and 3.00% per annum, in the case of Eurodollar rate borrowings, or between 0.75% per annum and 2.00% per annum, in the case of base rate loans, in each case, based on our Total Leverage Ratio (as defined in our credit agreement) at such time, with 25 basis point increases or decreases for each 0.50 increase or decrease in our Total Leverage Ratio from 2.75:1:00 to 4.75:1:00.
We are required to pay a commitment fee on the daily unused amount under the revolving credit commitments at a rate between 0.25% and 0.50% per annum.
The credit agreement contains certain covenants, restrictions and events of default. We are required to maintain (1) a maximum Total Leverage Ratio at or below 4.75 to 1.00 (or 5.00 to 1.00 during a Material Transaction Period and (2) a minimum Interest Coverage Ratio (as defined in our credit agreement) of not less than 2.25 to 1.00.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants and restrictions associated with, and no events of default existed under, the credit agreement governing our senior secured revolving credit facility. Our obligations under the senior secured revolving credit facility are guaranteed by certain of our subsidiaries and secured by liens on substantially all of our assets; however, the senior secured revolving credit facility is not guaranteed by the Hamlet JV or secured by liens on its assets. For additional information on our senior secured revolving credit facility, see Note 14, Long-Term Debt and Finance Lease Obligations.
Seller Note
In connection with the Greenwood Drop-Down, we became a party to, and a guarantor of, a promissory note (the “Seller Note”) with a remaining principal balance of $40.0 million, which was initially recorded at its carrying value of $36.9 million. The Seller Note matures in February 2023 and has an interest rate of 2.5% per annum. Principal and related interest payments are due annually through February 2022 and quarterly thereafter.
Shelf Registration - Equity Interests in the Partnership
We filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC on June 21, 2019 to allow us, from time to time, in one or more offerings, to offer and sell (1) common units representing limited partner interests in Enviva Partners, LP and (2) preferred units representing equity interests in Enviva Partners, LP. The aggregate initial offering price of all securities sold by us under the effective shelf registration statement may not exceed $500.0 million.
On June 18, 2020, we entered into a Common Unit Purchase Agreement (the “Unit Purchase Agreement”) with certain investors to sell 6,153,846 common units in a private placement at a price of $32.50 per common unit for gross proceeds of
$200.0 million (the “Private Placement”). We used the net proceeds of $190.8 million from the Private Placement to fund a portion of the consideration for each of the Greenwood Drop-Down and the Georgia Biomass Acquisition.
Pursuant to the Unit Purchase Agreement, we entered into a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with the investors in connection with the closing of the Private Placement, pursuant to which we agreed to file and maintain a registration statement (the “Shelf Registration Statement”) with respect to the resale of the common units on the terms set forth therein. The Registration Rights Agreement also provides certain investors with customary piggyback registration rights. On July 10, 2020, we filed the Shelf Registration Statement and on July 20, 2020, the Shelf Registration Statement was declared effective.
At-the-Market Offering Program
Pursuant to an equity distribution agreement dated August 8, 2016, we may offer and sell common units from time to time through a group of managers, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in such agreement, of up to an aggregate sales amount of $100.0 million (the “ATM Program”).
We did not sell any units under the ATM Program during 2020. As of February 15, 2021, $88.4 million remained available for issuance under the ATM Program.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our net cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $119.3 million and $53.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $65.5 million increase in cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the increase in net income.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $396.8 million and $177.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $219.3 million increase in cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a total of net cash paid of $292.9 million in relation to the Greenwood Drop-Down and the Georgia Biomass Acquisition, offset by a $74.7 million cash payment in relation to the Hamlet Drop-Down in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $278.4 million and $130.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $148.2 million increase in net cash provided by financing activities in 2020, as compared to 2019, is primarily attributable to a net increase of $107.1 million in proceeds from debt issuances and debt issuance costs net of repayment of debt and a $93.7 million increase in net proceeds from common unit issuances offset by increases of $37.6 million in cash distributions and $15.6 million in deferred consideration for drop-down transactions.
Contractual Obligations____________________________________________
(1)Long-term debt as of December 31, 2020 consisted of (1) $746.9 million of outstanding indebtedness, net of unamortized discount, premium and debt issuance of $3.1 million related to the 2026 Notes, (2) $120.0 million of borrowings under our senior secured credit facility and (3) $37.6 million of outstanding indebtedness, net of unamortized discount of $2.4 million, related to the Seller Note.
(2)Finance leases are related to machinery, equipment and other assets included in property, plant and equipment.
(3)Other long-term debt consists of a note payable held by Enviva Pellets Amory, LLC (“Amory”), a wholly owned subsidiary of the Partnership.
(4)Operating leases are related to real estate, machinery, equipment and other assets with an initial term of longer than 12 months.
(5)Cash obligations for interest expense reflect, as of December 31, 2020, interest payments related to (1) the 2026 Notes, (2) borrowings under our senior secured credit facility, (3) the Seller Note, (4) other long-term debt and (5) finance leases.
(6)At December 31, 2020, we had $9.7 million of purchase obligations, which consisted of commitments for the purchase of materials, supplies and the engagement of services for the operation of our facilities to be used in the normal course of business. The amounts presented in the table do not include items already recorded in accounts payable or accrued liabilities at December 31, 2020.
(7)In order to mitigate volatility in our shipping costs, we have entered into fixed-price shipping contracts with reputable shippers matching the terms and volumes of certain of our off-take contracts for which we are responsible for arranging shipping. Our contracts with shippers include provisions as to the minimum amount of MTPY to be shipped and may also stipulate the number of shipments. Pursuant to these contracts, the terms of which extend to up to 15 years, charges are based on a fixed-price per MT and, in most cases, there are adjustment provisions for increases in the price of fuel or for other distribution-related costs. The price per MT may also vary depending on the loading port and the discharge port. Our shippers commit their resources based on our planned shipments and we would likely be liable for a portion of their expenses if we deviated from our communicated plans. As of December 31, 2020, we estimate our obligations related to these shipping contracts to be approximately $1.4 billion through 2039. These amounts will be offset by the related sales transactions in the same period, which are not included in the table above.
(8)Purchase and other commitments consist primarily of commitments under certain wood fiber and wood pellet purchases, handling and terminal and stevedoring service contracts. Some of our suppliers and service providers commit resources based on our planned purchases and require minimum levels of commitments. The wood pellet supply agreements for the purchase of 1,080,000 MT of wood pellets from British Columbia are fully offset by an agreement to sell 1,080,000 MT of wood pellets to the same counterparty from our terminal locations. The amounts in the table represent an estimate of the costs we would incur under these contracts as of December 31, 2020. Many of our contracts are requirement contracts and currently do not represent a firm commitment to purchase from our suppliers; therefore, they are not reflected in the table above. Under these contracts, we may be liable for the costs incurred on services rendered until termination and the costs of any supplies on hand.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K, such as the use of unconsolidated subsidiaries, structured finance, special purpose entities or a variable interest in unconsolidated entities.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Adopted Accounting Standards and Recently Issued Accounting Standards not yet Adopted,” in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the consolidated financial statements and the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis and base our estimates on historical experience, current conditions and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of these estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities as well as identifying and assessing the accounting treatment with respect to commitments and contingencies. Our actual results may materially differ from these estimates.
For accounting policies and estimates that we believe are critical to our consolidated financial statements due to the degree of uncertainty regarding the estimates or assumptions involved, please see the following disclosures within the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K: Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, specifically about “Business Combinations”, “Inventories”, “Revenue Recognition”, “Cost of Goods Sold”, and “Property, Plant and Equipment”, and Note 4, “Acquisition”.