Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a San Diego-based commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company committed to developing and commercializing innovative products to address unmet needs in women’s sexual and reproductive health.
Our first commercial product, Phexxi vaginal gel (Phexxi), was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on May 22, 2020 and commercially launched in the United States in September 2020. Phexxi is the first and only FDA approved hormone-free, woman-controlled, on-demand prescription contraceptive gel for women. In addition, we are advancing our lead product candidate EVO100 vaginal gel (EVO100) through a pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial for the prevention of urogenital transmission of both Chlamydia trachomatis infection (chlamydia) and Neisseria gonorrhoeae infection (gonorrhea) in women (we refer to this trial as EVOGUARD).
Phexxi as a Contraceptive and Commercial Strategies
Our comprehensive commercial strategy for Phexxi vaginal gel includes marketing and public relations awareness campaigns targeting the approximately 21 million females in the United States of reproductive potential who are not using hormonal contraception, as well as certain identified target health care provider segments; payer outreach; and execution of our consumer digital and media strategy. With the Phexxi Concierge Experience, our comprehensive telehealth support system women can, through our independent third-party telehealth service providers, secure a prescription, determine their insurance coverage and/or out-of-pocket costs, receive counseling support and refill reminders, and fill their prescription through their local neighborhood pharmacy or an online pharmacy.
We commercially launched Phexxi in September 2020 with a hybrid sales force promoting Phexxi directly to obstetricians, obstetrician/gynecologists and allied health care providers (HCPs), who collectively write the majority of prescriptions for contraceptive products. Our sales force comprises 59 regional business representatives, 11 regional business managers, a strategically focused tele-sales team through our partnership with Archer, a tele-sales communication platform, and a self-guided virtual health care provider learning platform. We currently offer a co-pay program to commercially insured patients whose insurance requires a co-pay to be made when filling their Phexxi prescription. This is a voluntary program that is intended to provide financial assistance to patients meeting certain eligibility requirements. At commercial launch we intentionally prioritized demand and increasing access to Phexxi for all women, and anticipated our co-pay programs would be our primary mechanism to achieve this near-term goal. With our strategic approach to maximize access and profitability, we will continue to assess the future utilization of the various components of our co-pay programs.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the ACA) mandates that women must receive their contraception for no out-of-pocket cost, with at least one product covered in each of the 18 categories that are defined by the ACA. These categories are listed on the FDA’s “methods of contraception” chart. This chart provides guidance to HCPs and patients as to which options exist, and to payers (including pharmacy benefit managers) as to which methods they need to cover. In June 2020, Medi-Span and First Databank, two major drug information databases that payers consult for pricing and product information, granted Phexxi a new classification in their databases and pricing compendia as the first and only “Vaginal pH Modulator.” We believe that a new category of contraception should be established for vaginal pH modulators such as Phexxi to reflect this unique mechanism of action, and are working with the Office of Women’s Health under the Health Resources and Services Administration to have the birth control chart updated accordingly.
Phexxi’s listing with Medi-Span and First Databank, coupled with our timely response to payer clinical requests and our clinical presentation, enabled us to achieve coverage for 55% of commercial lives at launch in September 2020. As of February 2021, we have coverage for approximately 55.1% of U.S. commercial lives, including approximately 8 million lives covered at no out-of-pocket cost and approximately 13.7 million lives covered under our December 2020 contract award from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. We continue to work to increase the number of lives covered.
Additionally, on January 1, 2021, the U.S. Medicaid population gained access to Phexxi through Evofem’s participation in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) Medicaid National Drug Rebate Program. Medicaid provides health coverage to approximately 68 million members.
We continue to monitor various non-financial metrics that we believe may be relevant in assessing our commercialization strategies for Phexxi. These metrics include unit shipments from our warehouse to wholesale distributors, our wholesale distributors’ shipments to retail pharmacies, the number of HCPs prescribing Phexxi, the number of Phexxi prescriptions and an increase in overall awareness of Phexxi measured by monthly surveys conducted by an independent third-party research group among women at risk for pregnancy.
Available prescription data as of and through the week of February 12, 2021, indicates that more than 2,650 unique HCPs have prescribed Phexxi since its commercial launch, with approximately 4,250 prescriptions for the year ended December 31, 2020 and approximately 2,900 prescriptions from January 1, 2021 through February 12, 2021. From commercial launch in September 2020 through January 2021, monthly prescriptions for Phexxi and the number of HCPs prescribing Phexxi have increased by an average of approximately 58% and 50%, respectively, on a monthly basis.
Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020 and from January 1, 2021 through February 26, 2021, approximately 6,350 and 6,430 units, respectively, were distributed by wholesalers to retail pharmacies. From February 1, 2021 through February 26, 2021, we sold approximately 3,800 units of Phexxi, our highest monthly sales figure since launch.
EVO100: Our STI Preventive Product Candidate
Our lead product candidate, EVO100, is an antimicrobial vaginal gel under evaluation for the prevention of chlamydia and gonorrhea in women - two of the most pervasive STIs in the United States. Currently, there are no FDA-approved prescription products for the prevention of either of these commonly reported sexually transmitted infections (STIs).
In December 2019, we reported positive top-line results from our clinical trial AMPREVENCE. The trial enrolled 860 women at 50 sites in the United States for a four-month intervention period followed by a one-month follow-up period. AMPREVENCE met both its primary and secondary endpoints of reducing the risk of chlamydia and gonorrhea infection, respectively.
In this landmark trial, the infection rate of chlamydia among women who used EVO100 for the four-month study period was 4.9% (n=14/288) compared to 9.8% among those who used placebo for four months (n=28/287) (p=0.024), a relative risk reduction of 50% in the primary endpoint. Among the reported cases of gonorrhea infection, the infection rate was 0.7% in the EVO100 arm (n=2/280), compared to 3.2% in the placebo arm (n=9/277) (p=0.03), a relative risk reduction of 78% in the secondary endpoint. The study further demonstrated that EVO100 was generally safe and well tolerated. The number of adverse events was similar across both arms (7.2% for EVO100 and 7.5% for placebo) and no serious treatment-related adverse events were reported.
In October 2020, we initiated the Phase 3 EVOGUARD clinical trial. This randomized, placebo-controlled pivotal trial is designed to enroll 1,730 women with a prior chlamydia or gonorrhea infection and who are at risk for future infection. Participants are enrolled for a 16-week interventional phase followed by a one-month follow-up period. We expect to complete enrollment in the fourth quarter of 2021, and to report top-line EVOGUARD results in mid-2022.
According to the CDC, any sexually active person can be infected with chlamydia and/or gonorrhea, and many are asymptomatic. Despite the CDC recommendation for condom use to prevent STIs, U.S. rates of infection with chlamydia and gonorrhea climbed in 2018 for the fifth consecutive year. Based on these reports, an estimated 78 million women 18-65 years of age who are sexually active in the United States could be at a risk for one of these STIs. In December 2020, the CDC updated its Treatment Guidelines for gonorrhea infections due to data demonstrating increasing resistance to the antibiotic azithromycin. The need for expanded preventive measures is clear.
The FDA has granted Fast Track designation to EVO100 for the prevention of chlamydia in women and has designated it a Qualified Infectious Disease Product (QIDP) for the prevention of gonorrhea in women. QIDP designation provides several important potential advantages, including qualification for the FDA Fast Track program and longer market exclusivity, among others.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The current COVID-19 worldwide pandemic has presented substantial public health and economic challenges and is affecting our employees, customers, communities and business operations, as well as the U.S. and global economies and financial markets. International and U.S. governmental authorities in impacted regions are taking actions in an effort to slow the spread of COVID-19, including issuing varying forms of “stay-at-home” orders, and restricting business functions outside of one’s home. In response, we have implemented a work-from-home policy for our employees. To date, our third-party manufacturer and suppliers have not experienced any interruptions or disruptions in their ability to manufacture Phexxi or to supply our manufacturer with raw materials, respectively. Nevertheless, the persistence of the ongoing pandemic related to a novel strain of a virus named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) (coronavirus), which causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) may interrupt or disrupt such manufacture and/or supply. Further, if our sales force is unable to visit HCPs and/or if our patients are unable to visit HCPs, this may also materially adversely affect our ability to sell Phexxi commercially. In addition, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to interact with government officials in an effort to obtain a 19th category of contraception has been slowed, which may, in turn, slow our efforts to obtain expanded payer coverage for Phexxi. Similarly, the timing of the completion of EVOGUARD may be affected by COVID-19 and COVID-19 may directly or indirectly impact the timeline for data readouts, initiation of, as well as monitoring, data collection and analysis and other related activities for EVOGUARD and our other potential clinical trials. Therefore, our assumptions around completion timing may prove to be incorrect, in particular if COVID-19 continues to spread. In light of recent developments relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, and consistent with the FDA’s updated industry guidance for conducting clinical trials, clinical trials may be deprioritized in favor of treating patients who have contracted the virus or to prevent the spread of the virus. This may lead to clinical trial protocol deviations or to discontinuation of treatment for patients who are then enrolled in our trials. Any disruptions in the commercialization of Phexxi and/or the initiation or completion of our clinical trials, data analysis or readouts and/or any disruption in our supply chain could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the success of ongoing COVID-19 vaccination efforts and the actions taken to contain or treat the disease, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets.
Merger
On January 17, 2018, Neothetics, Inc., now known as Evofem Biosciences, Inc., completed its Merger with Private Evofem in accordance with the terms of an agreement and plan of merger and reorganization, dated October 17, 2017.
Financial Operations Overview
Net Product Sales
Our revenue recognition is based on unit shipments from our warehouse to our wholesalers. We have recognized net product sales in the United States since the commercial launch of Phexxi in September 2020 and the fourth quarter of 2020 was our first full quarter of product sales. In the third quarter of 2020, those shipments were comprised primarily of the initial stocking orders for the Phexxi commercial launch. Shipments for the fourth quarter of 2020 were lower, with reorders primarily occurring toward the end of the quarter to replenish inventory that was depleted by increasing shipments from wholesalers to retail pharmacies filling Phexxi prescriptions. For the quarter and year ended December 31, 2020, gross Phexxi units sold to wholesalers totaled approximately 3,300 and 8,580 units, respectively. Gross Phexxi units sold to wholesalers in the first two months of 2021 totaled approximately 5,900 units.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, gross revenues on the units shipped to our wholesalers were reduced by robust utilization of the Phexxi co-pay program, as well as fixed costs primarily associated with distributor fees.
If Phexxi is approved for commercial sale outside of the United States, we expect to out-license commercialization rights for Phexxi to one or more pharmaceutical companies or other qualified potential partners, or enter into collaborations for the commercialization and distribution of Phexxi, we believe we would recognize revenue as a result of these arrangements, but we cannot forecast when these arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree these arrangements would affect our development plans and overall capital requirements.
Cost of Goods Sold
The Company began to capitalize the inventory costs associated with Phexxi in April 2020 when it was determined that this inventory had a probable future economic benefit. These inventory costs include all purchased materials, direct labor
and manufacturing overhead. Prior to April 2020, costs incurred for the manufacture of Phexxi were recorded as research and development expenses.
In addition, we are obligated to pay quarterly royalty payments pursuant to our license agreement with Rush University Medical Center (the Rush License Agreement), in amounts equal to a single-digit percentage of the gross amounts we receive on a quarterly basis less certain deductions incurred in the quarter based on a sliding scale. We are also obligated to pay a minimum annual royalty amount of $100,000 to the extent these earned royalties do not equal or exceed $100,000 in a given year. A minimum annual royalty amount of $100,000 was first required on January 1, 2021. This royalty payment was immaterial for the year ended December 31, 2020, and was included in the costs of goods sold in the consolidated financial statements.
Operating Expenses
Research and development expenses
Our research and development expenses primarily consist of costs associated with the clinical development of EVO100 and costs associated with the continuous improvements related to Phexxi commercialization efforts. These expenses include:
•external development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as fees paid to clinical research organizations (CROs) relating to our clinical trials, costs of acquiring and evaluating clinical trial data such as investigator grants, patient screening fees, laboratory work and statistical compilation and analysis, and fees paid to consultants;
•costs to acquire, develop and manufacture clinical trial materials, including fees paid to contract manufacturers;
•costs related to compliance with drug development regulatory requirements;
•continuous improvements of manufacturing and analytical efficiency;
•on-going product characterization and process optimization;
•back-up contract manufacturing organization’s evaluation to support future commercial forecast and reduce cost of goods sold;
•alternative raw material evaluation to secure an uninterrupted supply chain and reduce cost of goods sold;
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and noncash stock-based compensation expense; and
•facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation of leasehold improvements and equipment, and research and other supplies.
We expense internal and third-party research and development expenses as incurred. The following table summarizes research and development expenses by product candidate (in thousands):
Completion dates and costs for our clinical development programs may vary significantly for EVO100 and any future product candidate we may seek to develop and are difficult to predict. We anticipate that we will determine which programs and product candidates to pursue as well as the most appropriate funding allocations for each program and product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future clinical trials, regulatory developments, and our ongoing assessments of the commercial potential of each current or future product candidate. We expect research and development
expenses to increase significantly primarily due to EVOGUARD, which was initiated in October 2020. We will need to raise additional capital in the future to complete clinical development for EVO100 and any future product candidates.
The costs of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a program owing to the following:
•per patient trial costs;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the number of patients participating in the trials;
•the number of doses patients receive;
•potential additional safety monitoring or other trials requested by regulatory agencies;
•the phase of development of the product candidate; and
•the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate.
Selling and marketing expenses
Our selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of pre-commercialization sales and marketing expenses prior to launch, the initiation of full commercialization activities in September 2020, and post-launch commercialization activities for the remainder of 2020, including advertising, training, salaries, benefits, travel, noncash stock-based compensation expense, and other related costs for our employees and consultants.
We expect our selling and marketing expenses to increase significantly due to our sales force, which was established in the third quarter of 2020, and as we continue to develop and commence marketing campaigns and initiatives, and hire additional personnel to support full commercialization activities in the United States for Phexxi.
General and administrative expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits, travel, business development expense, investor and public relations expenses, noncash stock-based compensation, and other related costs for our employees and consultants performing executive, administrative, finance, legal and human resource functions. Other general and administrative expenses include facility-related costs not otherwise included in research and development or selling and marketing, and professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and legal fees, and other costs associated with obtaining and maintaining our patent portfolio.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to decrease slightly in 2021 due to lower recruiting fees and financing advisory fees.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists primarily of interest income, loss on issuance of financial instruments and change in fair value of financial instruments issued in various capital raise transactions. Loss on issuance of financial instruments was recognized upon issuance of such instruments to investors as they were determined as freestanding liability-classified financial instruments. The change in fair value of financial instruments was recognized as a result of mark-to-market adjustments for these financial instruments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the applicable periods. Management bases its estimates, assumptions, and judgments, on historical experience and on various other factors it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Different estimates, assumptions and judgments may change the estimate used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, which, in turn, could materially change our results from those reported. Management evaluates its estimates, assumptions, and judgments on an ongoing basis. However, if our assumptions change, we may need to revise our estimates, or take other corrective actions, either of which may also have a material adverse effect on our consolidated statements of operations, liquidity, and financial condition. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve significant areas where management applies estimates, assumptions, and judgments in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
Revenue Recognition and Trade Accounts Receivable
The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of its product Phexxi in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606). The provisions of ASC 606 require the following steps to determine revenue recognition: (1) Identify the contract(s) with a customer; (2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) Determine the transaction price; (4) Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
In accordance with ASC 606, the Company recognizes revenue when its performance obligation is satisfied by transferring control of the product to a customer. Per the Company’s contracts with customers, control of the product is transferred upon the conveyance of title, which occurs when the product is sold to and received by a customer. The Company’s customers consist of wholesale distributors and a specialty pharmacy. Payment terms typically range from 45 to 66 days, include prompt pay discounts, and vary by customer. Trade accounts receivable due to the Company from contracts with its customers are stated separately in the balance sheet, net of various allowances as described in the Trade Accounts Receivable policy in Note 2- Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
The amount of revenue recognized by the Company is equal to the amount of consideration which is expected to be received from the sale of product to its customers. Revenue is only recognized when it is probable that a significant reversal will not occur in future periods. To determine the amount of revenue to recognize, the Company assesses both the likelihood and magnitude of any such potential reversal of revenue.
Phexxi is sold to customers at the wholesale acquisition cost. However, the Company records product revenue, net of estimates for applicable variable consideration.
Clinical Trial Accruals
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, CROs and consultants and under clinical site agreements relating to conducting our clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts vary and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts.
Our objective is to reflect the appropriate clinical trial expenses in our consolidated financial statements by recording those expenses in the period in which services are performed and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the clinical trial as measured by patient progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial. We determine accrual estimates through financial models and discussions with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress of clinical trials.
During a clinical trial, we adjust the clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from estimates. We make estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known at that time. Our clinical trial accruals are partially dependent upon accurate reporting by CROs and other third-party vendors. Although we do not expect estimates to differ materially from actual amounts, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any reporting period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, there were no material adjustments to our prior period estimates of accrued expenses for clinical trials. For the year ended December 31, 2019, there were approximately $1.1 million in adjustments to the Company’s previous estimates of accrued expenses for AMPOWER upon final billings.
Fair Value of the Baker Notes
We elected the fair value option under ASC 825, Financial Instruments, for the convertible senior secured promissory notes (the Baker Notes) issued pursuant to that certain Baker Bros. Purchase Agreement (the Securities Purchase Agreement) with certain affiliates of Baker Bros. Advisors LP, as purchasers (the Purchasers), and Baker Bros. Advisors LP, as designated agent, dated April 23, 2020, as they are qualified financial instruments and are, in whole, classified as liabilities. Under the fair value option, we recognized the hybrid debt instrument at fair value inclusive of embedded features. The fair value of the Baker Notes issued, and the change in fair value of the Baker Notes at the reporting date, were determined using a Monte Carlo simulation-based model. Monte Carlo simulation was used to take into account several embedded features and factors including the future value of our common stock, a potential change of control event, the maturity term of the Baker Notes, the probability of an event of voluntary conversion of the Baker Notes, exercise of the put right, and exercise of our call right.
Fair Value of Stock Options and Warrants
The fair value of stock options and warrants issued in various financing transactions in connection with the Merger and post- Merger, the change in fair value of warrants as a result of modifications to these instruments, and mark-to-market adjustments for liability classified warrants were determined using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model based on the applicable assumptions, which include the exercise price of these options and warrants, time to expiration, expected volatility of our peer group of companies, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend.
Fair Value of Purchase Rights
The fair value of the rights granted to the Purchasers to optionally purchase from the Company up to $10.0 million of Baker Notes (the Baker Purchase Rights) at the Purchasers’ discretion at any time prior to the Company receiving at least $100.0 million in aggregate gross proceeds from one or more sales of equity securities issued in connection with the Baker Bros. Purchase Agreement, as described in Note 5- Convertible Notes, and the change in fair value of Baker Purchase Rights upon exercise of such rights, was determined as the maximum of (i) the fair value of rights to purchase the additional $10.0 million Baker Notes and; (ii) the fair value of the shares of on as-if converted basis, which was determined by the lattice model. The fair value of rights to purchase the accompanying 2,049,180 Baker Warrants (as defined below) was valued using a Geske option-pricing model. The Geske model was based on the applicable assumptions, including the underlying stock price, warrant exercise price, the exercise price of the rights to purchase the Baker Warrants, the term of the Baker Warrants, the term of the rights to purchase the Baker Warrants, expected volatility of the Company’s peer group, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend.
The fair value of the rights provided to the 2019 Purchasers (as defined below) to optionally purchase from the Company to issue and sell to each 2019 Purchaser the shares of common stock and warrants as specified in the Securities Purchase Agreement, dated April 10, 2019, with PDL BioPharma, Inc., a Delaware corporation (PDL), funds discretionally managed by Invesco Ltd. (Invesco) and funds managed by Woodford Investment Management Ltd. (WIM, collectively with Invesco and PDL, the 2019 Purchasers) during the period beginning on April 11, 2019 and ending on June 10, 2019 (the Private Placement Purchase Rights), and the change in fair value of the Private Placement Purchase Rights on June 5, 2019, was determined using a combination of a lattice model and Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The lattice model was used to determine the future value of our common stock. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model was based on the applicable assumptions, including the future value of the Company's common stock as determined by the lattice model, warrant exercise price, time to expiration, expected volatility of our peer group, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend.
Inventories
Inventories, consisting of purchased materials, direct labor and manufacturing overheads, are stated at the lower of cost, or net realizable value. Cost is determined on a first-in, first-out basis. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation. At each balance sheet date, we evaluate ending inventories for excess quantities, obsolescence, or shelf-life expiration. The evaluation includes an analysis of our current and future strategic plans, anticipated future sales, the price projections of future demand, and the remaining shelf life of goods on hand. To the extent that we determine there are excess or obsolete inventory or quantities with a shelf life that is too near its expiration for us to reasonably expect that it can sell those products prior to their expiration, we adjust the carrying value to estimated net realizable value.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019 (in thousands):
Net Product Sales
Phexxi was approved in May 2020, and commercially launched in September 2020. Net product sales were $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which includes a $0.1 million one-time charge related to product labelling rework recorded as scrap costs.
Research and development expenses
The overall decrease in research and development expenses was due to a $3.7 million reduction in outside services associated with the Phexxi new drug application for the prevention of pregnancy that was resubmitted to the FDA in the fourth quarter of 2019 and a $3.5 million reduction in clinical trial costs associated with the completion of the clinical phases of AMPOWER and AMPREVENCE in December 2018 and 2019, respectively. These aggregated decreases are partially offset by a $0.8 million increase in payroll related expenses and $0.8 million increase in noncash stock-based compensation, both of which are attributable to increased headcount, and a $0.5 million increase in facilities costs.
Selling and marketing expenses
The overall increase in selling and marketing expenses was primarily due to a $28.0 million increase in media, advertising costs and public relations costs for the commercialization of Phexxi commencing in September 2020, a $10.4 million increase in payroll related expenses due to increased headcount primarily related to the aforementioned hiring of the field sales force, a $4.3 million increase in costs for outside services associated with marketing, market access and medical affairs activities, a $1.8 million increase in facilities costs, and a $1.0 million increase in noncash stock-based compensation.
General and administrative expenses
The overall increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to a $2.9 million increase in legal and financing advisory fees, a $2.3 million increase in noncash stock-based compensation, a $1.8 million increase in outside services mainly associated with the issuance of convertible notes and recruiting of the sales force, a $1.7 million increase in payroll due to increased headcount, and a $1.0 million increase in facilities costs.
Total other expense, net
Total other expense, net, for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily included a $64.0 million recorded loss on issuance of convertible notes, warrants and purchase rights issued in connection with the Baker Bros. Purchase Agreement as described in Note 5- Convertible Notes and $2.1 million in accrued interest expense related to convertible notes. This loss was offset by a $27.3 million recorded gain from the change in fair value of these financial instruments as a result of mark-to-market adjustments.
Total other expense, net, for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily included a $0.7 million recorded loss on issuance of purchase rights issued in connection with the Private Placement as described in Note 10- 2019 Private Placement, a $22.9 million recorded loss from change in fair value of these financial instruments as a result of mark-to-market adjustments, and a $4.4 million incremental expense recognized as a result of a modification to the warrants exercised in February 2019 as described in Note 11- Stockholders' Equity.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $20.4 million and an accumulated deficit of $655.5 million. We have financed our operations to date primarily through product sales, the issuance of common stock, cash received from private placement transactions, the issuance of convertible notes, and interest earned on investments. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $48.9 million in cash and cash equivalents, and $22.6 million in restricted cash that is available for use. Our cash and cash equivalents include amounts held in checking accounts, money market funds, and investments in fixed income debt securities with original maturities of less than three months. Our short-term investments consist of held-to-maturity securities that mature in one year or less. We invest cash in excess of immediate requirements in accordance with our investment policy, which limits the amounts we may invest in any one type of investment and requires all investments held by us to maintain minimum ratings from Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations so as to primarily achieve liquidity and capital preservation.
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operating activities since inception. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received gross proceeds of $50.0 million from the issuance of convertible notes in the second and fourth quarter of 2020, net proceeds of approximately $103.7 million upon the sale and issuance of common stock from our Public Offering in June 2020, and net proceeds of $3.8 million pursuant to the Equity Distribution Agreement we entered into with Piper Sandler & Co. in November 2019.
We anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. We expect research and development expenses to increase in 2021 compared to 2020 due to our EVOGUARD study which was initiated in October 2020. We expect selling and marketing expenses to increase significantly in 2021 due to our commercial sales force that was originally established in the third quarter of 2020, and as we develop and commence associated marketing campaigns and initiatives, including our direct-to-consumer programs. Lastly, we expect general and administrative expenses to decrease slightly in 2021 due to lower recruiting fees and financing advisory fees. According to management estimates, our liquidity resources as of December 31, 2020 are not sufficient to maintain our planned level of operations for the next 12 months. In addition, the uncertainties associated with our ability to obtain additional equity financing on terms that are favorable to us, enter into collaborative agreements with strategic partners and succeed in our future operations, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
The opinion of our independent registered public accounting firm on our audited financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 contains an explanatory paragraph regarding substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Future reports on our financial statements may include an explanatory paragraph with respect to our ability to continue as a going concern. Our audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included in this report do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability
and classification of recorded asset amounts or amounts of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue our operations.
The COVID-19 pandemic caused us to delay the commercial launch of Phexxi until September 2020 and has impacted the terms on which we have been able to raise funds. Our ability to raise additional funds, and the terms on which those funds may be raised, will be dependent, in part, on how successful the commercialization of Phexxi is and whether we are able to gain revenue traction prior to raising such additional funds. If the COVID-19 pandemic disrupts or negatively impacts the commercialization of Phexxi, our ability to raise additional funds may be negatively impacted, or we may not be able to obtain funding on terms favorable to us or at all. If we are not able to obtain required additional funding, through equity financings or other means, or if we are unable to obtain funding on terms favorable to us, the shortfall in funds raised, or such unfavorable terms, will likely have a material adverse effect on our operations and strategic development plan for future growth. If we cannot successfully raise the funding necessary to implement our current strategic development plan, we may be forced to make reductions in spending, suspend or terminate development programs, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible, and/or suspend or curtail planned programs. Any of these developments would materially and adversely affect our financial condition and business prospects and could even cause us to be unable to continue as a going concern. If we are unable to continue as a going concern, we may have to liquidate our assets and, in doing so, we may receive less than the value
at which those assets are carried on our financial statements. Any of these developments would materially and adversely affect the price of our stock and the value of your investment.
2020 Debt and Equity Financing
As described in Note 5- Convertible Notes, we received aggregate gross proceeds of $25.0 million upon the first and second closings of convertible senior secured promissory notes pursuant to the Baker Bros. Purchase Agreement during the second quarter of 2020. We also received gross proceeds of $25.0 million from the closing of convertible unsecured promissory notes pursuant to the Adjuvant Purchase Agreement during the fourth quarter of 2020.
As described in Note 11- Stockholder's Equity, we received net aggregate proceeds of $103.7 million in June 2020 upon the issuance and sale of 31,700,000 shares of our common stock from our Public Offering and net aggregate proceeds of $3.8 million during the first half of 2020 upon the issuance and sale of 676,656 shares of our common stock pursuant to the “at the market” (ATM) program. The ATM program was terminated in June 2020.
2019 Private Placement
As described in Note 10- 2019 Private Placement, on April 10, 2019, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with the 2019 Purchasers, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell an aggregate of $80.0 million of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share at a purchase price of $4.50 per share, and warrants to purchase shares of common stock with an exercise price of $6.38 per share in a private placement that was funded in two separate closings.
The first closing was completed on April 11, 2019, pursuant to which we (i) issued and sold to PDL 6,666,667 shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase up to 1,666,667 shares of common stock and (ii) provided to the 2019 Purchasers an option to purchase an aggregate of up to 11,111,111 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 2,777,779 shares of our common stock as specified in the aforementioned Securities Purchase Agreement during the period beginning on April 10, 2019 and ending on June 10, 2019. The total consideration for the Private Placement First Closing was $30 million.
The second closing was completed on June 10, 2019, pursuant to which the Company issued and sold to PDL, Invesco and WIM (i) 6,666,667, 2,222,222 and 2,222,223 shares of its common stock, respectively and (ii) warrants to purchase up to 1,666,667, 555,556 and 555,556 shares of common stock, respectively, for an aggregate purchase price of $50 million. Shares of common stock issued to WIM included one voting share issued in connection with the issuance of its warrants.
Summary Statements of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of the net cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities. During the year ended December 2020 and 2019, the primary use of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash has been to fund development and commercialization of our lead product, Phexxi, and to support selling and marketing, and general and administrative operations.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities. During the year ended December 2020, the change in net cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash provided by investing activities was primarily due to an $8.2 million cash inflow from maturities of short-term investments offset by $2.3 million in purchases of property and equipment. Net cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 2019 was primarily the purchase of short-term investments of $8.2 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities. During the year ended December 2020, the primary source of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash was provided from the sale of an aggregate of 31,700,000 shares of common stock for net proceeds of approximately $103.7 million, net of underwriting commissions, gross proceeds of $50.0 million from issuance of convertible notes and warrants, the sale of 676,656 shares of common stock under the at-the-market program for net proceeds of approximately $3.8 million in cash and cash equivalents (including $0.3 million that was included in other receivables in the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2019), net of commissions, and the issuance of 150,353 shares of our common stock under the 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP) and exercise of stock options with aggregate proceeds of $0.4 million. These cash inflows were offset by $2.9 million in payments of tax withholdings related to vesting of restricted stock awards and $1.1 million payments for financing and debt issuance costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the primary source of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
was the issuance of 2,376,062 shares of common stock upon the exercise of warrants in February 2019 for gross proceeds of $6.3 million, the issuance of an aggregate of 17,777,779 shares of common stock and common warrants to purchase 4,444,446 shares of common stock pursuant to the 2019 Private Placement as described in Note 10- 2019 Private Placement during the second quarter of 2019 for proceeds of $75.4 million, net of financial advisory fees, the sales of 515,019 shares of common stock with proceeds of approximately $3.0 million in cash and cash equivalents, net of commissions, under the ATM program, and the issuance of 88,074 shares of common stock with proceeds of approximately $0.3 million from the ESPP purchase and stock option exercises. The cash inflow was offset by the $4.0 million repayment to satisfy a note held by one of our vendors during the second quarter of 2019, $1.3 million in payments for financing costs and $1.6 million payments for tax withholdings related to vesting of restricted stock awards.
Operating and Capital Expenditure Requirements
Our specific future operating and capital expense requirements are difficult to forecast however we can anticipate the general types of expenses and areas in which they might occur as follows: We expect research and development expenses and selling and marketing expenses to increase significantly in 2021, while we expect general and administrative expenses to decrease slightly in 2021 due to the reasons stated under the Operating Expenses section above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as that term is defined under Item 303 of Regulation S-K, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As a “smaller reporting company” as defined in Rule 12(b) of the Exchange Act, we are not required to provide the information required by this item.