Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements presented in “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” as well as “Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
INTRODUCTION
Background and Recent Events
Evolent Health, Inc. is a holding company whose principal asset is all of the Class A common units it holds in Evolent Health LLC, and its only business is to act as sole managing member of Evolent Health LLC. Substantially all of our operations are conducted through Evolent Health LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries. The financial results of Evolent Health LLC are consolidated in the financial statements of Evolent Health, Inc.
Evolent Health’s Response to COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (the “WHO”) declared the novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. While response to the COVID-19 outbreak continues to rapidly evolve, it has led to aggressive actions to reduce the spread of the disease that have seriously disrupted activities in large segments of the economy. We are continuing to monitor the COVID-19 outbreak and its impact on our business.
Because of the nature of the services we provide, market dynamics in our end markets and with our significant customers, to date the COVID-19 pandemic has not materially impacted our financial condition or results of operations or our outlook. As of December 31, 2020 we had cash and cash equivalents of $340.5 million and as of the date the financial statements were available to be issued we believe our current cash balance is sufficient to meet our liquidity needs for the next twelve months. The COVID-19 crisis has also adversely impacted global access to capital and caused significant volatility in financial markets. Significant deterioration of the U.S. and global economies could have a significant adverse impact on our investment income, the value of our investments, or future liquidity needs. Although the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business has not been severe to date, the long-term impact of the pandemic on our partners and the global economy is uncertain and will depend on various factors, including the scope, severity and duration of the pandemic. A prolonged economic downturn or recession resulting from the pandemic could adversely affect many of our partners which could, in turn, adversely impact our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Evolent’s focus throughout this pandemic has been the health and safety of its employees and their families, as well as ensuring that we continue to furnish high quality service to our partners. Evolent has deployed a multi-faceted response to COVID-19, overseen by its Emergency Preparedness Team, led by the General Counsel and Chief Compliance Officer, that focuses on maintaining its workforce in a manner that does not disrupt service delivery or operations. Evolent is closely monitoring and overseeing any issues of noncompliance or deficiencies with client operational service level agreements and continuing to review contractual business requirements in light of state and federal mandates, emergency laws and orders, and available financial support opportunities. Evolent is also mindful of the impact COVID-19 has on its vendors and subcontractors, and we will continue to work with them regarding our collective obligations to Evolent’s customers. We require a COVID-19 Business Continuity Attestation from subcontractors and vendors, confirming that operational and financial obligations will be met and aiming to ensure that privacy and security risks or incidents can be mitigated and disclosed in a timely manner.
Summary of Impact of COVID-19
In evaluating the impact of COVID-19 on our Services business, we considered, among other factors, the nature of the services we provide, end market trends and outlook and customer-specific trends. In evaluating our health plan businesses, we focused on possible changes in membership and medical utilization trends.
Services Business
Our two most significant service offerings in terms of revenue are specialty care management and administrative health services. Because both of these services offerings provide critical services to our clients and their members and have relatively long lead times to implement such services, we currently do not anticipate any material near-term disruption to the relevant contracts as a result of the pandemic.
The three key end-markets we serve are Medicaid, Medicare and Commercial.
Across 2020 we saw changes in membership and medical utilization in our end-markets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic has resulted in a significant increase in unemployment in the United States. Historically, Medicaid enrollment has increased during periods of rising unemployment as individuals lose access to employer sponsored health care and turn to government sponsored health care. In addition, with respect to Medicaid, many states (including Florida, Kentucky and Illinois) put in place new rules during the pandemic eliminating the ability of Medicaid health plans to dis-enroll non-paying members, as well as waiving certain eligibility requirements, which together we expect will result in higher membership during the period of the pandemic. It is possible to see an opposite trends in the commercial market, where employees who are made redundant lose access to employer sponsored health care. We do not expect to see meaningful changes in membership in the Medicare market as a result of COVID-19. In aggregate, as more than 50% of the lives on our platform are currently in Medicaid and we generally earn revenue with respect to those lives based on a per member per month model, we expect to see a net benefit in our business from increased membership in that market in the near-term. We cannot predict the magnitude of this potential benefit, or how long it will last.
With respect to medical utilization, following the declaration of the pandemic by the WHO, many state-wide mandates deferred non-essential medical procedures to allow hospitals to focus on providing care to COVID-19 patients. Across all markets, our partners experienced declines in non-essential care throughout the year ended December 31, 2020, offset in part by increased costs for care of COVID-19 patients. We continue to monitor medical utilization trends closely as the pandemic progresses. Beginning late in the first quarter after declaration of the pandemic and continuing across the year, we have seen a modest benefit in our business from lower utilization trends. However, we cannot predict with any certainty the net impact of lower utilization on our business, as it is possible we will experience a surge in utilization if and when consumer behavior changes (for example if the novel coronavirus is controlled by a vaccine or other measures).
Our two largest customers in terms of revenue, EVH Passport/UHC and Cook County Health and Hospitals Systems, together accounted for approximately 37.1% and 28.2% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and both participate in the Medicaid market. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we saw a modest increase in the membership at Cook County Health and Hospitals Systems; further increases in unemployment in Illinois could result in higher Medicaid enrollment in the future. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020 we saw modestly lower claims volume at both clients tied to State mandates curtailing non-essential care.
Health Plans
Our True Health plan serves approximately 17,000 members in the small and large group market in New Mexico as well as 6,700 members in the individual and federal employee markets in New Mexico. At the end of December 2020, the membership in group plans was not meaningfully changed relative to the year ended December 31, 2019. Beginning at the end of the three months ended March 31, 2020, we observed a decline in medical utilization tied to a state-wide mandate prohibiting non-essential care in the period from March 13, 2020, resulting in slightly lower than expected claims expenses. In our two Medicaid equity method investees (Lighthouse Health Plan and Miami Children’s Health Plan in Florida) and our wholly-owned Medicaid plan (EVH Passport), we saw modest increases in membership during the year ended December 31, 2020 however reduced medical utilization resulted in reduced claims expenses in the same period. While we cannot estimate the magnitude of reduced medical utilization and its impact on our business, we expect this trend to continue until the COVID-19 pandemic moderates.
Overall, we are unable to determine or predict the nature, duration, or scope of the overall impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources. We are actively monitoring the ongoing situation and may take further actions that change our operations if required by law or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees or partners.
Transactions
The Company has undertaken several transactions, some of which may impact year-to-year comparisons. The following is a discussion of certain of those transactions.
Passport
On December 30, 2019, UHC, Passport Health Solutions, LLC (“PHS I”), the Company and EVH Passport, closed a transaction whereby EVH Passport acquired substantially all of the assets and assumed substantially all of the liabilities of UHC, including the Passport Medicaid Contract. The purchase price paid by EVH Passport consisted of $70.0 million in cash and a 30% equity interest in EVH Passport issued to the Sponsors; however, $16.2 million of the foregoing cash purchase price was held back until such time as PHS I delivers to EVH Passport certain owned real property and improvements.
On September 1, 2020, EVH Passport and Molina completed the Molina Closing and the Passport Medicaid Contract was novated to Molina. As a result, EVH Passport began to wind down its business. In connection with the Molina Closing, Molina deposited $20.0 million in cash in escrow, which was subsequently released to EVH Passport in January 2021. Prior to the Molina Closing, the Company accounted for its investment in EVH Passport as an unconsolidated variable interest entity under the equity method of accounting. As a result of the Molina Closing, the Company concluded that a reconsideration event occurred whereby EVH Passport was determined to be a voting interest entity and that Evolent had a controlling financial interest in EVH Passport; accordingly, the Company consolidated EVH Passport as of September 1, 2020 in its consolidated financial statements. The Company accounted for the transaction as an asset acquisition, as the Company concluded that assets acquired as a result of the consolidation did not meet the criteria to be classified as a business under GAAP. Following the Molina Closing and consolidation of EVH Passport in the Company’s consolidated financials, EVH Passport redeemed the Sponsors’ equity interests in EVH Passport in accordance with the terms of EVH Passport's Stockholders' Agreement , and, as a result, EVH Passport became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. The Company expects a return of capital from EVH Passport, expected to be between $130 million and $170 million in total, which is subject to regulatory approval from the Kentucky Department of Insurance.
Refer to “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 4” for additional discussion regarding the Passport transactions.
GlobalHealth
As of March 31, 2020, the Oklahoma Insurance Division (“OID”) informed GlobalHealth, Inc. that in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the OID required GlobalHealth, Inc. to increase its regulatory capital surplus by May 15, 2020. It would otherwise be placed into receivership if additional financing could not be secured. Certain investors agreed to provide liquidity as necessary to increase statutory capital reserves to no lower than 300%. In connection with the investment, GlobalHealth, Inc. transferred 100% of the equity interests in GlobalHealth, Inc. to the new investors for no consideration. Closing of this transaction occurred on May 13, 2020. As a result of this transaction, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of approximately $47.1 million, representing the total value of our investment, in impairment of equity method investments on the consolidated statements of operations for the three months ended March 31, 2020.
Convertible Debt Issuance, Extinguishment of Debt and Repayment of Notes
In August 2020, the Company issued $117.1 million aggregate principal amount of its 3.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2024 (the “2024 Notes”) in privately negotiated exchange and/or subscription agreements, with certain holders of its outstanding 2021 Notes and certain new investors. The Company issued $84.2 million aggregate principal amount of 2024 Notes in exchange for $84.2 million aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes and an aggregate cash payment of $2.5 million, and issued $32.8 million aggregate principal amount of New Notes for cash at par. We incurred $3.0 million of debt issuance costs in connection with the 2024 Notes. The closing of the private placement of the 2024 Notes occurred on August 19, 2020.
The exchanges were accounted for as an extinguishment resulting in a net loss on extinguishment of debt of $4.8 million, including an aggregate cash payment to noteholders of $2.5 million, which is included in loss on extinguishment of debt, net on the consolidated statement of operations.
In August 2020, we also repurchased $14.0 million of the 2021 Notes with $13.9 million of cash and recorded an immaterial gain on extinguishment of debt. Refer to “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 9” for additional discussion relating to the convertible debt issuance, extinguishment of debt and partial repayment of 2021 Notes.
Agreement for the Sale of True Health New Mexico
On January 11, 2021, Evolent LLC, EH Holdings and True Health, each wholly owned subsidiaries of the Company, entered into the SPA with Bright HealthCare, pursuant to which EH Holdings expects to sell all of its equity interest in True Health to Bright HealthCare for a purchase price of $22.0 million plus excess risk based capital, subject to satisfaction of customary closing conditions, including regulatory approvals. The purchase price is subject to a customary purchase price adjustment following the True Health Closing based in part on actual medical claims experience. Refer to “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 26” for additional discussion regarding the True Health sale.
Repayment and Termination of Existing Credit Agreement
On January 8, 2021, the Company repaid all outstanding amounts owed under, and terminated, the Credit Agreement with Ares Capital Corporation. The total amount paid to Ares Corporation under the Credit Agreement in connection with the prepayment was $98.6 million, which included $9.7 million for the make-whole premium as well as $0.2 million in accrued interest. In addition to the payment of the Credit Agreement, the Company settled the outstanding warrants associated with the debt for $13.7 million. Refer to “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 9” for additional discussion relating to the repayment of the Credit Agreement.
Repositioning Plan
We continually assess opportunities to improve operational effectiveness and efficiency to better align our expenses with revenues, while continuing to make investments in our solutions, systems and people that we believe are important to our long-term goals. Across 2020, we divested or agreed to divest a majority of our health plan assets, including the assets of EVH Passport, which represented a significant revenue stream for the Company. In parallel with these divestitures, we contracted with a third-party vendor to review our operating model and organizational design in order to improve our profitability, create value through our solutions and invest in strategic opportunities in future periods.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we committed to certain operational efficiency and profitability actions that we are taking in order to accomplish these objectives (“Repositioning Plan”). These actions included making organizational changes across our Services segment as well as other profitability initiatives expected to result in reductions in force, re-aligning of resources as well as other potential operational efficiency and cost-reduction initiatives. The Repositioning Plan is expected to continue through the fourth quarter of 2021.
The Company recorded approximately $1.3 million of repositioning costs in selling, general and administrative expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020. The following tables provide a summary of our total costs associated with the Repositioning Plan, included in the line item within our consolidated statements of operations, for the year ended December 31, 2020, by major type of cost:
Business Overview
We are a market leader in the new era of value-based care, in which leading health systems and physician organizations, which we refer to as providers, as well as health plans, which we refer to as payers, are moving their business models from traditional FFS reimbursement to an increasingly integrated clinical and financial responsibility for populations. We refer to our provider and payer customers as partners. We consider value-based care to be the necessary convergence of health care payment and delivery. We believe the pace of this convergence is accelerating, driven by price pressure in traditional FFS health care, a market environment that is incentivizing value-based care models, growth in consumer-focused insurance programs, such as Medicare Advantage and managed Medicaid, and innovation in data and technology.
We were founded in 2011 by members of our management team, UPMC, an integrated delivery system based in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and The Advisory Board Company. We provide integrated, technology-enabled services to our national network of leading health systems, physician organizations and national and regional payers across Medicare, Medicaid and commercial markets.
During 2020, we managed our operations and allocate resources across two reportable segments, our Services segment and our True Health Segment. The Company’s Services segment provides our customers two clinical solutions: (i) total cost of care services and (ii) specialty care management services, and one administrative solution: comprehensive health plan administration services. These services enable payers and providers to manage patient health in a more cost-effective manner. The Company’s contracts are structured as a combination of monthly member service fees, percentage of plan premiums, shared medical savings arrangements and/or other performance-based arrangements including taking responsibility for all or substantially all of the cost of care. Our True Health
segment consists of a commercial health plan we operate in New Mexico that focuses on individual and family as well as small and large businesses.
The Company made organizational changes, including re-evaluating its reportable segments, as a result of the entry into the agreement to sell True Health on January 11, 2021. Effective during the first quarter of 2021, the Company will bifurcate its Services segment into two reportable segments as follows:
•Evolent Health Services, which houses our Administrative Simplification solution and certain supporting population health infrastructure; and
•Clinical Solutions, which includes our specialty management and physician-oriented total cost of care solutions, along with the New Century Health and Evolent Care Partners brands.
All of our revenue is recognized in the United States and substantially all of our long-lived assets are located in the United States.
We have incurred operating losses since our inception, as we have invested heavily in resources to support our growth. We intend to continue to invest aggressively in the success of our partners, expand our geographic footprint and further develop our capabilities. We also expect to continue to incur operating losses for the foreseeable future and if we are unable to achieve our revenue growth and cost management objectives, we may not be able to achieve profitability.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have identified the accounting policies below as critical to the understanding of our results of operations and our financial condition. In applying these critical accounting policies in preparing our financial statements, management must use critical assumptions, estimates and judgments concerning future results or other developments, including the likelihood, timing or amount of one or more future events. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our assumptions, estimates and judgments based upon historical experience and various other information that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. For a detailed discussion of other significant accounting policies, see “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 2.”
Goodwill
We recognize the excess of the purchase price, plus the fair value of any non-controlling interests in the acquiree, over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired as goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized, but is reviewed at least annually for indications of impairment, with consideration given to financial performance and other relevant factors. We perform impairment tests of goodwill at a reporting unit level. The Company has four reporting units and our annual goodwill impairment review occurs during the fourth quarter of each year. We perform impairment tests between annual tests if an event occurs, or circumstances change, that we believe would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount.
Our goodwill impairment analysis first assesses qualitative factors to determine whether events or circumstances existed that would lead the Company to conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is below its carrying amount. If the Company determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is below the carrying amount, a quantitative goodwill assessment is required. In the quantitative evaluation, the fair value of the relevant reporting unit is determined and compared to the carrying value. If the fair value is greater than the carrying value, then the carrying value is deemed to be recoverable and no further action is required. If the fair value estimate is less than the carrying value, goodwill is considered impaired for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value and a charge is reported in goodwill impairment on our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
A description of our 2020 goodwill impairment test follows below.
The Company performed an interim goodwill impairment assessment in one of our three reporting units in the Services segment as of March 31, 2020 due to the decline in the Company’s stock price during the first quarter of 2020 and lack of excess of fair value over the carrying value considering the $199.8 million impairment charge taken in the fourth quarter of 2019. The Company concluded that the fair value of its reporting unit was more than its carrying value as of March 31, 2020. In addition, the Company performed an interim goodwill impairment assessment as of May 31, 2020 and concluded that the fair value of one of our three reporting units in the Services segment was less than its carrying value by $215.1 million as of May 31, 2020. The decrease in fair value was due to our largest customer, EVH Passport, not obtaining a renewal of its Kentucky managed Medicaid contract, which was its sole business. The non-renewal of EVH Passport’s contract caused a reduction in the Company’s cash flow projections.
As a result of the impairment charges in the fourth quarter of 2019 and second quarter of 2020, the Company elected to forego the qualitative assessment and proceed directly to the quantitative assessment of the goodwill impairment test for the specific reporting
unit that incurred those impairment charges. This election does not preclude Management from performing the qualitative assessment in any subsequent period. For the remaining reporting units, after assessing the totality of events and circumstances including the results of our previous valuations, the minimal impacts of the Passport loss and COVID-19, the Company does not believe that an event occurred or circumstances changed during the period under consideration that would, more likely than not, reduce the fair value of any reporting unit below their carrying amount. Therefore, the Company concluded that the quantitative assessment was not required.
In performing our October 31, 2020 impairment test for one of the three reporting units in the Services segment, we estimated the fair value of our reporting units by considering a discounted cash flow valuation approach (“income approach”). In determining the estimated fair value using the income approach, we projected future cash flows based on management’s estimates and long-term plans and applied a discount rate based on the Company’s weighted average cost of capital. This analysis required us to make judgments about revenues, expenses, fixed asset and working capital requirements, capital market assumptions, cash flows and discount rates.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company assessed whether there were additional events or changes in circumstances since its annual goodwill impairment test that would indicate that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting units was less than the reporting unit’s carrying amounts that would require an interim impairment assessment after October 31, 2020. The Company determined there had been no such indicators, therefore, we did not perform an interim goodwill impairment assessment as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining goodwill attributable to the reporting unit from which we recognized a non-cash goodwill impairment charge earlier in the year was $214.3 million.
Revenue Recognition
Services
Our services segment derives revenue from two sources: (1) transformation services and (2) platform and operations services. Revenue is recognized when control of the services is transferred to our customers. We use the following 5-Step model, outlined in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), to determine revenue recognition on our contracts with customers:
•Identify the contract(s) with a customer
•Identify the performance obligations in the contract
•Determine the transaction price
•Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations
•Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation
Transformation Services Revenue
Transformation services consist of strategic assessments, or Blueprint contracts, and implementation services whereby we assist the customer in launching its population health or health plan programs, or implement certain platform and operations services. In certain cases, transformation services can also include revenue associated with our support of certain one-time wind-down activities for clients who are exiting a line of business or population. The transformation services are usually completed within 12 months. We generally receive a fixed fee for transformation services and recognize revenue over time using an input method based on hours incurred compared to the total estimated hours required to satisfy our performance obligation.
Platform and Operations Services Revenue
Platform and operations services generally include multi-year arrangements with customers to provide various population health, health plan operations, specialty care management and claims processing services on an ongoing basis, as well as transition or run-out services to customers receiving primarily third-party administration (“TPA”) services. Revenue is recognized when control of the services is transferred to our customers.
We use the following 5-step model outlined in ASC 606 to determine revenue recognition for our services segment from our contracts with customers:
•Identify the contract(s) with a customer
•Identify the performance obligations in the contract
•Determine the transaction price
•Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations
•Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
Our contracts with customers may contain multiple performance obligations, primarily when the customer has requested both transformation services and platform and operations services as these services are distinct from one another. When a contract has multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on the relative standalone selling price using the expected cost margin approach. This approach requires estimates regarding both the level of effort it will take to satisfy the performance obligation as well as fees that will be received under the variable pricing model. We also take into consideration customer demographics, current market conditions, the scope of services and our overall pricing strategy and objectives when determining the standalone selling price.
Principal vs Agent
We occasionally use third parties to assist in satisfying our performance obligations. In order to determine whether we are the principal or agent in the arrangement, we review each third-party relationship on a contract by contract basis. We are an agent when our role is to arrange for another entity to provide the services to the customer. In these instances, we do not control the service before it is provided and recognize revenue on a net basis. We are the principal when we control the good or service prior to transferring control to the customer. We recognize revenue on a gross basis when we are the principal in the arrangement.
True Health
Our True Health segment derives revenue from premiums that are earned over the terms of the related insurance policies. True Health also derives revenue from reinsurance premiums assumed from NMHC under the terms of the Reinsurance Agreement. The portion of premiums that will be earned in the future or are received prior to the effectiveness of the policy are deferred and reported as premiums received in advance. These amounts are generally classified as short-term deferred revenue on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Income Taxes
Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. We estimate our actual current tax expense, including permanent charges and benefits, and temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items, such as deferred revenue for tax and book accounting purposes. These temporary differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included within our consolidated balance sheets.
We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income by considering both positive and negative evidence relating to their recoverability. If we believe that recovery of these deferred tax assets is not more likely than not, we establish a valuation allowance. To the extent that we increase a valuation allowance in a period, we include an expense in the consolidated statement of operations in the period in which such determination is made.
In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we considered all available evidence, including recent operating results, projections of future taxable income, our ability to utilize loss and credit carryforwards, and the feasibility of tax planning strategies. A significant piece of objective positive evidence evaluated for jurisdictions in a net deferred tax asset position was cumulative pre-tax income over the three years ended December 31, 2020. In addition, we considered that loss and credit carryforwards have not expired unused and the majority of our loss and credit carryforwards will not expire prior to 2031.
As of December 31, 2020, we have determined that it is more likely than not that we will realize the benefit related to our deferred tax assets, except for a valuation allowance related to the realization of existing US deferred tax assets.
Deferred tax liabilities, net of deferred tax assets, as of December 31, 2020 were $0.7 million, net of our valuation allowance of $89.9 million.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes by recognizing a tax position only when it is more likely than not that the tax position, based on its technical merits, will be sustained upon ultimate settlement with the applicable tax authority. The tax benefit to be recognized is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the applicable tax authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information.
Our gross unrecognized benefits are $0.7 million as of December 31, 2020. Our evaluation of uncertain tax positions is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effectively settled issues under audit, and new audit activity. If actual settlements differ from these estimates, or we adjust these estimates in future periods, we may need to recognize additional tax benefits or charges that could materially impact our financial position and results of operations.
We are a holding company and our assets consist of our direct ownership in Evolent Health LLC, for which we are the managing member. Prior to the Class B unit exchanges on December 26, 2019, Evolent Health LLC was classified as a partnership for U.S. federal and applicable state and local income tax purposes and, as such, was not subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes. Taxable income or loss generated by Evolent Health LLC was allocated to holders of its units, including us, on a pro rata basis. Accordingly, we were subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes with respect to our allocable share of any taxable income of Evolent Health LLC. As a result of the 2019 Class B units exchanges, we became the sole owner of Evolent Health LLC and its entity classification changed from a partnership to an entity disregarded as separate from its owner for U.S. federal, state and local income tax purposes. Following the Class B units exchanges, any taxable income or loss generated by Evolent Health LLC is reportable and taxable on the Company’s federal, state and local income tax returns. Evolent Health LLC has direct ownership in corporate subsidiaries, which were subject to U.S. and foreign taxes with respect to their own operations during 2019.
Reserve for Claims and Performance-based Arrangements
Reserves for performance-based arrangements and claims for our services and True Health segments reflect actual payments under performance-based arrangements and the ultimate cost of claims that have been incurred but not reported, including expected development on reported claims, those that have been reported but not yet paid (reported claims in process), and other medical care expenses and services payable that are primarily composed of accruals for incentives and other amounts payable to health care professionals and facilities. The Company uses actuarial principles and assumptions that are consistently applied in each reporting period and recognizes the actuarial best estimate of the ultimate liability along with a margin for adverse deviation. This approach is consistent with actuarial standards of practice that the liabilities be adequate under moderately adverse conditions.
The process of estimating reserves involves a considerable degree of judgment by the Company and, as of any given date, is inherently uncertain. The methods for making such estimates and for establishing the resulting liability are continually reviewed, and adjustments are reflected in current results of operations in the period in which they are identified as experience develops or new information becomes known.
Adoption of New Accounting Standards
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments and subsequently issued additional guidance that modified ASU 2016-13. The standard requires an entity to change its accounting approach for measuring and recognizing credit losses on certain financial assets measured at amortized cost, including trade receivables, certain non-trade receivables, customer advances and certain off-balance sheet credit exposures, by replacing the existing “incurred loss” framework with an expected credit loss recognition model. The new standard results in earlier recognition of credit losses based on past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The standard is effective for entities with fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within such fiscal years. We adopted the requirements of this standard effective January 1, 2020 using the modified retrospective approach and recorded a cumulative effect adjustment of $3.0 million to January 1, 2020 retained earnings (accumulated deficit). In our previous accounting policy for trade receivables and non-trade receivables, we maintained an allowance for doubtful accounts based on specific identification. Under the new accounting standard, we utilize several factors to develop historical losses, including aging schedules, customer creditworthiness, and historical payment experience, which are then adjusted for current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts in measurement of the allowance. In addition, for customer advances and certain off-balance sheet credit exposures, we evaluate the allowance through a discounted cash flow approach. Refer to Note 6 for additional disclosures related to current expected credit losses.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Evolent Health, Inc. is a holding company and its principal asset is all of the Class A common units in Evolent Health LLC, which has owned all of our operating assets and substantially all of our business since inception. The financial results of Evolent Health LLC are consolidated in the financial statements of Evolent Health, Inc.
Key Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
Our services segment derives revenue from three sources: (i) transformation services, (ii) platform and operations services and (iii) premiums earned.
Transformation Services Revenue
Transformation services consist of implementation services whereby we assist the customer in launching its population health or health plan programs. In certain cases, transformation services can also include revenue associated with our support of certain one-time wind-down activities for clients who are exiting a line of business or population. The transformation services are usually completed within 12 months. We generally receive a fixed fee for transformation services and recognize revenue over time using an input method based on hours incurred compared to the total estimated hours required to satisfy our performance obligation.
Platform and Operations Services Revenue
Platform and Operations services are typically multi-year arrangements with customers to provide various clinical and administrative solutions. Our clinical solutions are designed to lower the medical expenses of our partners and include our total cost of care and specialty care management services; our administrative solutions are designed to provide comprehensive health plan operations and claims processing services, and also include transition or run-out services to customers receiving primarily TPA services. Contracts to provide these services may be developed on an integrated basis. For purposes of revenue disaggregation, we classify contracts including both clinical and administrative solutions into the category corresponding to the majority of services provided under those contracts.
Our performance obligation in these arrangements is to provide an integrated suite of services, including access to our platform that is customized to meet the specialized needs of our customers and members. Generally, we will apply the series guidance to the performance obligation as we have determined that each time increment is distinct. We primarily utilize a variable fee structure for these services that typically includes a monthly payment that is calculated based on a specified per member per month rate, multiplied by the number of members that our partners are managing under a value-based care arrangement or a percentage of plan premiums. Our arrangements may also include other variable fees related to service level agreements, shared medical savings arrangements and other performance measures. Variable consideration is estimated using the most likely amount based on our historical experience and best judgment at the time. Due to the nature of our arrangements, certain estimates may be constrained if it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will occur when the uncertainty is resolved. We recognize revenue from platform and operations services over time using the time elapsed output method. Fixed consideration is recognized ratably over the contract term. In accordance with the series guidance, we allocate variable consideration to the period to which the fees relate.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
Our contracts with customers may contain multiple performance obligations, primarily when the customer has requested both transformation services and platform and operations services as these services are distinct from one another. When a contract has multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on the relative standalone selling price using the expected cost margin approach. This approach requires estimates regarding both the level of effort it will take to satisfy the performance obligation as well as fees that will be received under the variable pricing model. We also take into consideration customer demographics, current market conditions, the scope of services and our overall pricing strategy and objectives when determining the standalone selling price.
Premiums Earned
Our True Health segment derives revenue from premiums that are earned over the terms of the related insurance policies. The portion of premiums that will be earned in the future or are received prior to the effectiveness of the policy are deferred and reported as premiums received in advance. True Health also derived revenue from reinsurance premiums assumed from NMHC under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, prior to their termination in the fourth quarter of 2019.
During the third quarter of 2019, the Company terminated the reinsurance agreement with NMHC effective in the fourth quarter of 2019, approximately one and a half months prior to its scheduled end.
In the ordinary course of business, our reportable segments enter into transactions with one another. While intersegment transactions are treated like third-party transactions to determine segment performance, the revenues and expenses recognized by the segment that is the counterparty to the transaction are eliminated in consolidation and do not affect consolidated results.
Cost of Revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization)
Our cost of revenue includes direct expenses and shared resources that perform services in direct support of clients. Costs consist primarily of employee-related expenses (including compensation, benefits and stock-based compensation), expenses for TPA support and other services, as well as other professional fees. In certain cases, our cost of revenue also includes claims and capitation payments to providers and payments for pharmaceutical treatments and other health care expenditures through performance-based arrangements. Subsequent to the consolidation of EVH Passport on September 1, 2020, our cost of revenue includes the consolidated impact of the runout of EVH Passport’s operations, consisting principally of updates to EVH Passport’s claims reserve based on actual claims payments.
Claims Expenses
Our claims expenses consist of the direct medical expenses incurred by our health plan, including expenses incurred related to the reinsurance agreement. Claims expenses are recognized in the period in which services are provided and include amounts that have been paid by us through the reporting date, as well as estimated medical claims and benefits payable for costs that have been incurred but not paid by us as of the reporting date. Claims expenses include, among other items, fee-for-service claims, pharmacy benefits, various other related medical costs and expenses related to our reinsurance agreement. We use judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions for determining the required estimates.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Our selling, general and administrative expenses consist of employee-related expenses (including compensation, benefits and stock-based compensation) for selling and marketing, corporate development, finance, legal, human resources, corporate information technology, professional fees and other corporate expenses associated with these functional areas. Selling, general and administrative expenses also include costs associated with our centralized infrastructure and research and development activities to support our network development capabilities, claims processing services, including PBM administration, technology infrastructure, clinical program development and data analytics.
Depreciation and amortization expense
Depreciation and amortization expenses consist of the amortization of intangible assets associated with the step up in fair value of Evolent Health LLC’s assets and liabilities for the Offering Reorganization, amortization of intangible assets recorded as part of our various business combinations and asset acquisitions and depreciation of property and equipment, including the amortization of capitalized software.
Evolent Health, Inc. Consolidated Results
Comparison of the Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to 2019
Revenue
Total revenue increased by $176.1 million, or 20.8%, to $1.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019.
Transformation services revenue decreased by $3.2 million, or 21.1%, to $12.0 million for year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to the timing of implementation activities. Transformation services revenue accounted for 1.2% and 1.8% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Platform and operations services revenue increased by $233.6 million, or 35.4%, to $893.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019 primarily as a result of membership growth with existing partners, cross-sell of new services to existing
partners and new partner additions. We expect our platform and operations growth rate in 2021 to be negatively impacted by the wind-down of EVH Passport’s operations. Platform and operations services revenue accounted for 87.3% and 77.9% of our total revenue for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We had 3.6 million lives on full platform and approximately 6.2 million lives on our New Century Technology & Services Suite as of December 31, 2020. Lives on platform are calculated by summing members on our value-based care and comprehensive health plan administrative platform, as well as members covered for oncology specialty care services and members covered for cardiology specialty care services. Members covered for more than one category are counted in each category. Management uses lives on platform as a supplemental performance measure because we believe that it provides insight into the unit economics of our services. We believe that this measure is also useful to investors because it allows further insight into the period over period operational performance. We had 37 and 39 operating partners as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Premiums decreased by $54.4 million, or 31.7%, to $117.4 million, for year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to the termination of the quota-share reinsurance agreement with NMHC signed in the fourth quarter of 2018. Under this reinsurance agreement, NMHC ceded 90% of its gross premiums to the Company and the Company indemnified NMHC for 90% of its claims liability. The agreement qualified for reinsurance accounting due to the deemed risk transfer, and therefore we recorded the gross premiums assumed on our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss). Effective in the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company terminated the reinsurance agreement with NMHC and True Health revenues decreased as a result. Premiums accounted for 11.5% and 20.3% of our total revenue for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Refer to “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 10” in this Form 10-K for further discussion of the reinsurance agreement.
On January 11, 2021, Evolent Health LLC, EH Holdings and True Health, each wholly owned subsidiaries of the Company, agreed to sell True Health to Bright Health Management, Inc. Though we cannot predict the certainty or timing of closing, we expect the transaction to close in the first half of 2021, subject to satisfaction of customary closing conditions, including regulatory approvals. Following the closing of this transaction, we will not report any premiums revenues.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased by $188.3 million, or 36.7%, to $701.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost of revenue increased by approximately $182.8 million period over period as a result of growth of our revenue generating services and additional payments related to performance-based arrangements, an increase of $5.8 million in professional fees due to the nature and timing of our projects, offset, in part by a decrease of $4.4 million in our technology services, TPA fees, personnel costs and other costs period over period. Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes approximately $(11.9) million associated with the wind-down of EVH Passport, inclusive of a reduction in Passport’s claims reserve. Approximately $1.8 million and $2.7 million of total personnel costs was attributable to stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cost of revenue represented 77.5% and 76.0% of total services revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our cost of revenue increased as a percentage of our total services revenue due to a change in the mix of our service offerings towards lower gross margin services, principally New Century Health, during 2020; however, we expect our cost of revenue to decrease as a percentage of total services revenue over the longer-term subject to the composition of our growth.
Claims Expenses
Claims expenses attributable to our True Health segment were $88.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $135.8 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to the quota-share reinsurance agreement with NMHC signed in the fourth quarter of 2018 that terminated in the fourth quarter of 2019 and savings from cancellation of non-essential services such as elective and non-emergency medical services as a result of COVID-19. Claims expenses represented 74.9% and 79.1% of premiums for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, respectively. We expect future claims expenses to decrease as a percentage of premiums revenue due to the termination of the reinsurance agreement. Refer to “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 10” in this Form 10-K for further discussion of the reinsurance agreement.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased by $34.4 million, or 13.4%, to $222.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, personnel costs decreased by $31.8 million period over period due to a reduction in employee headcount. Approximately $12.8 million and $12.9 million of total personnel costs were attributable to stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Ceded expenses under the reinsurance agreement were $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Technology costs increased by $5.5 million period over period as a result of the growing customer base and service offerings. Legal and professional fees increased by $6.1 million and other costs decreased by $17.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019,
respectively, due to the nature and timing of our projects. Transaction, transition and severance costs accounted for approximately $9.0 million and $17.4 million of total selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Selling, general and administrative expenses represented 21.8% and 30.4% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, respectively. While our selling, general and administrative expenses are expected to grow as our business grows, we expect them to continue to decrease as a percentage of our total revenue over the long term due to cost saving initiatives introduced in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $0.6 million, or 0.9%, to $61.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019. The increase was due primarily to additional depreciation and amortization expenses related to assets acquired through business combinations and asset acquisitions during 2019 and the increase in amortization expense for internal-use software. We expect depreciation and amortization expenses to increase in future periods as we continue to capitalize internal-use software and amortize intangible assets resulting from asset acquisitions and business combinations (including possible future transactions).
Goodwill Impairment
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $215.1 million on our consolidated statements of operations as we determined that the implied fair value of goodwill of one of the three reporting units in the Services segment was less than the carrying amount. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $199.8 million in the same reporting unit. Both of these charges related to the value of our investment in EVH Passport. See “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 8” for further details of the impairment charge to goodwill.
Gain (Loss) on Disposal of Assets and Consolidation
During 2019, the Company, through a non-wholly owned consolidated subsidiary, entered into an agreement with an unrelated party to provide services and support to providers, independent physician associations, and other provider groups. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company sold its interest in the subsidiary and recorded a $6.4 million loss in gain (loss) on disposal of assets and consolidation on the consolidated statements of operations. The Company did not have any continuing involvement with the entity after the consummation of this transaction.
On September 1, 2020, EVH Passport and Molina consummated the Molina Closing, and the Passport Medicaid Contract was novated to Molina. As a result, the Company concluded that a reconsideration event occurred whereby EVH Passport was determined to be a voting interest entity and that Evolent had a controlling financial interest in EVH Passport; accordingly, the Company consolidated EVH Passport as of September 1, 2020 and recorded a $5.7 million bargain purchase gain in gain (loss) on disposal of assets and consolidation in its consolidated financial statements.
Loss on extinguishment of debt, net
In August 2020, as part of the issuance of the 2024 Notes, the Company issued $84.2 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes in exchange for $84.2 million aggregate principal of its 2021 Notes. These exchanges were accounted for as an extinguishment resulting in a net loss on extinguishment of debt of $4.8 million, including an aggregate cash payment to noteholders of $2.5 million, which is included in loss on extinguishment of debt, net on the consolidated statement of operations.
In August 2020, we also repurchased $14.0 million of the 2021 Notes with $13.9 million of cash and recorded an immaterial gain on extinguishment of debt.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration and Indemnification Asset
We recorded a (gain) loss on change in fair value of contingent consideration and indemnification asset of $3.9 million and $(4.0) million for the years December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, respectively. This variance is the result of changes in the fair values of contingent liabilities incurred from entering in the warrant agreements compared to the liabilities acquired as a result of business combinations and asset acquisitions during 2016, 2018 and 2019. See “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 18” in this Form 10-K for the information related to the fair value of our warrant agreements.
Comparison of the Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to 2018
Revenue
Total revenue increased by $219.3 million, or 35.0%, to $846.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to 2018.
Transformation services revenue decreased by $17.7 million, or 53.8%, to $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to 2018, due primarily to the fact that our offering has become more product-oriented, thereby resulting in lower average transformation services revenue per newly added partner. As a result, we expect future transformation services revenue to continue to decrease as a percentage of total revenue. Transformation services revenue accounted for 1.8% and 5.2% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Platform and operations services revenue accounted for 77.9% and 79.8% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Platform and operations services revenue increased by $159.2 million, or 31.8%, to $659.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to 2018, primarily as a result of additional revenue from our acquisition of New Century Health during the fourth quarter of 2018, new partner additions, cross-sell, an increase in our average PMPM fee and an aggregate enrollment growth of 35.5% in lives on platform. We ended the quarter with 39 operating partners as of December 31, 2019, as compared to 35 as of December 31, 2018.
Premiums increased by $77.8 million, or 82.8%, to $171.7 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the same period in 2018. The increase is primarily attributable to the quota-share reinsurance agreement with NMHC signed in the fourth quarter of 2018. Under this reinsurance agreement, NMHC ceded 90% of its gross premiums to the Company and the Company indemnified NMHC for 90% of its claims liability. The agreement qualified for reinsurance accounting due to the deemed risk transfer, and therefore we recorded the gross premiums assumed on our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss). Refer to “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 10” in this Form 10-K for further discussion of the reinsurance agreement. Premiums accounted for $171.7 million and $94.0 million, or 20.3% and 15.0% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Effective in the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company terminated the reinsurance agreement with NMHC and we expect future True Health revenues to be diminished as a result.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased by $185.2 million, or 56.5%, to $513.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to 2018. Cost of revenue increased by approximately $222.3 million period over period as a result of business combinations completed in the fourth quarter of 2018 and additional payments related to performance-based arrangements. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in our professional fees of $9.0 million due to the nature and timing of our projects, and a decrease of $28.0 million in our technology services, TPA fees, personnel costs and other costs period over period. Approximately $2.7 million and $1.5 million of total personnel costs was attributable to stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Cost of revenue represented 76.0% and 61.5% of total services revenue for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Our cost of revenue increased as a percentage of our total services revenue as we integrated new businesses acquired during 2018; however, we expect our cost of revenue to decrease as a percentage of total services revenue going forward subject to the composition of our growth.
Claims Expenses
Claims expenses attributable to our True Health segment, including $72.6 million of expenses assumed from the Reinsurance Agreement, were $135.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $70.9 million for the prior year. Claims expenses consist of claims paid during the period and the change in reserve for incurred but unreported claims. The increase is
primarily attributable to the quota-share reinsurance agreement with NMHC signed in the fourth quarter of 2018. Claims expenses represented 79.1% of premiums for the year ended December 31, 2019. We expect future claims expenses to decrease as a percentage of premiums revenue due to the termination of the new reinsurance agreement. Refer to “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 10” in this Form 10-K for further discussion of the reinsurance agreement.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased by $21.6 million, or 9.2%, to $257.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred additional selling, general and administrative expenses due partially to growth in our business resulting from business combinations completed in 2018. Technology costs, personnel costs and lease costs increased by $2.6 million, $8.0 million and $3.6 million, respectively, period over period, as a result of the growing customer base and service offerings. Approximately $12.9 million and $16.1 million of total personnel costs were attributable to stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Ceded expenses
under the reinsurance agreement were $14.0 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Legal fees and other costs increased by $0.5 million and $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to 2018, respectively, while our professional fees decreased by $7.6 million due to the nature and timing of our projects. One-time transaction, transition and severance costs accounted for approximately $17.4 million and $4.4 million of total selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Selling, general and administrative expenses represented 30.4% and 37.5% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. While our selling, general and administrative expenses are expected to grow as our business grows, we expect them to continue to decrease as a percentage of our total revenue over the long term.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $16.4 million, or 36.8%, to $60.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to 2018. The increase was due primarily to additional depreciation and amortization expenses related to assets acquired through business combinations and asset acquisitions during late 2018 and the increase in amortization expense for internal-use software. We expect depreciation and amortization expenses to increase in future periods as we continue to capitalize internal-use software and amortize intangible assets resulting from asset acquisitions and business combinations (including possible future transactions).
Gain on disposal of assets
On May 24, 2019, the Company entered into a joint venture arrangement in respect of GlobalHealth. The Company determined that it has significant influence over the entity, but that it does not have control over the entity. Accordingly, the investment is accounted for under the equity method of accounting and the Company is allocated its proportional share of the entity’s earnings and losses for each reporting period. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a non-cash gain on disposal of assets of $9.6 million upon the consummation of the GlobalHealth transaction.
Goodwill impairment
During the fourth quarter of 2019, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $199.8 million on our consolidated statements of operations as we determined that the implied fair value of goodwill was less than the carrying amount. See “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 8” for further details of the impairment charge to goodwill.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration and indemnification asset
We recorded a gain on change in fair value of contingent consideration and indemnification asset of $4.0 million and $4.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. This variance is the result of changes in the fair values of mark-to-market contingent liabilities acquired as a result of business combinations and asset acquisitions during 2016, 2018 and 2019. See “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 18” in this Form 10-K for further details regarding the fair value of our mark-to-market contingent liabilities.
Discussion of Non-Operating Results
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest from investing cash in money market funds, interest from both our short-term and long-term investments, interest earned on the capital-only reinsurance agreement with NMHC and interest from the implementation loan and amounts contributed to UHC in the form of an advance for regulatory capital requirements under an agreement with UHC. We recorded interest income of $3.2 million, $4.0 million and $3.4 million for years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Interest income decreased during 2020 as a result of lower interest income generated from the capital-only reinsurance agreement with NMHC which was terminated in the fourth quarter of 2019. Interest income increased during 2019 as a result of additional interest income generated from interest payments received on the Implementation Loan and the capital-only
reinsurance agreement with NMHC.
Interest Expense
Our interest expense is primarily attributable to our 2021 Notes, 2024 Notes, 2025 Notes and Credit Agreement with Ares Capital Corporation.
The Company issued its 2021 Notes in December 2016. Holders of the 2021 Notes are entitled to cash interest payments at a rate equal to 2.00% per annum. In addition, we incurred $4.6 million of debt issuance costs in connection with the 2021 Notes, which we are amortizing to non-cash interest expense using the straight-line method over the contractual term of the 2021 Notes.
The Company issued its 2024 Notes in August 2020. As part of the issuance of the 2024 Notes, the Company consummated an exchange offer pursuant to which it issued $84.2 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes in exchange for $84.2 million aggregate principal of its 2021 Notes. Holders of the 2024 Notes are entitled to cash interest payments at a rate equal to 3.50% per annum. In addition, the 2024 Notes contain a cash conversion option, which resulted in a debt discount of $38.1 million, allocated to equity. The amount allocated to equity, along with $3.0 million of debt issuance costs in connection with the 2024 Notes, will be amortized to non-cash interest expense using the effective interest method over the contractual term of the 2024 Notes.
The Company issued its 2025 Notes in October 2018. Holders of the 2025 Notes are entitled to cash interest payments at a rate equal to 1.50% per annum. The 2025 Notes contain a cash conversion option, which resulted in a debt discount of $71.8 million, allocated to equity. The amount allocated to equity, along with $3.4 million of issuance costs, will be amortized to non-cash interest expense using the effective interest method over the contractual term of the 2025 Notes.
The Company entered into the Credit Agreement in December 2019 with Ares Credit Corporation in connection with the Company’s acquisition of certain assets of UHC. Ares Capital Corporation was entitled to cash interest payments. The interest rate for each loan under the Senior Credit Facilities was calculated, at the option of the Borrower, at either the eurodollar rate plus 8.00%, or the base rate plus 7.00%. A commitment fee of 1.00% per annum was payable by the Borrower quarterly in arrears on the unused portion of the DDTL Facility. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $75.0 million outstanding under its Credit Agreement. On January 8, 2021, the Company repaid all outstanding amounts owed under, and terminated, the Credit Agreement with Ares Capital Corporation.
We recorded interest expense (including amortization of deferred financing costs) of approximately $28.3 million, $14.5 million and $5.5 million for years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. See “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 9” in this Form 10-K for further details.
Impairment of Equity Method Investments
As of March 31, 2020, the Oklahoma Insurance Division (“OID”) informed GlobalHealth, Inc. that in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the OID required GlobalHealth, Inc. to increase its regulatory capital surplus by May 15, 2020. It would otherwise be placed into receivership if additional financing could not be secured. Certain investors agreed to provide liquidity as necessary to increase statutory capital reserves to no lower than 300%. In connection with the investment, GlobalHealth, Inc. transferred 100% of the equity interests in GlobalHealth, Inc. to the new investors for no consideration. Closing of this transaction occurred on May 13, 2020. As a result of this transaction, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of approximately $47.1 million, representing the total value of our investment, in impairment of equity method investments on the consolidated statements of operations for the three months ended March 31, 2020.
Gain (Loss) from Equity Method Investees
The Company has acquired economic interests in several entities that are accounted for under the equity method of accounting. The Company is allocated its proportional share of the investees’ earnings and losses each reporting period. The Company’s proportional share of the gains (losses) from these investments was approximately $10.0 million, $(9.5) million and $(4.7) million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
In August 2020, as part of the issuance of the 2024 Notes, the Company issued $84.2 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes in exchange for $84.2 million aggregate principal of its 2021 Notes. There was no cash consideration in these exchanges outside of an aggregate cash payment of $2.5 million paid to exchanging noteholders. These exchanges were accounted for as an extinguishment resulting in a net loss on extinguishment of debt of $4.8 million, including an aggregate cash payment of $2.5 million paid to exchanging noteholders. See “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 9” in this Form 10-K for additional discussion of our exchange of 2021 Notes.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes
The Company recorded $(3.6) million, $(21.5) million and less than $0.1 million in income tax expense (benefit) for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, which resulted in effective tax rates of 1.0%, 6.7% and (0.1)%, respectively. The difference between our effective tax rate and our statutory rate is primarily due to the impacts from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”).
Net Loss Attributable to Non-controlling Interests
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, our results reflected net losses of $3.6 million and $1.5 million, respectively, attributable to non-controlling interests, which represented 1.2% and 3.2% of the operating losses. See “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 17” in this Form 10-K for additional discussion of our non-controlling interests.
REVIEW OF CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL CONDITION
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since its inception, the Company has incurred operating losses and net cash outflows from operations. The Company incurred operating losses of $270.6 million and $306.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash and restricted cash from (used in) operating activities was $(16.2) million and $(42.6) million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $340.5 million of cash and cash equivalents and $21.7 million in restricted cash and restricted investments.
We believe our current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the next twelve months as of the date these financial statements were available to be issued. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth, the expansion of our sales and marketing activities and the timing and extent of our spending to support our investment efforts and expansion into other markets. We may also seek to invest in, or acquire complementary businesses, applications or technologies.
Cash Flows
The following summary of cash flows (in thousands) has been derived from our financial statements included in “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data:”
Operating Activities
Cash flows used in operating activities of $16.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 were due primarily to our net loss of $334.2 million, partially offset by non-cash items, including an impairment of goodwill of $215.1 million, an impairment of an equity method investment of $47.1 million, depreciation and amortization expenses of $61.5 million, stock-based compensation expense of $14.6 million and a loss on the disposal of assets and consolidation of $0.7 million. Our operating cash inflows were affected by the timing of our customer and vendor payments. In addition to these non-cash items, increases in accounts receivables and contract cost assets and decreases in claims reserves contributed approximately $94.5 million to our cash outflows. Those cash outflows were partially offset by an increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and accrued compensation and employee benefits contributed of approximately $23.5 million.
Cash flows used in operating activities of $42.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 were due primarily to our net loss of $305.6 million, partially offset by non-cash items, including goodwill impairment of $199.8 million, depreciation and amortization expenses of $60.9 million, stock-based compensation expense of $15.6 million and a decrease in deferred tax liability of $23.1 million. Our operating cash outflows were affected by the timing of our customer and vendor payments. An increase in contract cost assets combined with accounts payable and accrued liabilities contributed approximately $50.4 million to our cash outflows. Those cash outflows were partially offset by decreases in accounts receivable combined with increases in accrued compensation and employee benefits and claims reserves of approximately $49.1 million.
Cash flows used in operating activities of $20.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2018 were due primarily to our net loss of $54.2 million, partially offset by non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization expenses of $44.5 million and stock-based compensation expense of $17.6 million. Our operating cash outflows were affected by the timing of our customer and vendor payments. A decrease in accrued compensation and employee benefits, combined with increases in accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and contract cost assets, contributed approximately $65.0 million to our cash outflows. Those cash outflows were partially offset by increases in accounts payable, accrued liabilities, claims reserves and other long-term liabilities of approximately $32.0 million.
Investing Activities
Cash flows from investing activities of $261.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily attributable to cash flows from the impact of the initial consolidation of EVH Passport of $159.8 million, maturities and sales of investments primarily held by EVH Passport of $143.4 million, offset, in part by investments in internal-use software and purchases of property and equipment of $29.5 million, disposal of non-strategic assets of $2.3 million and purchases of investments of $11.2 million.
Cash flows used in investing activities of $181.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 were primarily attributable to purchases of property and equipment of $35.5 million, cash paid for asset acquisitions, business combinations and equity method investments of $96.1 million, amounts advanced to satisfy regulatory capital requirements of $46.4 million and purchases of investments of $11.1 million, partially offset by a customer’s repayment of advance to satisfy regulatory capital requirements of $5.4 million.
Cash flows used in investing activities of $160.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily relate to cash paid for asset acquisitions or business combinations of $130.2 million, investments in internal-use software and purchases of property and equipment of $39.6 million, purchases of investments of $10.0 million and investments in equity method investees of $9.4 million. These amounts were partially offset by the $20.0 million principal repayment of the implementation funding loan and net maturities of restricted investments of $7.9 million.
Financing Activities
Cash flows used in financing activities of $11.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily related to a $20.0 million redemption of the Sponsors equity in EVH Passport in accordance with the terms of EVH Passport’s Stockholders’ Agreement as part of the EVH Passport wind-down and repurchase of our 2021 Notes of $16.6 million, $1.9 million of taxes withheld and paid for vests of restricted stock units and a $6.0 million decrease in working capital balances held on behalf of our partners for claims processing services offset, in part by $30.1 million from proceeds of convertible debt. The change in working capital balances held on behalf of partners for claims processing are pass-through amounts and can fluctuate materially from period to period depending on the timing of when the claims are processed.
Cash flows used in financing activities of $35.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 were primarily related to a $104.3 million increase in working capital balances held on behalf of our partners for claims processing as well as $2.6 million of taxes withheld and paid for vests of restricted stock units, offset, in part by net proceeds of $62.6 million from borrowings under the credit agreement.
Cash flows provided by financing activities of $274.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2018 were primarily related to net proceeds of $167.2 million from the issuance of convertible notes. In addition, there was a $96.2 million increase in working capital balances held on behalf of our partners for claims processing. Stock option exercises during the year resulted in additional proceeds of $11.9 million, which were partially offset by $1.2 million of taxes withheld and paid for vests of restricted stock units.
Contractual Obligations
Our estimated contractual obligations (in thousands) as of December 31, 2020, were as follows:
1.Debt principal repayments in 2021 includes voluntary prepayment of the Credit Agreement principal of $75.0 million and the remaining $26.7 million of 2021 Notes. Refer to “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 26” for additional discussion relating to the repayment of the Credit Agreement and 2021 Notes.
2.Warrant settlement in 2021 includes voluntary settlement of the Ares warrant agreements. Refer to “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 26” for additional discussion relating to the settlement of the warrant agreements.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the only material change outside the ordinary course of business in the contractual obligations set forth above was the addition of the principal and interest payments related to the 2024 Notes and the exchange and repurchase of 2021 Notes. Refer to the discussion in “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 9” for additional information on our long-term debt.
Restricted Cash and Restricted Investments
Restricted cash and restricted investments of $21.7 million is carried at cost and includes cash held on behalf of other entities for pharmacy and claims management services of $12.1 million, collateral for letters of credit required as security deposits for facility leases of $3.5 million, amounts held with financial institutions for risk-sharing arrangements of $4.7 million and other restricted balances of $1.3 million as of December 31, 2020. See “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 2” for further details of the Company’s restricted cash balances.
Uses of Capital
Our principal uses of cash are in the operation and expansion of our business. The Company does not anticipate paying a cash dividend on our Class A common stock in the foreseeable future.
OTHER MATTERS
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
Through December 31, 2020, the Company had not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements, other than the operating leases and notes receivable noted above, and did not have any holdings in variable interest entities, other than the unconsolidated variable interest entities discussed in “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 16” within this Form 10-K.
Related Party Transactions
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into transactions with related parties. Information regarding transactions and amounts with related parties is discussed in “Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements - Note 19” within this Form 10-K.
Other Factors Affecting Our Business
In general, our business is subject to a changing social, economic, legal, legislative and regulatory environment. Although the eventual effect on us of the changing environment in which we operate remains uncertain, these factors and others could have a material effect on our results of operations, liquidity and capital resources. Factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those set forth in this section are described in “Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements - Cautionary Language.”