ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on January 24, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The outbreak of the COVID-19 coronavirus has resulted in a widespread health crisis that has adversely affected the economies and financial markets worldwide, and potential target companies may defer or end discussions for a potential business combination with us whether or not COVID-19 affects their business operations. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our search for a business combination will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others. We may be unable to complete a business combination if continued concerns relating to COVID-19 restrict travel, limiting our ability to conduct meetings to negotiate and consummate transactions in a timely manner with potential investors, target company’s personnel, or vendors and services providers.
	On August 4, 2020, simultaneously with the consummation of the IPO, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) with the Sponsor and certain funds and accounts managed by Magnetar Financial LLC, UBS O’Connor LLC, and Mint Tower Capital Management B.V. (collectively the “Anchor Investors”) of 5,250,000 warrants (the “Private Warrants”) at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $5,250,000. On August 14, 2020, simultaneously with the issuance and sale of the Over-Allotment Units, the Company consummated the sale of an additional 450,000 Private Warrants (the “Over-Allotment Private Placement” and, together with the IPO Private Placement, the “Private Placements”), generating gross proceeds of $450,000. The Private Warrants are identical to the Warrants (as defined below) sold in the IPO except that the Private Warrants will be non-redeemable and may be exercised on a cashless basis, in each case so long as they continue to be held by the Sponsor, the anchor investors or their permitted transferees. Additionally, our Sponsor and anchor investors have agreed not to transfer, assign, or sell any of the Private Warrants or underlying securities (except in limited circumstances, as described in the Registration Statement) until the date that is 30 days after the date we complete our initial business combination. The Sponsor and anchor investors were granted certain demand and piggyback registration rights in connection with the purchase of the Private Warrants.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from January 24, 2020 (inception) through August 4, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to consummate the Initial Public Offering, described below. Subsequent to August 4, 2020 our activities include seeking to identify a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of income on investments held in the Trust Account. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from January 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $951,000, which consisted of operating costs of approximately $1,030,000 offset by income on investments held in the Trust Account of approximately $79,000. Included in the operating costs of approximately $1,030,000 is approximately $706,000 of professional, consulting, diligence and other costs related to evaluating business combination candidates, approximately $166,000 for professional, compliance, listing and insurance costs associated with the Company’s public reporting, approximately $83,000 for taxes (a portion of which can be reimbursed from the Trust Account), and approximately $75,000 paid to our Sponsor for Administrative Support Agreement, among other costs
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We consummated our Initial Public Offering of 17,250,000 Units, including the full exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 2,250,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $172,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 5,250,000 Private Placement Warrants to our Sponsor, at $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $5,250,000. On August 14, 2020, simultaneously with the issuance and sale of the Over-Allotment Units, the Company consummated the sale of an additional 450,000 Private Warrants (the “Over-Allotment Private Placement” and, together with the IPO Private Placement, the “Private Placements”), generating gross proceeds of $450,000.
Transaction costs amounted to approximately $9,986,500 consisting of $3,450,000 of underwriting fees, $6,037,500 of deferred underwriting fees and approximately $499,000 of other offering costs.
For the period from January 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was approximately $454,000. Net loss of approximately $951,000 was affected by income earned on investments held in the Trust Account of approximately $79,000. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided approximately $576,000 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $172,579,000 consisting of U. S. government treasury bills which matured on February 4, 2021. Upon maturity, the proceeds were invested in U.S. government treasury bills maturing on May 6, 2021. At December 31, 2020, income of approximately $79,000 was available to us to pay taxes which were accrued at approximately $83,000. Through December 31, 2020, however, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account to pay our taxes. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, to acquire a target business and to pay our expenses relating thereto. To the extent that our capital stock is used in whole or in part as consideration to effect a Business Combination, the remaining funds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees which we had incurred prior to the completion of our Business Combination if the funds available to us outside of the Trust Account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of approximately $1,328,000. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the initial stockholders or an affiliate of the initial stockholders, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of notes may be convertible into Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an agreement to pay our Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on August 4, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $6,037,500. The deferred fee will be payable in cash to the underwriters solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination from the amounts held in the Trust Account, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Deferred Offering Costs:
The Company complies with the requirements of the FASB ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering.” Costs incurred in connection with preparation for the Offering (approximately $9,986,500) including underwriters’ discount paid and deferred, have been charged to equity upon completion of the Offering.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
As discussed in Note 3, all of the 17,250,000 public shares sold as part of Units in the Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of public shares if the Company holds a stockholder vote or there is a tender offer for shares in connection with a Business Combination. In accordance with FASB ASC 480, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of FASB ASC 480. Although the Company did not specify a maximum redemption threshold, its charter provides that in no event will it redeem its public shares in an amount that would cause its net tangible assets (stockholders’ equity) to be less than $5,000,001 upon the closing of a Business Combination.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the securities at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by adjustments to additional paid-in capital. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 16,229,286 of the 17,250,000 public shares were classified outside of permanent equity.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 14,325,000 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted income (loss) per common share is the same as basic loss per common share for the period.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. Net income (loss) per share, basic and diluted for Class A common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the funds in the Trust Account, net of income tax expense and franchise tax expense, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding since their original issuance. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted, for shares of Class B common stock is calculated by dividing the net income (loss), less income attributable to Class A common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B common stock outstanding for the period. Net income (loss) available to each class of common stockholders is as follows for the three months ended December 31, 2020 and for the period from January 24, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020:
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.