Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read together with “Business” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report, as well as the consolidated financial statements and accompanying footnotes in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and Part I “Forward-looking Statements” of this Annual Report, and elsewhere in this report. These statements are based on current expectations and assumptions that are subject to risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed.
Company Overview
EVO Transportation & Energy Services, Inc. is a transportation provider serving the USPS and other customers. We are the second largest surface transportation company serving the USPS with approximately 1,000 vehicles in operation as of December 31, 2019. Of these, approximately 200 vehicles operate on CNG which makes us the largest user of alternative fuels amongst transportation companies serving the USPS. In certain markets, we fuel our vehicles at one of our five dedicated CNG stations which serve other customers as well. We operate from our headquarters in Phoenix, Arizona and from 15 facilities in 17 states.
We have grown primarily through acquisitions, and we have completed seven acquisitions since our initial business combination in 2016. We have also grown organically by obtaining new contracts from the USPS and other customers. During 2019, we were awarded 114 additional contracts from the USPS which are expected to generate $15.2 million in annual revenue. We have been actively integrating the acquisitions we have made under common leadership and technology and are now operating under a single brand.
Recent Developments
The Company completed the following acquisitions in 2019:
•
On January 2, 2019, the Company acquired Sheehy. Sheehy is based in Waterloo, Wisconsin and is engaged in the business of fulfilling government contracts for freight trucking services, as well as providing freight trucking services to non-government entities.
•
On February 1, 2019, the Company acquired Ursa and JB Lease. Ursa and JB Lease are based in Oak Creek, Wisconsin and are engaged in the business of fulfilling government contracts for freight trucking services, as well as providing freight trucking services to non-government entities.
•
On July 15, 2019, the Company acquired Finkle and Courtlandt. Finkle and Courtlandt are based in Newark, New Jersey and are engaged in the business of fulfilling government contracts for freight trucking services, as well as providing freight trucking services to non-government entities.
•
On September 16, 2019, the Company acquired the Ritter Companies. The Ritter Companies are based in Laurel, Maryland and engaged in the business of fulfilling government contracts for freight trucking services, as well as providing freight trucking services to non-government entities. As discussed in Note 7, Debt, to the consolidated financial statements, the Company entered into a $24.5 million financing agreement in order to finance the acquisition of the Ritter Companies.
Key Trends & Anticipated Future Trends
The USPS has for more than 100 years contracted with private carriers to transport mail between its processing plants and post office locations. In 2016, the USPS began implementing a new Dynamic Route Optimization (DRO) initiative to retool its private carrier contracting strategy. For decades, the USPS hired private carriers to transport mail over specific routes on a set schedule at fixed prices under its Highway Contract Routes (HCR) program. The DRO initiative aims to replace fixed-price HCR contracts with rate-per-mile DRO contracts that have varying departure times, lines of travel, and mail types transported based on mail volume. By “optimizing” its routes, the USPS seeks to reduce mileage and lower its transportation costs.
We believe the USPS’s new distribution strategy under the DRO initiative is causing a fundamental change to its contracting activity with private carriers. Historically, HCR contracts often were awarded to smaller carriers capable of performing under a limited number of fixed-price, -route, and -cost contracts. In 2014, the USPS had contracts with more than 4,000 carriers, many servicing the same or overlapping territories. With the implementation of the DRO program, the USPS has a stated goal to manage fewer relationships and reduce its number of carriers to fewer than 1,000 by 2022. The USPS is aiming to consolidate all contracts within a defined geographical area into one contract with a single carrier. Accordingly, DRO contracts are being awarded to carriers with larger service territories that have the capacity to increase or reduce services to adjust for changes in mail volume.
We expect the USPS to continue its contract consolidation efforts in the foreseeable future. In its five-year strategic plan for fiscal years 2020 through 2024, the USPS reported it intends to continue to deploy dynamic routing technologies and processes for plant-to-plant and plant-to-post office transportation and to expand carrier relationships where best aligned to improve service reliability, lower costs, and increase capabilities. We estimate that over $1 billion in USPS contracts will become available in the next five years as the USPS continues to roll out its DRO program. We believe the USPS’s consolidation efforts can help the Company grow organically through new contracting opportunities.
During 2019, we bid on and won two new USPS DRO contracts. We intend to continue bidding on new and existing DRO contract opportunities as they arise. DRO contracts are bid competitively and performed in accordance with various requirements, including, but not limited to requirements under the Service Contract Act, Department of Transportation regulations (federal and state), and other applicable local and state regulations. The USPS evaluates the bids based on price, past performance, operational plans, financial resources, and the use of innovation or alternative fuels. USPS contracts typically have four-year terms, but can range from two to six years, and often are renewed with the incumbent carrier after expiration of the initial term.
In addition to organic growth, the Company expects to further increase its footprint into the transportation industry by acquiring, owning, and operating transportation companies. The Company intends to target acquisition candidates that have won contracts to provide trucking services for the USPS. Our CNG business complements this expansion strategy since fueling our CNG trucks at our own stations in cases where our routes are located near our CNG facilities will allow us to implement cost saving strategies that will increase profitability and increase our presence in this space.
We experienced significant growth in USPS contract revenue through acquisitions and organic growth during 2018 and 2019. We obtained a total of 170 USPS contracts pursuant to our acquisitions of Thunder Ridge on June 1, 2018, Graham on November 18, 2018, Sheehy Mail on January 2, 2019, Ursa and JB Lease on February 1, 2019, Courtlandt and Finkle on July 15, 2019, and the Ritter Companies on September 16, 2019. These operating subsidiaries won an additional 145 USPS contracts post-acquisition. We currently service 315 USPS contracts across 42 states.
Sources of Revenue
Our USPS trucking operations generates revenue for our trucking segment from transportation services under multi-year contracts with the USPS, generally on a rate per mile basis that adjusts monthly for fuel pricing indexes.
Our freight trucking operations generates revenue for our trucking segment by providing both irregular and dedicated route and cross-border transportation services of various products, goods, and materials for a diverse customer base.
Our CNG station revenue is derived predominately pursuant to contractual fuel purchase commitments. These contracts typically include a stand-ready obligation to supply natural gas daily. The CNG stations are also open to individual consumers. In addition to revenue earned from our customers, we may also earn alternative fuel tax credits through certain federal programs. These programs are generally short-term in nature and require legislation to be passed extending the term.
Results from Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2019, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Trucking Segment
Substantially all of the increases in Trucking revenue and operating expenses from the year ended December 31, 2018 to the year ended December 31, 2019 are due to 2018 including the acquisition of, and partial-year results of operations for, Thunder Ridge while 2019 includes full-year results of operations for Thunder Ridge as well as the acquisitions of, and partial-year results of operations for, Sheehy, Ursa, JB Lease, Finkle, Courtlandt and the Ritter Companies.
Trucking revenue: The Company earned trucking revenue for the first time in 2018 as a result of the Thunder Ridge and Graham acquisitions in June and November 2018, respectively. The majority of trucking revenue is derived from the USPS. The remainder of the revenue is derived from corporate freight hauling. The USPS contracts are typically four years in duration with pricing varying by contract. The USPS contracts also include a monthly fuel adjustment.
Payroll, benefits and related: Of the Company’s 1,503 employees at year-end, 1,228 were drivers. Driver wages are fixed per contract with USPS and are eligible for renegotiation with USPS on a bi-annual basis. In addition to an hourly wage that is set by the Department of Labor, drivers also earn an incremental hourly rate for benefits.
Purchased transportation: Purchased transportation represents payments to subcontracted third party companies. These contracts are negotiated on a rate per mile basis and the subcontracting company is responsible for supplying all resources to perform the service including, but not limited to labor, equipment, fuel and associated expenses. The Company utilized purchased transportation for less than 10% of the Company’s total miles for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Fuel: Fuel expense is comprised of diesel and CNG fuel required to operate the truck fleet. The Company manages fuel cost by negotiating volume discounts from rack fuel rates with select vendors.
Equipment rent: The Company rents and leases a portion of its trucks and trailers through a combination of short and long-term arrangements. Efforts are currently underway to rebalance the fleet towards having more company-owned assets to achieve the expected returns, subject to financing availability.
Maintenance and Supplies: Maintenance and supplies expense primarily includes the costs to maintain the fleet.
Operating supplies and expenses: Operating and supplies expense includes all other direct costs in the trucking segment.
Insurance and claims: Insurance and claims is comprised of auto liability and physical damage and workers comp expense related to the trucking segment of the business.
CNG Fueling Stations Segment
CNG revenue: Revenue for the CNG stations was $1.7 million and $1.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase is due primarily to additional tax rebate revenue received during 2019.
CNG operating expenses: CNG operating expense is comprised of natural gas, electricity, federal excise tax, vendor use fuel tax and credit card fees.
Impairment: Impairment expense was $3.6 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Of the $3.6 million impairment expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, $3.5 million was related to the CNG fueling stations segment, and the increase in impairment expense is due primarily to the compression of commodity prices.
EVO Consolidated
General and administrative: General and administrative expense was $13.0 million and $3.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in general and administrative expense is due primarily to 2018 including the acquisition of, and partial-year results of operations for, Thunder Ridge while 2019 included full-year results of operations for Thunder Ridge as well as the acquisitions of, and partial-year results of operations for, Sheehy, Ursa, JB Lease, Finkle, Courtlandt and the Ritter Companies.
Depreciation and amortization: Depreciation and amortization expense was $7.8 million and $1.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in depreciation and amortization expense is due primarily to 2018 including the acquisition of, and partial-year results of operations for, Thunder Ridge while 2019 included full-year results of operations for Thunder Ridge as well as the acquisitions of, and partial-year results of operations for, Sheehy, Ursa, JB Lease, Finkle, Courtlandt and the Ritter Companies.
Interest expense: Interest expense increased to $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in interest expense is due primarily to the incurrence of debt obligations to finance the Company’s 2019 acquisitions, including the September 2019 Financing Agreement, as well as the assumption of debt obligations in connection with such acquisitions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Year Ended December 31, 2019, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Changes in Liquidity
Cash and Cash Equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents were $3.3 million and $1.6 million at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase is attributable to financing activities consummated during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operations was $15.2 million and $6.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company had a net loss of $32.7 million and $6.6 million, respectively. For 2019, the net loss was partially offset by $17.3 million in adjustments for non-cash items and $0.2 million of cash provided by changes in working capital. Non-cash items primarily consisted of $7.8 million in depreciation and amortization, $4.6 million in non-cash interest expense, $3.6 million in impairment charges, non-cash lease expense of $3.2 million, amortization of debt discount of $1.6 million, and stock option and warrant-based compensation expense of $1.6 million, partially offset by a $5.5 million adjustment for deferred income taxes. For 2018, cash used in operations approximates and was primarily attributed to net loss.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $22.4 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The net cash used in investing activities during 2019 is primarily related to $19.5 million of cash consideration paid for acquisitions and $3.1 million of equipment purchases. During 2018, cash used in investing activities is primarily related to cash consideration paid for acquisitions.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $39.2 million and $8.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The cash provided by financing activities during 2019 primarily consisted of $163.5 million in advances from factoring receivables, proceeds of $30.1 million from the issuance of debt, and $11.4 million in proceeds from the sale of common stock and warrants, partially offset by $153.8 million in payments on factoring arrangements, and $11.3 million in payments of debt principal. The cash provided by financing activities during 2018 primarily consisted of $4.1 million in advances from factoring receivables, gross proceeds of $4.0 million (less $0.5 million in debt issuance costs) from secured convertible debt, and $2.5 million from the sale of common stock, less $0.8 million in payments on the subordinated convertible senior notes payable to stockholders, and $0.7 million in payments on other debt obligations.
Sources of Liquidity
Our primary historical and future sources of liquidity are cash on hand ($3.3 million at December 31, 2019), the incurrence of additional indebtedness, the sale of the Company’s common stock or preferred stock, and advances under our accounts receivable factoring arrangements. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional financing in the future via the incurrence of additional indebtedness or the sale of the Company’s common stock or preferred stock.
Uses of Liquidity
Our business requires substantial amounts of cash for operating activities, including salaries and wages paid to our employees, contract payments to independent contractors, and payments for fuel, maintenance and supplies, and other expenses. We also use large amounts of cash and credit for principal and interest payments, as well as operating and finance lease liabilities and capital expenditures to fund the replacement and/or growth in our tractor and trailer fleet.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2019, we had a cash balance of $3.3 million, a working capital deficit of $66.2 million, stockholders’ deficit of $12.7 million, and material debt and lease obligations of $72.8 million, which included term loan borrowings under a financing agreement with Antara Capital. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we reported cash used in operating activities of $15.2 million and a net loss of $32.7 million.
The following significant transactions and events affecting our liquidity occurred following the year ended December 31, 2019:
•
During the first quarter of 2020, we entered into Forbearance Agreements and Incremental Amendments to the Financing Agreement with Antara Capital and obtained an additional $6.3 million in term loan commitments and the lenders agreed to forbear from exercising certain rights, remedies, powers, privileges, and defenses under the Financing Agreement during the forbearance period. These incremental borrowings were subject to the same terms as our existing term loan commitments with Antara Capital. During the fourth quarter of 2020, in connection with our borrowing under the Main Street Priority Loan Program (as subsequently discussed), we
paid down the aggregate principal amount due to Antara, including capitalized interest, from $25.4 million at December 31, 2019 (and $31.7 million after the first quarter 2020 borrowings) to $16.7 million, the forbearance period related to the remaining Antara debt was terminated and all existing defaults and events of defaults were waived, and the maturity date of the remaining outstanding term loan balance under the Antara Financing Agreement was extended from September 16, 2022 to the earlier of the date that is ninety-one days after the fifth anniversary of the closing date of the Main Street Loan or the date that is ninety-one days after the date the Main Street Loan is paid in full.
•
During the first quarter of 2020, we sold a total of 1,260,000 shares of our common stock and 1,000,000 shares of our Series B preferred stock to related parties for aggregate gross proceeds of $6.2 million pursuant to the terms of subscription agreements.
•
During the second quarter of 2020, we obtained a loan in the amount of $10.0 million under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act. The principal amount of the loan and accrued interest are eligible for forgiveness, and we have submitted a request for such forgiveness.
•
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we borrowed $17.0 million under the Main Street Priority Loan Program authorized by Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act (the “Main Street Loan”) and used all of the net proceeds to refinance a portion of the amount outstanding under the Antara Financing Agreement and to pay related prepayment premiums. The entire outstanding principal balance of the Main Street Loan, together with all accrued and unpaid interest, is due and payable in full on December 14, 2025.
•
During the first quarter of 2021, we entered into agreements with the USPS to settle claims submitted by us seeking additional compensation for work performed under Dynamic Route Optimization (“DRO”) contracts since 2018. We received a total of $28.4 million related to this historical work performed and also renegotiated the contractual rates per mile for some of our DRO contracts on a prospective basis.
•
During the first quarter of 2021, we entered into an agreement with our factoring lender (“Triumph”) related to the application of $17.5 million of proceeds received from the USPS arising out of prior underpayments on certain DRO contracts. Pursuant to the agreement, the parties agreed that Triumph would remit $11.0 million of net proceeds to us and that Triumph would retain approximately $6.9 million of net proceeds and apply that amount to reduce the outstanding principal amount of our factoring advances. The parties further agreed that we will repay the remaining balance of approximately $6.9 million due under the factoring arrangement in 48 equal monthly installments beginning January 1, 2022, and that Triumph will apply funds held in reserve against the approximately $0.8 million remaining balance for advances that Triumph made to us in September 2020. The parties also agreed to work together to wind down their factoring relationship, including waiver of any applicable termination fees.
•
During the first and second quarters of 2021, we entered into agreements with certain noteholders to purchase promissory notes previously issued by us in the principal amount of $0.6 million by paying $0.1 million in cash and issuing warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to 231,453 shares of our common stock at a price of $0.01 per share.
While these transactions and events resulted in an overall increase in our cash balance as of March 31, 2021, an overall reduction in our working capital deficit as of March 31, 2021, and an overall extension of the maturity dates for our debt obligations, we continue to have a working capital deficit and stockholders’ deficit as of March 31, 2021 and continue to incur net losses for 2021. As a result of these circumstances, we believe our existing cash, together with any positive cash flows from operations, may not be sufficient to support working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the next 12 months, and we may be required to seek additional financing from outside sources.
In evaluating the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern and our potential need to seek additional financing from outside sources, management also considered the following conditions:
•
The counterparty to our accounts receivable factoring arrangement is not obligated to purchase our accounts receivable or make advances to us under such arrangement;
•
We are currently in default on certain of our debt obligations; and
•
There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional financing in the future via the incurrence of additional indebtedness or via the sale of our common stock or preferred stock.
As a result of the circumstances described above, we may not have sufficient liquidity to make the required payments on our debt, factoring or leasing obligations; to satisfy future operating expenses; to make capital expenditures; or to provide for other cash needs.
Management’s plans to mitigate the Company’s current conditions include:
•
Negotiating with related parties and 3rd parties to refinance existing debt and lease obligations;
•
Potential future public or private debt or equity offerings;
•
Acquiring new profitable contracts and negotiating revised pricing for existing contracts;
•
Profitably expanding trucking revenue;
•
Cost reduction efforts, including eliminating redundant costs across the companies acquired during 2019 and 2018;
•
Improvements to operations to gain driver efficiencies;
•
Purchases of trucks and trailers to reduce purchased transportation; and
•
Replacement of older trucks with newer trucks to lower the overall cost of ownership and improve cash flow through reduced maintenance and fuel costs.
Notwithstanding management’s plans, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in our efforts to address our current liquidity and capital resource constraints. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern for twelve months from the issuance of these financial statements on Form 10-K. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Refer to Notes 1, 7 and 11 to the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding our debt, factoring, and lease obligations, including the future maturities of such obligations. Refer to Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding changes in our debt obligations and liquidity subsequent to December 31, 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Refer to Note 12, Commitments and Contingencies - Off Balance Sheet Arrangements - Captive Insurance.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“US GAAP”). The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and revenues and expenses recorded during the reporting periods.
On a periodic basis we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience and various other assumptions we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions. For further information on our significant accounting policies, refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Purchase Accounting
We are required to estimate the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations as of the acquisition date, including identified intangible assets. The amount of purchase price paid in excess of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. The fair values are estimated in accordance with accounting standards which define fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. The fair values of the net assets acquired are determined primarily using Level 3 inputs (inputs that are unobservable to the marketplace participant).
The most significant fair value estimates include intangible assets (customer relationships and trade names) subject to amortization. We recorded $4.0 million and $2.8 million of acquired intangible assets in connection with the 2019 and 2018 acquisitions, respectively. These amounts of intangible assets were determined based primarily on the acquiree’s projected cash flows. The projected cash flows include various assumptions, including estimated revenue growth rates, operating margins, customer attrition rates, royalty rates, and the appropriate risk-adjusted discount rates used to discount the projected cash flows. The residual value assigned to goodwill was $22.0 million and $2.9 million, respectively, for the 2019 and 2018 acquisitions.
Goodwill
We test goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or circumstances make it more likely than not that an impairment may have occurred, such as a significant adverse change in the business climate or a decision to sell all or a portion of a reporting unit. We perform our annual goodwill impairment test as of October 1 and monitor for interim triggering events on an ongoing basis. All of the Company’s goodwill is recorded in its Trucking reporting unit.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment utilizing either a qualitative assessment or a quantitative goodwill impairment test. If we choose to perform a qualitative assessment and determine the fair value more likely than not exceeds the carrying value, no further evaluation is necessary. When we perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test, we compare the fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying value, which includes goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, the goodwill is not considered impaired. If the carrying value is higher than the fair value, the difference would be recognized as an impairment loss.
The impairment test process requires valuation of the reporting unit, which we determine using a combination of the income, or discounted cash flows, approach and the market approach. The assumptions about future cash flows and growth rates are based on the reporting unit's long-term forecast and are subject to review and approval by senior management. A reporting unit’s discount rate is a risk-adjusted weighted average cost of capital, which we believe approximates the rate from a market participant's perspective. The estimated fair value could be impacted by changes in market conditions, interest rates, growth rates, tax rates, costs, pricing and capital expenditures. The fair value determination is categorized as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy due to its use of internal projections and unobservable measurement inputs.
During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, the impairment tests did not result in an impairment of goodwill.
Long-Lived Assets
The Company evaluates the recoverability of long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an asset’s carrying amount may not be recoverable. Such circumstances could include, but are not limited to (1) a significant decrease in the market value of an asset, (2) a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used, or (3) an accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition of an asset. The Company measures the carrying amount of the asset against the estimated undiscounted future cash flows associated with it. Should the sum of the expected future net cash flows be less than the carrying value of the asset being evaluated, an impairment loss would be recognized. The impairment loss would be calculated as the amount by which the carrying value of the asset exceeds its fair value. The fair value is measured based on quoted market prices, if available.
If quoted market prices are not available, the estimate of fair value is based on various valuation techniques, including the discounted value of estimated future cash flows. The evaluation of asset impairment requires the Company to make assumptions about future cash flows over the life of the asset being evaluated. These assumptions require significant judgment and actual results may differ from assumed and estimated amounts. The assumptions about future cash flows and growth rates are based on the asset group’s long-term forecast and are subject to review and approval by senior management. An asset group’s discount rate is a risk-adjusted weighted average cost of capital, which we believe approximates the rate from a market participant's perspective. The estimated fair value could be impacted by changes in market conditions, interest rates, growth rates, tax rates, costs, pricing and capital expenditures. The fair value determination is categorized as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy due to its use of internal projections and unobservable measurement inputs.
An impairment expense of $3.5 million related to the CNG Fueling Stations asset group was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Fair Valuation of Common Stock, Warrants and Stock Options
Our executive officers, directors and principal stockholders beneficially own a substantial majority of the Company’s outstanding common stock. The Company’s common stock does not have an observable quoted market price on the OTC Pink Marketplace because the stock is thinly traded. As a result, we must utilize an alternative method to estimate the fair value of our common stock, including when the Company issues other equity instruments for which the common stock is the underlying security. One commonly accepted approach to valuing the equity of a company in similar circumstances, including a distressed or highly-leveraged company, is viewing the equity as a call option on the debt. The equity of a company is a residual claim to all cash flows remaining after other financial claim-holders (e.g., debt) have been satisfied. If a company is liquidated, the same principle applies in which equity investors receive cash flows remaining in a company after all outstanding debts and other financial claims are settled. Therefore, equity can be viewed as a call option on a company and valued using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Accordingly, we apply the Black-Scholes option pricing model to the assets and debt of the Company as of each valuation date to estimate the fair value of Company common stock. The key assumptions utilized in the Black-Scholes option pricing model for the fair valuation of the Company’s common stock are: i) an exercise price equal to the Company’s total liabilities; ii) a stock price equal to the Company’s total assets; iii) an estimated expected term or holding period; iv) an estimated stock price volatility based upon comparable companies; and v) an estimated risk-free interest rate. The estimated fair value of the Company’s common stock is a key assumption in the fair valuation of the warrants and stock options the Company issues.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation awards based on the fair value of the award as of the grant date, which is calculated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions, including the estimated fair value of the Company’s common stock, the expected term of the award, the expected stock price volatility, expected dividend yield and the risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the award. The expected term represents the period of time the awards are expected to be outstanding. Due to the lack of sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to otherwise estimate the expected term of the awards, we use the simplified method to estimate the expected term for our stock-based compensation awards. Under the simplified method, the expected term of an award is presumed to be the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. Expected volatility is based on historical volatilities for publicly traded stock of comparable companies over the estimated expected term of the awards. We assume no dividend yield because dividends on our common stock are not expected to be paid in the near future, which is consistent with our history of not paying dividends on our common stock.
Deferred Income Tax Assets and Liabilities
The carrying values of deferred income tax assets and liabilities reflect the application of our income tax accounting policies in accordance with applicable accounting standards and are based on management’s assumptions and estimates regarding future operating results and levels of taxable income, as well as management’s judgment regarding the interpretation of the provisions of applicable accounting standards. The carrying values of liabilities for income taxes currently payable are based on management’s interpretations of applicable tax laws and incorporate management’s assumptions and judgments regarding the use of tax planning strategies in various taxing jurisdictions. The use of different estimates, assumptions and judgments in connection with accounting for income taxes may result in materially different carrying values of income tax assets and liabilities and results of operations.
We evaluate the recoverability of these deferred tax assets by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. These sources of income inherently rely heavily on estimates. We use our historical experience and our short and long-term business forecasts to provide insight. To the extent we do not consider it more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will be recovered, a valuation allowance is established. As of December 31, 2019, we had federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $40.0 million and $25.0 million, respectively, to offset future taxable income. Federal and some state net operating loss carryforwards generated in tax years ending after December 31, 2017 can be carried forward indefinitely. These federal and state net operating loss carryforwards are reserved with a full valuation allowance because, based on the available evidence, we believe it is more likely than not that we would not be able to utilize those deferred tax assets in the future. If the actual amounts of taxable income differ from our estimates, the amount of our valuation allowance could be materially impacted. Federal and state operating loss carryforwards start to expire in 2036 and 2021, respectively. Of the $40.0 million federal operating loss carryforwards, $2.0 million of the operating loss carryforwards begin to expire in 2036. Federal operating loss carryforwards generated in 2018 or later have indefinite lives and are subject to an 80% limitation of taxable income in the year of use.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Seasonality and Inflation
Due to increased USPS volume, the Company’s tractor productivity typically increases during the last quarter of each calendar year. At the same time, operating expenses increase and fuel efficiency declines because of engine idling and harsh weather creating higher accident frequency, increased claims and higher equipment repair expenditures. The Company also may suffer from weather-related or other events such as tornadoes, hurricanes, blizzards, ice storms, floods, fires, earthquakes and explosions. These events may disrupt fuel supplies, increase fuel costs, disrupt freight shipments or routes, affect regional economies, destroy the Company’s assets or adversely affect the business or financial condition of customers, any of which could adversely affect the Company’s results or make the Company’s results more volatile.
To some extent, we experience seasonality with the CNG business. Natural gas vehicle fuel amounts consumed by some of our customers tend to be higher in summer months when fleet vehicles use more fuel to power their air conditioning systems. Natural gas commodity prices tend to be higher in the fall and winter months due to increased overall demand for natural gas for heating during these periods. With the USPS contracts the trucking segment experiences a significant increase in business from the last week of November through the end of December
Since our inception, inflation has not significantly affected our operating results. However, costs for construction, repairs, maintenance, electricity and insurance are all subject to inflationary pressures, which could affect our ability to maintain our stations adequately, build new stations, expand our existing facilities or pursue additional CNG production projects, or could materially increase our operating costs.