Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included in Part IV of this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, beliefs and expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors including, but not limited to, those discussed in Item 1 (Business) and Item 1A (Risk Factors) of Part I of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a provider of new purpose-built zero-emission electric vehicles focused on total cost of ownership. The vehicles are manufactured by outside, original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”) partners located in China, Malaysia and the Philippines that can be marketed, sold, warrantied and serviced through our developing distribution and service network. We also are a provider of advanced zero-emission electric drivetrain systems for integration in new buses and medium to heavy-duty commercial fleet vehicles. We also provide re-power conversion kits to replace conventional drivetrain systems for combustion powered vehicles with zero-emission electric drivetrain systems. Our vehicles and drivetrain systems are designed to help fleet operators unlock the benefits of technology that reduces greenhouse gases (“GHG”), nitrous oxide (“NOx”), particulate matter (“PM”) and other pollutants, as well as to address the challenges of local, state and federal regulatory compliance and traditional-fuel price cost instability.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, we generated sales revenue of approximately $618,000 and $12.6 million, respectively, and our net losses were approximately $4.4 million and $5.2 million, respectively.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that the growth and future success of our business depend on various opportunities, challenges and other factors, including the following:
•
COVID-19 pandemic. Global health concerns related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic have resulted in social, economic and labor instability in the countries in which we or the third parties with whom we engage operate, and resulted in unexpected legal and regulatory changes, such as travel, social distancing and quarantine policies, boycotts, curtailment of trade, and other business restrictions that have negatively our ability to procure and sell our products and provide our services. Accordingly, our future performance will depend in part upon our ability to successfully respond and adapt to these challenges and we have developed, and continue to develop, plans to address the ongoing effects and help mitigate the potential negative impact of the pandemic on our business.
•
Availability of government subsidies, rebates and economic incentives. We believe that the availability of government subsidies, rebates, and economic incentives is currently a critical factor considered by our customers when purchasing our zero-emission systems or converting their existing vehicles to zero-emission-electric or hybrids, and that our growth depends in large part on the availability and amounts of these subsidies and economic incentives. In particular, our business and operating results have been and continue to be significantly affected by our inability to resolve the California HVIP funding backlog created by the program’s staff that has to-date prevented us and our customers from accessing the funds, creating a significant delay in our ability to deliver products and to obtain new orders. We are working with the California Air Resources Board and the HVIP to resolve the administrative issues.
•
New customers. We are competing with other companies and technologies to help fleet managers and their districts/companies more efficiently and cost-effectively manage their fleet operations. Once these fleet managers have decided they want to buy from us, we still face challenges helping them obtain financing options to reduce the cost barriers to purchasing. We may also encounter customers with inadequate electrical services at their facilities that may delay their ability to purchase from us.
•
Dependence on external sources of financing of our operations. We have historically depended on external sources for capital to finance our operations. Our ability to raise additional capital on terms that are acceptable to us has until very recently depended, in large part, on our ability to mitigate the impact of certain anti-dilution rights contained in our outstanding warrants that have, through December 4, 2020, restricted our ability to obtain such funding. However, on December 2, 2020, as discussed in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we entered into Exchange Agreements (the “Exchange Agreements”) with the holders (collectively, the “Holders”) of outstanding warrants of the Company to purchase 5,499,997 shares of the Company’s common stock, $0.00001 par value per share (“Common Stock”) issued in January 2018 (the “Warrants”). Pursuant to the Exchange Agreements, the Holders agreed to cancel the Warrants in exchange for the issuance of 27,499,985 shares of Common Stock (the “Exchange”). The closing of the Exchange is occurred on December 4, 2020. The shares of Common Stock were issued in reliance on the exemption from registration provided by Section 3(a)(9) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. As discussed below in Liquidity and Capital Resources, and in Notes 6 and 7 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we did subsequently raise additional capital.
•
Investment in growth. We plan to continue to invest for long-term growth. We anticipate that our operating expenses will increase in the foreseeable future as we invest in research and development to enhance our zero-emission electric vehicles and systems; design, develop and manufacture our commercial fleet vehicles and their components; increase our sales and marketing to acquire new customers; and increase our general and administrative functions to support our growing operations. We believe that these investments will contribute to our long-term growth, although they will adversely affect our results of operations in the near term. In addition, the timing of these investments can result in fluctuations in our annual and quarterly operating results.
•
Zero-emission electric vehicle experience. Our dealer and service network is not currently completely established, although we do have certain agreements in place. One issue they may have, and we may encounter, is finding appropriately trained technicians with zero-emission electric fleet vehicle experience. Our performance will depend on having a robust dealer and service network, which will require appropriately trained technicians to be successful. Because vehicles that utilize our technology are based on a different technology platform than traditional internal combustion engines, individuals with sufficient training in zero-emission electric vehicles may not be available to hire, and we may need to expend significant time and expense training the employees we do hire. If we are not able to attract, assimilate, train or retain additional highly qualified personnel in the future, or do so cost-effectively, our performance would be significantly and adversely affected.
•
Market growth. We believe the market for all-electric solutions for alternative fuel technology, specifically all-electric vehicles, will continue to grow as more purchases of new zero-emission vehicles and as more conversions of existing fleet vehicles to zero-emission vehicles are made. However, unless the costs to produce such vehicles decrease dramatically, purchases of our products will continue to depend in large part on financing subsidies from government agencies. We cannot be assured of the continued availability, the amounts of such assistance to our customers, or our ability to access such funds.
•
Sales revenue growth from additional products. We seek to add to our product offerings additional zero-emission vehicles of all sizes manufactured by outside OEM partners, to be marketed, sold, warrantied and serviced through our developing distribution and service network, as well as add other ancillary products discussed elsewhere in this report.
•
Third-party contractors, suppliers and manufacturers. We rely upon third parties to supply us with raw materials, parts, components and services in adequate quantity in a timely manner and at reasonable prices, quality levels, and volumes acceptable to us. Significant outbreaks of contagious diseases such as COVID-19, and other adverse public health developments, could have a material impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations. In 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 has led to
numerous confirmed cases worldwide, including in the Unites States. In addition to those who have been directly affected, millions more have been affected by governmental efforts around the world to slow the spread of the outbreak. Accordingly, our future performance will depend in part upon our third-party resources’ ability to respond and adapt to unexpected legal and regulatory changes resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, such as shelter-in-place orders, travel, social distancing and quarantine policies, boycotts, curtailment of trade, and other business restrictions affecting their ability to assemble and deliver our products to us so that we can conduct our business.
Components of Results of Operations
Sales
Sales are recognized from the sales of new, purpose-built zero-emission electric vehicles; zero-emission electric drivetrain systems for fleet vehicles; the sale and/or installation of re-power conversion kits to replace conventional drivetrain systems in combustion powered vehicles with zero-emission electric drivetrain systems; and from contracting to provide engineering services. The Company also, in 2020, began providing vehicle maintenance and safety inspection services. Sales are recognized in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, as discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes those costs related to the development, manufacture, and distribution of our products. Specifically, we include in cost of sales each of the following: material costs (including commodity costs); freight costs; labor and other costs related to the development and manufacture of our products; and other associated costs. Cost of sales for long-term contracts are recognized proportionate to the prescribed gross profit of each contract. Cost of sales also includes costs related to the valuation of inventory due to impairment, obsolescence, or shrinkage.
General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses include all corporate and administrative functions that support our company, including personnel-related expense and stock-based compensation costs; costs related to investor relations activities; warranty costs, including product recall and customer satisfaction program costs; consulting costs; marketing-related expenses; and other expenses that cannot be included in cost of sales.
Consulting and Research and Development Costs
These expenses are related to our consulting and research and development activity.
Other Income/Expenses, Net
Other income/expenses include non-operating income and expenses, including interest income and expense.
Provision for Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 740 “Income Taxes,” which requires the recognition of deferred income tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statements carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Under FASB ASC 740, the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period the enactment occurs. A valuation allowance is provided for certain deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that we will not realize tax assets through future operations. Because we have incurred only losses to this point, no provision for income taxes has been made.
Results of Operations
The following discussion compares operating data for the year ended December 31, 2020 to the data for the year ended December 31, 2019:
Sales
Sales, severely impacted by the HVIP-created administrative delays and subsequent denying us access to funding, were approximately $618,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of cargo vans sold to the City of Palmdale in July, SnowCap Community Charities in June, and to the City of Orlando Florida in January, as well as fees due us relating to the Blue Bird termination agreement, as discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, and maintenance and inspection services provided.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of sales related to the sales revenue described above and were approximately $303,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $11.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Expenses
1 Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $4.4 million, compared to approximately $5.7 million for 2019, a decrease of approximately $1.3 million, which was primarily related to decreases in non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $420,987; a $406,537 decrease in salaries and benefits; a $173,898 decrease in investor relations expenses; a $139,694 decrease in legal expenses and decreases in other general and administrative expenses in the current year period of approximately $159,000. The 2020 general and administrative expenses include approximately $729,000 in non-cash charges, including $347,000 in non-cash stock-based compensation expense, $338,000 in bad debt expense related to notes receivable and $44,000 in depreciation expense. The 2019 general and administrative expenses include approximately $1.1 million in non-cash
charges, including $768,550 in non-cash stock-based compensation expense, $273,972 in bad debt expense, and $48,576 in depreciation expense.
Consulting
Consulting expenses were approximately $155,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $333,000 for 2019, primarily the result of the absence of grant application and tax credit consulting expenses incurred in 2019 that were not incurred in 2020. Consulting expenses include non-cash charges of approximately $76,000 and $55,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $75,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $108,751 for 2019, primarily attributable to a fluctuation in supply chain expenditures made for research and development activity in the two periods.
Interest (Expense)Income
Interest expense in 2019 consisted primarily of payments made for interest incurred on our secured line of credit; interest expense in 2020 includes interest on that line of credit that was paid in full in February 2020; interest accrued on two SBA Covid-19 relief-related loans; as well as interest expense of approximately $78,000 on two short-term working capital loans received and repaid in the fourth quarter of 2020. Interest expense was approximately $94,000 and $155,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease is due to the decrease in outstanding debt in 2020 compared to the amount outstanding in 2019, partially offset by the high rates incurred on the two short-term working capital loans. Interest income earned was approximately $45,000 and $197,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in interest income in 2020 was the result of declining cash balances available to be invested as compare to those balances available in 2019 Interest expense, net was therefore approximately $49,000 and interest income, net of interest expense, was approximately $42,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities is primarily the result of our operating losses, reduced by the impact of non-cash expenses, including non-cash stock-based compensation.
Net cash used in operating activities decreased by approximately $1.6 million to approximately $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash used in operating activities of approximately $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net cash used in operating activities was due to a
decrease in net loss of approximately $767,000 and to approximately $1.0 million net cash provided by changes in asset and liability accounts, reduced by a reduction in non-cash expenses of approximately $0.2 million.
We expect cash used in operating activities to fluctuate significantly in future periods as a result of a number of factors, some of which are outside of our control, including, among others: the success we achieve in generating revenue; the success we have in helping our customers obtain financing to subsidize their purchases of our products; our ability to efficiently develop our dealer and service network; the costs of batteries and other materials utilized to make our products; the extent to which we need to invest additional funds in research and development; and the amount of expense we incur to satisfy future warranty claims.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by approximately $1.7 million to approximately $2.8 million, as compared to cash provided by investing activities of approximately $1.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due to proceeds received from the sale of liquid marketable securities in the amount of approximately $2.8 million, whereas net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the purchase of liquid marketable securities in the amount of approximately $1.2 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by approximately $4.2 million from cash provided by financing activities in 2019 of $4.1 million to cash used by financing activities of approximately $93,000 in 2020. Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of approximately $5.3 million proceeds from a securities offering, net of offering costs, and $411,244 in proceeds received from SBA loans, reduced by approximately $5.8 million in net principal repayments made under our line of credit with Morgan Stanley.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $4.1 million, primarily the result of the approximately $5.3 million net proceeds from the December 29, 2020 closing of the $5.425 million Tranche I of the financing commitments discussed below and in Note 7 and Note 8. The net proceeds were reduced by the repayment of certain debt discussed in Note 6 and reduced further by the payment of certain accrued liabilities.
On December 24, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional and accredited investors, whereby the Company will sell, and the investors will purchase, shares of common stock of the Company, and warrants (the “Warrants”) to purchase additional shares of the Company’s common stock (the “Financing”).
The first closing of the Financing occurred on December 29, 2020. The Company raised gross proceeds of $5,425,000 through the sale and issuance of 11,500,000 shares of its common stock at a purchase price equal to $0.50 per share and Warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 8,625,001 shares of its common stock at an exercise price of $0.50 per share. The share and warrant amounts issued include 650,000 shares and 487,500 warrants issued to the underwriter in lieu of paying $325,000 of fees in cash. Net proceeds net of offering costs were approximately $5.3 million.
The second closing of the Financing is subject to, and contingent upon, the effectiveness of a registration statement filed with the SEC registering the shares of common stock sold, or issuable under the Warrants, in connection with the Financing, and the closing of the Merger with EVT, which was completed on March 16, 2021 as further described below. Upon the completion of the second closing, the Company will raise aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $16,275,000 through the sale and issuance of 38,333,333 shares of common stock at a purchase price equal to $0.45 per share and Warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 19,166,666 shares of its
common stock at an exercise price of $1.00 per share. The share and warrant amounts to be issued include 2,166,667 shares and 1,083,333 warrants to be issued to the underwriter in lieu of paying $975,000 of fees in cash.
On March 16, 2021, the Company completed its acquisition of EVT, a supplier of zero-emission trucks, cargo vans, chassis and other commercial vehicles. The transaction was completed in accordance with an Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated February 16, 2021 (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among the Company, EVT and EVT Acquisition Company, Inc., a Delaware corporation and our wholly owned subsidiary (“Merger Sub”). As a result of such transaction, Merger Sub was merged with and into EVT, with EVT surviving as our wholly owned subsidiary (the “Merger”). Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, it was a condition to the Company’s obligation to close the Merger that EVT have at least $5 million in cash as of immediately following the consummation thereof.
The closing of the Merger is one of the conditions to the completion of the second closing of the Financing, as noted above. In order to satisfy the remaining closing condition, the Company must effect the registration of the shares issued or issuable in connection with the Financing in accordance with the terms of the Securities Purchase Agreement, whereupon the participating investors will be obligated to fund the remaining $17.25 million contemplated to be raised at the second closing of the Financing. In the event that we are able to satisfy the conditions to the completion of the second closing of the Financing described above, we believe that we will have adequate funding for more than twelve months from the date of issuance of the 2020 financial statements, which we believe alleviates substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Options to Purchase Common Stock
As of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding options to purchase 9,685,247 shares of common stock, net of exercises, cancellations, and forfeitures, as discussed below, and 7,465,570 shares of common stock were issuable upon the exercise of options vested at such date. Options to purchase 5,500,000 were issuable upon exercise at a price of $0.10 per share, none were issuable upon exercise at a price of $0.12 per share, 564,266 were issuable upon exercise at a price of $0.45 per share, 1,000,000 were issuable upon exercise at a price of $1.00 per share, and 401,304 were issuable upon exercise at a price of $1.31 per share. If all vested options to purchase common stock were exercised, we would receive proceeds of approximately $2.3 million and we would be required to issue 7,465,570 shares of common stock. There can be no assurance, however, that any such options will be exercised.
On March 6, 2018, Edward R. Monfort ceased serving as the Company’s Chief Technology Officer. Upon Mr. Monfort’s separation from service, the Company’s board of directors suspended Mr. Monfort’s outstanding options. Although such options remained outstanding, they were unexercisable as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2019, outstanding options to purchase an aggregate of 14,297,902 shares of common stock were attributable to Mr. Monfort. Effective as of February 4, 2020, all such options were cancelled by the Company in connection with the settlement of Mr. Monfort’s claims against the Company.
During 2020, Mr. Monfort’s 14,297,902 vested options were cancelled per the discussion above; former officers of the Company forfeited options to purchase an aggregate of 3,500,000 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $0.10 per share; consultants forfeited options to purchase an aggregate of 704,436 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $0.10 per share and 1,000,000 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $0.50 per share. Employees forfeited options to purchase an aggregate of: 86,177 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $1.31 per share; 161,433 shares with an exercise price of $0.45 per share; and 417,143 shares with an exercise price of $0.12 per share.
Debt
On May 6, 2020, the Company received $261,244 in loan funding from the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) established pursuant to the recently enacted Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act of 2020 (the “CARES Act”) and administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The unsecured loan (the “PPP Loan”) is evidenced by a promissory note of the Company, dated May 3, 2020 (the “PPP Note”) in the principal amount of $261,244 with Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. (Wells Fargo), the lender. The PPP provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The loans and accrued interest are forgivable after eight weeks, or, if elected by the Company, twenty-four weeks, in either case, as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll,
benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if the borrower terminates employees or reduces salaries during the eight-week or twenty-four week period, as applicable. Under the terms of the PPP Note and the PPP, interest accrues on the outstanding principal at the rate of 1.0% per annum. The term of the PPP Note is two years, though it may be payable sooner in connection with an event of default under the PPP Note. To the extent the loan amount is not forgiven under the PPP, the Company will be obligated to make equal monthly payments of principal and interest beginning on November 1, 2020 through the maturity date of May 3, 2022. The Company filed its forgiveness application on October 16, 2020, and was notified by Wells Fargo on January 6, 2021 that its PPP Loan had been approved internally for 100% forgiveness and had been forwarded to SBA for their approval. The Company anticipates the net amount forgiven will be $251,244, which is the principal amount of $261,244, less $10,000 that was advanced as part of the Company’s application for the EIDL loan (see below). Any EIDL advance must be repaid as part of the PPP Loan forgiveness process. As of December 31, 2020, the principal and accrued interest on the PPP Note is $262,979, of which $203,867 and $59,112 is reflected on the consolidated balance sheets as current and long-term liabilities, respectively.
On May 20, 2020, the Company received $150,000 in loan funding from the U.S. SBA under the Economic Injury Disaster Loan (“EIDL”) program administered by the SBA, which program was expanded pursuant to the recently enacted CARES Act. The EIDL load is evidenced by a promissory note, dated May 17, 2020 (the “EIDL Note”) in the original principal amount of $150,000 with the SBA, the lender. Under the terms of the EIDL Note, interest accrues on the outstanding principal at the rate of 3.75% per annum. The term of the EIDL Note is thirty years, though it may be payable sooner upon an event of default under the EIDL Note. Under the EIDL Note, the Company will be obligated to make equal monthly payments of principal and interest beginning on May 17, 2021 through the maturity date of May 17, 2050. The EIDL Note may be prepaid in part or in full, at any time, without penalty. As of December 31, 2020, the principal and accrued interest on the EIDL Note is $153,789, all of which is reflected on the consolidated balance sheets as a long-term liability.
On October 28, 2020, the Company received $500,000 in loan funding (the “Envirotech Loan #1”) from Envirotech Drive Systems, Inc. / SRI Professional Services, Incorporated (collectively, “Lender”). The Envirotech Loan #1 was evidenced by a balloon payment promissory note, dated October 28, 2020, issued by the Company in favor of Lender (the “Envirotech Note #1”) in an original principal amount of $500,000. The terms of Envirotech Note #1 provided that no interest will accrue on the unpaid principal amount of the Envirotech Loan #1. In connection with the funding of the Envirotech Loan #1, the Company paid to Lender an origination fee in the amount of $49,999. Under the terms of the Envirotech Note #1, the unpaid principal amount of the Envirotech Loan #1 was payable by the Company in one installment due upon the Company securing additional financing or issuing shares of its capital stock on or before December 31, 2020. The Envirotech Note #1 was repaid in full on December 30, 2020 from proceeds of the PIPE offering that closed on December 29, 2020. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
On November 25, 2020, the Company received an additional $237,840 in loan funding (the “Envirotech Loan #2”) from Lender. The funding of this loan was accomplished by Envirotech making a $237,840 payment on behalf of the Company to the manufacturer of ten all-electric trucks previously ordered by the Company, for which the Company did not have sufficient funds to pay for. The Envirotech Loan #2 was evidenced by a balloon payment promissory note, dated November 25, 2020, issued by the Company in favor of Lender (the “Envirotech Note #2”) in an original principal amount of $237,840. No interest will accrue on the unpaid principal amount of the Envirotech Loan #2. In connection with the funding of the Envirotech Loan #2, the Company paid to Lender an origination fee in the amount of $23,784. Under the terms of the Envirotech Note #2, the unpaid principal amount of the Envirotech Loan #2 was payable by the Company in one installment due upon the Company securing additional financing or issuing shares of its capital stock on or before December 31, 2020. The Envirotech Note #2 was repaid in full on December 30, 2020 from proceeds of the PIPE offering that closed on December 29, 2020. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Credit Facilities
Effective May 2, 2018, the Company secured a line of credit from Morgan Stanley Private Bank, National Association (“Morgan Stanley”). Borrowings under the line of credit bear interest at 30-day LIBOR plus 2.0%. There is no maturity date for the line, but Morgan Stanley may at any time, in its sole discretion and without cause, demand the Company immediately repay any and all outstanding obligations under the line of credit in whole or in part. The line is secured by the cash and cash equivalents maintained by the Company in its Morgan Stanley accounts, which was approximately $7.1 million as of December 31, 2019. Borrowings under the line may not exceed 95% of such cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities balances. The maximum amount the Company could borrow at December 31, 2019, was approximately $6.6 million, and the principal amount outstanding under this line of credit was approximately $5.8 million at that date. The line of credit and related interest expense was repaid in full on February 3, 2020.. The line of credit is still available to the Company, but there is no current plan to borrow from it.
Capital Expenditures
We do not have any contractual obligations for ongoing capital expenditures at this time. We do, however, purchase equipment necessary to conduct our operations on an as needed basis.
Contractual Obligations
On February 4, 2020, the Company signed a sublease agreement with Masters Transportation, Inc. (“Masters”) for Masters to occupy a portion of the Corona, California facility that the Company occupied effective January 1, 2020 (see above). The effective date of the Masters’ sublease is February 1, 2020, and it expires when the Company’s lease on the property expires on December 31, 2022. Under the sublease, Masters is obligated to pay the Company monthly rent payments in an amount equal to $6,000 at commencement and thereafter escalating to $6,365 by its conclusion.
On October 30, 2020, James L. Reynolds resigned from his employment with the Company, including his positions as the President and Chairman of the Board of the Company, as a member of the board of directors of the Company, and any and all other positions, directorships, and committee memberships that Mr. Reynolds held with the Company or any of its subsidiaries or other affiliated entities, in each case, effective as of October 30, 2020. Mr. Reynolds’ resignation did not result from a disagreement with the Company on any matter relating to its operations, policies, or practices. In connection with Mr. Reynolds’ resignation, the Company and Mr. Reynolds entered into Separation Agreement and General Release, dated October 30, 2020, pursuant to which Mr. Reynolds will be entitled to receive certain separation benefits see Note 9 and Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Indemnification Agreements
As we have generated sales, we have provided customers with indemnification of varying scope against claims of intellectual property infringement by third parties arising from the use of our products. We do not estimate the costs related to these indemnification provisions to be significant and are unable to determine the maximum potential impact of these indemnification provisions on our future results of operations. In addition, we have directors and officers liability coverage to further mitigate our indemnification exposure. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheet, consolidated statement of operations, or consolidated cash flows.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with the preparation of the financial statement information presented in this report are not significant because we have not generated any appreciable revenue. Therefore, we have not had to make assumptions or estimates related to a reserve for bad debt expense. As to future warranty costs to be incurred, we recorded a warranty reserve against 2020 revenue and will continue to evaluate the provision for such expenses in the future. These two items will have significant potential impact on our consolidated financial statements in the future. We also have no significant current litigation on which we have to provide reserves or estimate accruals and our investment to date in property, plant and equipment has not been significant. We therefore have not had to rely on estimates related to impairment. We have not generated any taxable income to date, so have not had to make any decisions about future profitability that would impact recording income tax expense. Assuming we are able to generate future profits by executing our business plan, these areas, among others, will most likely be our critical accounting policies and estimates.
On January 1, 2018, we adopted ASC Topic 606 using the modified retrospective method applied to those contracts which were not completed as of January 1, 2018. Results for reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2018 are presented under ASC Topic 606, while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with our historic accounting under ASC Topic 605. The adoption of ASC Topic 606 did not result in a cumulative impact on us as of January 1, 2018 and the application of ASC Topic 606 had no impact on our statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 or 2018, respectively.
We early-adopted ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). The amendment requires companies to recognize leased assets and liabilities on the balance sheet and to disclose key information regarding leasing arrangements. This guidance is effective for annual periods, and interim periods within those annual periods, beginning after December 15, 2018. Early application of this amendment is permitted for all entities. While we do not anticipate that, going forward, leases will be material to our balance sheet, we chose to early-adopt as of December 31, 2017 due to our entering into new leases during the year. These new leases are the only leases required to be included on our balance sheet under the new standard. Consequently, the adoption of the new lease standard did not have any impact to prior period information. Further, these leases are operating leases and, therefore, have no income statement impact resulting from the adoption of this standard.
Contingencies
Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to us, but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. Our management, in consultation with our legal counsel as appropriate, assesses such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. In assessing loss contingencies related to legal proceedings that are pending against us or unasserted claims that may result in such proceedings, we, in consultation with our legal counsel, evaluates the perceived merits of any legal proceedings or unasserted claims, as well as the perceived merits of the amount of relief sought or expected to be sought therein. If the assessment of a contingency indicates it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in our financial statements. If the assessment indicates a potentially material loss contingency is not probable, but is reasonably possible, or is probable, but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, together with an estimate of the range of possible loss, if determinable and material, would be disclosed. Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the guarantees would be disclosed.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the fair value of the award. The fair value of the award is measured on the grant date and is then recognized over the period during which services are required to be provided in exchange for the award, usually the vesting period. The fair value of our common stock was estimated by management based on observations of the cash sales prices of its common shares. Awards granted to directors are treated on the same basis as awards granted to employees.
Fair Value Measurement
The carrying values of our financial instruments, including cash, notes receivable and accounts payable approximate their fair value due to the short-term nature of these financial instruments. FASB ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurement” defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. It also establishes a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value as follows:
Level 1: Observable inputs such as quoted prices in active markets;
Level 2: Inputs, other than the quoted prices in active markets, that are observable either directly or indirectly; and
Level 3: Unobservable inputs for which there is little or no market data, and which require the reporting entity to develop its own assumptions.
We do not have any assets or liabilities that are required to be measured and recorded at fair value on a recurring basis.
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”)
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for emerging growth companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards, and, therefore, will be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. We have chosen to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an emerging growth company we are not required to, among other things, (i) being permitted to provide only two years of audited financial statements, in addition to any required unaudited interim financial statements, with correspondingly reduced “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” disclosure, (ii) not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements in the assessment of our internal control over financial reporting, (iii) not being required to comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, (iv) reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation or (v) exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
We will retain our emerging growth company status until the first to occur of: (i) the end of the fiscal year in which the fifth anniversary of the completion of our initial public offering occurs, (ii) the end of the fiscal year in which our annual revenues exceed $1.07 billion, (iii) the date on which we issue more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during any three-year period or (iv) the date on which we qualify.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management has considered all recent accounting pronouncements issued, but not effective, and does not believe that they will have a significant impact on the Company’s financial statements.