ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
The Company was incorporated in the State of Nevada on December 23, 2009, and established a fiscal year end of December 31.
Going Concern
To date the Company has little operations or revenues and consequently has incurred recurring losses from operations. No revenues are anticipated until we complete the financing we endeavor to obtain, as described in the Form 10-K, and implement our initial business plan. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on raising capital to fund our business plan and ultimately to attain profitable operations. Accordingly, these factors raise substantial doubt as to the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Our activities have been financed from related-party loans and the proceeds of share subscriptions.
The Company plans to raise additional funds through debt or equity offerings. There is no guarantee that the Company will be able to raise any capital through this or any other offerings.
PLAN OF OPERATION
We are an early stage corporation and have generated revenues of $12,797 from our business during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the 12 months following the date of filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, will be focused on attempting to raise $750,000 of funds to expand our business. We have no assurance that future financing will materialize. If that financing is not available, we may be unable to continue. Management believes that if we are successful in raising $750,000, we will be able to generate sales revenue within the following twelve months thereof. However, if such public financing is not available, we could fail to satisfy our future cash requirements. We have no assurance that future financing will materialize. If that financing is not available we may be unable to continue. Management believes that if subsequent private placements are successful, we will be able to generate sales revenue within the following twelve months thereof. However, additional equity financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all, and thus we could fail to satisfy our future cash requirements.
If we are unsuccessful in raising the additional proceeds through a private placement offering we will then have to seek additional funds through debt financing, which would be highly difficult for an early-stage company to secure. Therefore, the Company is highly dependent upon the success of the anticipated private placement offering and failure thereof would result in the Company having to seek capital from other sources such as debt financing, which may not even be available to the Company. However, if such financing were available, because we are an early stage company, it would likely have to pay additional costs associated with high risk loans and be subject to an above market interest rate. At such time these funds are required, management would evaluate the terms of such debt financing and determine whether the business could sustain operations and growth and manage the debt load. If we cannot raise additional proceeds via a private placement of its common stock or secure debt financing it would be required to cease business operations. As a result, investors in our common stock would lose all of their investment.
With new investors joining, the Company will increase its current efforts on marketing and selling its already created variety of products.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
As of December 31, 2020, we suffered from a working capital deficit of $465,956. As a result, our continuation as a going concern is dependent upon improving our profitability and the continuing financial support from our stockholders or other capital sources. Management believes that the continuing financial support from the existing shareholders and external financing will provide the additional cash to meet our obligations as they become due. Our financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets and liabilities that may result in the Company not being able to continue as a going concern.
The following table sets forth certain operational data for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenue. We generated revenues of $12,979 and $3,054 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $878 and $206, respectively. Cost of revenue increased primarily as a result of the increase in our business volume.
Gross Profit. We achieved a gross profit of $11,919 and $2,848 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in gross profit is primarily attributable to the increase in our business volume.
General and Administrative Expenses (“G&A”). We incurred G&A expenses of $150,817 and $120,531 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in G&A is primarily attributable to the stock-based compensation.
Income Tax Expense. Our income tax expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019were $0.
Net Loss. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a net loss of $173,880, as compared to $145,718 for the same period ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $5,265, accounts receivable and accrued expenses of $104,581, convertible notes payable of $323,329, and notes payable of $45,000.
We believe that our current cash and other sources of liquidity discussed below are adequate to support general operations for at least the next 12 months.
Net Cash Used In Operating Activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $129,350, which consisted primarily of a net loss of $173,880 offset by depreciation and amortization of $9,757, changes in operating assets of $73, inventory of $9,416, and an increase in accrued expenses and other payables of $25,284.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $124,625, which consisted primarily of a net loss of $145,718, offset by depreciation and amortization of $10,422, changes in operating assets of $(73), inventory of $(8,481), and accrued expenses and other payables of $19,615.
We expect to continue to rely on cash generated through financing from our existing shareholders and private placements of our securities, however, to finance our operations and future acquisitions.
Net Cash Provided By Investing Activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, there is no net cash provided by investing activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, there is no net cash provided by investing activities.
Net Cash Provided By Financing Activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $242,610 consisting of $141,660 of proceeds from the sale of convertible promissory notes, $45,000 of proceeds from the sale of notes, and $55,950 of proceeds from the sale of common stock.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $137,554 consisting of $39,064 of proceeds from the sale of notes, and $98,490 from the sale of common stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any financial guarantees or other commitments to guarantee the payment obligations of any third parties. In addition, we have not entered into any derivative contracts that are indexed to our own shares and classified as shareholders’ equity, or that are not reflected in our financial statements. Furthermore, we do not have any retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support to such entity. Moreover, we do not have any variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit support to us or engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.
COVID-19
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and our Company and have concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position and results of our operations, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of this filing. Our financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
1. Basis of presentation
These accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“US GAAP”).
2. Use of estimates and assumptions
In preparing these consolidated financial statements, management makes estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities in the balance sheet and revenues and expenses during the years reported. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
3. Basis of consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the financial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries. All significant inter-company balances and transactions within the Company have been eliminated upon consolidation.
4. Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents are carried at cost and represent cash on hand, demand deposits placed with banks or other financial institutions and all highly liquid investments with an original maturity of three months or less as of the purchase date of such investments.
5. Accounts receivable
Accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amount and do not bear interest, which are due within contractual payment terms, generally 30 to 90 days from completion of service. Credit is extended based on evaluation of a customer’s financial condition, the customer credit-worthiness and their payment history. Accounts receivable outstanding longer than the contractual payment terms are considered past due. Past due balances over 90 days and over a specified amount are reviewed individually for collectibility. At the end of fiscal year, the Company specifically evaluates individual customer’s financial condition, credit history, and the current economic conditions to monitor the progress of the collection of accounts receivables. The Company will consider the allowance for doubtful accounts for any estimated losses resulting from the inability of its customers to make required payments. For the receivables that are past due or not being paid according to payment terms, the appropriate actions are taken to exhaust all means of collection, including seeking legal resolution in a court of law. Account balances are charged off against the allowance after all means of collection have been exhausted and the potential for recovery is considered remote. The Company does not have any off-balance-sheet credit exposure related to its customers. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there was no allowance for doubtful accounts.
6. Revenue recognition
The Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC 606”) as of January 1, 2019 using the modified retrospective method. This method allows the Company to apply ASC 606 to new contracts entered into after January 1, 2019, and to its existing contracts for which revenue earned through December 31, 2018 has been recognized under the guidance in effect prior to the effective date of ASC 606. The revenue recognition processes the Company applied prior to adoption of ASC 606 align with the recognition and measurement guidance of the new standard, therefore adoption of ASC 606 did not require a cumulative adjustment to opening equity.
Under ASC 606, a performance obligation is a promise within a contract to transfer a distinct good or service, or a series of distinct goods and services, to a customer. Revenue is recognized when performance obligations are satisfied and the customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for goods or services. Under the standard, a contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that the Company determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the Company performs the following five steps:
•
identify the contract with a customer;
•
identify the performance obligations in the contract;
•
determine the transaction price;
•
allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and
•
recognize revenue as the performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company records its revenue from booking income upon the ticket booking service is rendered to travelers. The Company also records its revenue from the sale of air tickets upon the confirmation and issuance of tickets to the travelers.
7. Income taxes
The Company adopted the ASC 740 Income tax provisions of paragraph 740-10-25-13, which addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the consolidated financial statements. Under paragraph 740-10-25-13, the Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent (50%) likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Paragraph 740-10-25-13 also provides guidance on de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties on income taxes, accounting in interim periods and requires increased disclosures. The Company had no material adjustments to its liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits according to the provisions of paragraph 740-10-25-13.
The estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities are reported in the accompanying balance sheets, as well as tax credit carry-backs and carry-forwards. The Company periodically reviews the recoverability of deferred tax assets recorded on its balance sheets and provides valuation allowances as management deems necessary.
8. Comprehensive income
ASC Topic 220, “Comprehensive Income”, establishes standards for reporting and display of comprehensive income, its components and accumulated balances. Comprehensive income as defined includes all changes in equity during a period from non-owner sources. Accumulated other comprehensive income, as presented in the accompanying consolidated statements of changes in shareholders’ equity, consists of changes in unrealized gains and losses on foreign currency translation. This comprehensive income is not included in the computation of income tax expense or benefit.
9. Share-based compensation
The Company follows ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”), which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards, including restricted stock units, based on estimated grant date fair values. Restricted stock units are valued using the market price of the Company’s common shares on the date of grant. The Company records compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, over the requisite service period.
10. Related parties
The Company follows the ASC 850-10, Related Party for the identification of related parties and disclosure of related party transactions.
Pursuant to section 850-10-20 the related parties include a) affiliates of the Company; b) entities for which investments in their equity securities would be required, absent the election of the fair value option under the Fair Value Option Subsection of section 825-10-15, to be accounted for by the equity method by the investing entity; c) trusts for the benefit of employees, such as pension and Income-sharing trusts that are managed by or under the trusteeship of management; d) principal owners of the Company; e) management of the Company; f) other parties with which the Company may deal if one party controls or can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the other to an extent that one of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests; and g) other parties that can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the transacting parties or that have an ownership interest in one of the transacting parties and can significantly influence the other to an extent that one or more of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests.
The consolidated financial statements shall include disclosures of material related party transactions, other than compensation arrangements, expense allowances, and other similar items in the ordinary course of business. However, disclosure of transactions that are eliminated in the preparation of consolidated or combined financial statements is not required in those statements. The disclosures shall include: a) the nature of the relationship(s) involved; b) a description of the transactions, including transactions to which no amounts or nominal amounts were ascribed, for each of the periods for which income statements are presented, and such other information deemed necessary to an understanding of the effects of the transactions on the financial statements; c) the dollar amounts of transactions for each of the periods for which income statements are presented and the effects of any change in the method of establishing the terms from that used in the preceding period; and d) amount due from or to related parties as of the date of each balance sheet presented and, if not otherwise apparent, the terms and manner of settlement.
11. Commitments and contingencies
The Company follows the ASC 450-20, Commitments to report accounting for contingencies. Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to the Company but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. The Company assesses such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. In assessing loss contingencies related to legal proceedings that are pending against the Company or un-asserted claims that may result in such proceedings, the Company evaluates the perceived merits of any legal proceedings or un-asserted claims as well as the perceived merits of the amount of relief sought or expected to be sought therein.
If the assessment of a contingency indicates that it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in the Company’s consolidated financial statements. If the assessment indicates that a potentially material loss contingency is not probable but is reasonably possible, or is probable but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, and an estimate of the range of possible losses, if determinable and material, would be disclosed.
Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the guarantees would be disclosed. Management does not believe, based upon information available at this time that these matters will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows. However, there is no assurance that such matters will not materially and adversely affect the Company’s business, financial position, and results of operations or cash flows.
12. Fair value of financial instruments
The Company follows paragraph 825-10-50-10 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification for disclosures about fair value of its financial instruments and has adopted paragraph 820-10-35-37 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“Paragraph 820-10-35-37”) to measure the fair value of its financial instruments. Paragraph 820-10-35-37 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. To increase consistency and comparability in fair value measurements and related disclosures, paragraph 820-10-35-37 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification establishes a fair value hierarchy which prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value into three (3) broad levels. The fair value hierarchy gives the highest priority to quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs. The three (3) levels of fair value hierarchy defined by paragraph 820-10-35-37 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification are described below:
Level 1
Quoted market prices available in active markets for identical assets or liabilities as of the reporting date.
Level 2
Pricing inputs other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1, which are either directly or indirectly observable as of the reporting date.
Level 3
Pricing inputs that are generally observable inputs and not corroborated by market data.
Financial assets are considered Level 3 when their fair values are determined using pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies or similar techniques and at least one significant model assumption or input is unobservable.
The fair value hierarchy gives the highest priority to quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs. If the inputs used to measure the financial assets and liabilities fall within more than one level described above, the categorization is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement of the instrument.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities, such as cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, deposits, prepayment and other receivables, amount due from a director and operating lease right-of-use assets, approximate their fair values because of the short maturity of these instruments.
13. Recent accounting pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standard Board (“FASB”) or other standard setting bodies and adopted by the Company as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, the Company believes that the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations upon adoption.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
In June 2016, the FASB issued guidance that affects loans, trade receivables and any other financial assets that have the contractual right to receive cash. Under the new guidance, an entity is required to recognize expected credit losses rather than incurred losses for financial assets. The new guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 and interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company adopted the new guidance effective January 1, 2020, with no material impact to the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
In August 2018, the FASB issued guidance which modifies certain disclosure requirements over fair value measurements. The guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including all interim periods within that fiscal year. The Company adopted the new guidance effective January 1, 2020. The Company does not currently classify any of its derivative contracts or restoration plan assets as Level 3 assets or liabilities, nor did the Company have any transfers amongst fair value levels during the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result, the guidance did not have an impact on Company’s the fair value measurement disclosures upon adoption.
In January 2017, the FASB issued guidance which eliminates the second step from the traditional two-step goodwill impairment test. Under current guidance, an entity performed the first step of the goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount; if an impairment loss was indicated, the entity computed the implied fair value of goodwill to determine whether an impairment loss existed, and if so, the amount to recognize. Under the new guidance, an impairment loss is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value (the Step 1 test), with no further testing required. Any impairment loss recognized is limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. The new guidance is effective for public companies that are Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) registrants for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019. The Company adopted the new guidance on January 1, 2020, and applied the guidance prospectively to its goodwill impairment tests.
Accounting Standards Not Yet Adopted as of December 31, 2020
In December 2019, the FASB issued new guidance to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles and also simplification of areas such as franchise taxes, step-up in tax basis goodwill, separate entity financial statements and interim recognition of enactment of tax laws or rate changes. The new guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020 and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this new guidance on its consolidated financial statements.
In March 2020, the FASB issued guidance to address certain accounting consequences from the anticipated transition from the use of the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) and other interbank offered rates to alternative reference rates. The new guidance contains practical expedients for reference rate reform related activities that impact debt, leases, derivatives and other contracts. The guidance is optional and may be elected over time as reference rate reform activities occur. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company elected to apply the hedge accounting expedients related to probability and the assessments of effectiveness for future LIBOR-indexed cash flows to assume that the index upon which future hedged transactions will be based on matches the index of the corresponding derivatives. Application of these expedients preserves the presentation of derivatives consistent with past presentation. The Company continues to evaluate the impact of the guidance and may apply other elections as applicable as additional changes in the market occur.
The Company believes that other recent accounting pronouncement will not have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Subsequent Events
None through date of this filing.