Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have omitted discussion of 2018 results where it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which has been filed with the SEC.
Overview
Exact Sciences Corporation (together with its subsidiaries, “Exact,” “we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company”) is a leading global cancer diagnostics company. We have developed some of the most impactful brands in cancer diagnostics, and we are currently working on the development of additional tests, with the goal of bringing new innovative cancer tests to patients throughout the world.
Acquisitions
On January 4, 2021, we completed the acquisition ("Thrive Merger") of Thrive Earlier Detection Corporation, which merged Thrive with and into one of our wholly-owned subsidiaries. Thrive is a healthcare company dedicated to incorporating earlier cancer detection into routine medical care. We intend to combine Thrive's early-stage screening test, CancerSEEK, with our scientific platform, clinical organization and commercial infrastructure to establish us as a leading competitor in blood-based, multi-cancer screening. Under the terms of the Thrive Merger, we agreed to pay the Thrive owners total consideration of up to $2.15 billion, of which $1.70 billion was payable at closing, comprised of 35% in cash and 65% of our common stock. An additional $450.0 million would be payable in cash based upon the achievement of certain milestones related to the development and commercialization of a blood-based, multi-cancer screening test.
On October 26, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Base Genomics Limited, an epigenetics company working to set a new standard in DNA methylation analysis to detect cancer in its earliest stages. As part of the combination, we acquired all of the outstanding equity interest of the company for an aggregate purchase price of $416.5 million in cash.
On March 3, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Paradigm Diagnostics, Inc. and Viomics, Inc., two related companies, in transactions that are deemed to be a single business combination under Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 805. The acquired entities provide comprehensive genomic-based profiling tests that assist in the diagnosis and therapy recommendations for late-stage cancer. As part of the acquisition, we acquired all of the outstanding equity interests of the companies for an aggregate purchase price of $40.4 million, which consists of $32.2 million payable in shares of our common stock and $8.2 million which was settled through a cash payment. Of the $32.2 million to be settled through the issuance of common stock, $28.8 million was issued as of December 31, 2020, and the remaining $3.4 million, which was withheld and may become payable as additional merger consideration, is included in other current liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
COVID-19 Testing Business
In late March 2020, we began providing COVID-19 testing. We have partnered with various customers, including the State of Wisconsin Department of Health, to administer testing. Customers are responsible for employing trained personnel to collect specimens. Specimens are sent to our laboratory in Madison, Wisconsin,where we allocated space to run the assay in our laboratories and provide test results to ordering providers. We also manufacture and assemble our COVID-19 test kits at our manufacturing facilities in Madison, Wisconsin. In light of the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, we intend to periodically reassess our COVID-19 testing business.
2021 Priorities
Our top priorities for 2021 are to (1) get more people tested, (2) advance new solutions, and (3) enhance our customer experience.
Get More People Tested
We are committed to delivering critical answers to patients by getting more people tested with our Cologuard and Oncotype tests. We will also continue to provide COVID-19 testing to support our employees, the states where they live, and to improve the country's testing capacity.
Advance New Solutions
In 2021, we are focused on advancing new solutions for screening and guiding treatment decisions for cancer. We'll do this by investing in ongoing and additional clinical trials to support our product development efforts in enhancing existing products and bringing new products to patients and providers.
We are seeking opportunities to improve upon our Cologuard test’s performance characteristics. In October 2019, we and Mayo presented at the American College of Gastroenterology’s 2019 Annual Scientific Meeting findings from a blinded-case control study showing enhanced colorectal cancer and advanced adenoma detection using newly discovered methylation biomarkers. In October 2020, we acquired Base Genomics, whose methylation analysis technologies promise to build upon other contemplated enhancements to our Cologuard test. To establish the performance of an enhanced multi-target stool DNA test, we expect to enroll more than 10,000 patients 40 years of age and older in our multi-center, prospective BLUE-C study. The timing of any such enhancements to our Cologuard test is unknown and would be subject to FDA approval. We are also working to develop a blood-based screening test for colorectal cancer.
We are currently seeking to develop a blood-based, multi-cancer screening test. In January 2021, we completed the acquisition of Thrive, a healthcare company dedicated to developing a blood-based, multi-cancer screening test. An early version of Thrive’s test has achieved promising results in a 10,000-patient, prospective, interventional study detecting 10 different types of cancer, including seven with no current recommended screening guidelines, with very few false positives. We are exploring opportunities to incorporate Exact’s and Base Genomics’ methylation technologies into Thrive's test in order to enhance the test's accuracy and accelerate the widespread adoption of this potentially life-saving advancement.
We are currently seeking to develop a blood-based biomarker test to serve as an alternative to ultrasound and the AFP test for use in HCC testing. HCC is the most common type of liver cancer. Our goal is to develop a patient-friendly test that performs better than the current standard of care. In November 2019, we released the results of a 450-patient study which demonstrated 80% overall sensitivity for HCC at 90% specificity with a novel combination of six blood-based biomarkers for HCC. The study also showed 71% sensitivity for early-stage HCC at 90% specificity. The study compared performance to the AFP test, which demonstrated 45% sensitivity at 90% specificity for early-stage HCC.
In January 2021 we acquired an exclusive license to the TGen proprietary TARDIS technology. We are currently seeking to utilize this compelling and technically distinct approach to develop a test to detect small amounts of tumor DNA that may remain in patients’ blood after they have undergone initial treatment. In a study published in Science Translational Medicine, TARDIS demonstrated high accuracy in assessing molecular response and residual disease during neoadjuvant therapy to treat breast cancer. TARDIS achieved up to 100-fold improvement beyond the current limit of circulating tumor DNA detection. We intend to expand our precision oncology business to become a leader in minimal residual disease testing, which will leverage our existing foundation to deliver better solutions to patients navigating cancer. Additionally, we may also use a number of other technologies across our various development programs and to implement our products. While early-stage cancer continues to be our main focus, we believe we also have an opportunity to expand our business further along the patient’s cancer journey, both through our research and development process and strategic collaborations.
We may also conduct or fund clinical studies that could support additional opportunities for our Oncotype IQ products. For example, we are exploring clinical studies to expand the use of genomic testing to address additional populations, including higher-risk patients.
Enhance Our Customer Experience
Another priority for 2021 is to enhance our customer service. We plan to improve customer communications and outreach to make doing business with Exact Sciences easier than ever. Our goal is to become the cancer diagnostic provider of choice for physicians and patients.
Results of Operations
The spread of COVID-19 has affected many segments of the global economy, including the cancer screening and diagnostics industry. The COVID-19 outbreak, which the World Health Organization has classified as a pandemic, has prompted governments and regulatory bodies throughout the world to enact broad precautionary measures, including “stay at home” orders, restrictions on the performance of “non-essential” services, public gatherings and travel. Health systems, including in key markets where we operate, have been, or may be, overwhelmed with high volumes of patients suffering from COVID-19. The territories in which we market, sell, distribute and perform our tests are attempting to address the COVID-19 pandemic in varying ways, including stay-at-home orders, temporarily closing businesses, restricting gatherings, restricting travel, and mandating social distancing and face coverings. Certain jurisdictions have begun re-opening only to return to restrictions due to increases in new COVID-19 cases. Even in the absence of legal restrictions, businesses and individuals may voluntarily continue to limit in-person interactions and practice social distancing, and such behaviors may continue beyond the formal end of the pandemic. The level and nature of the disruption caused by COVID-19 is unpredictable, may be cyclical and long-lasting and may vary from location to location.
The pandemic and related precautionary measures began to materially disrupt our business in March 2020 and may continue to disrupt our business for an unknown period of time. As a result, the pandemic had a significant impact on our 2020 operating results, including our revenues, margins, and cash utilization, among other measures.
As a result of COVID-19 and its impact to our business, we re-prioritized our goals for 2020 with a focus on serving patients who continued to need the healthcare services we provide while aligning our cost structure with the anticipated lower sales volumes and revenues. Our top priorities for 2020 were to (1) get people tested using our Cologuard, Oncotype IQ, and COVID-19 tests, (2) take care of our customers by taking steps to limit exposure to COVID-19 based on recommendations from government and health agencies, and (3) preserve financial strength by taking proactive measures to achieve cost savings.
Due to social distancing, stay-at-home orders, and other actions taken in response to COVID-19, in 2020 there was a significant and widespread decline in standard wellness visits and preventive services. We took steps to limit exposure to COVID-19 based on recommendations from government and health agencies, including limiting field-based, face-to-face interactions by our sales force. The sales team that was not engaged in face-to-face interactions served healthcare providers via telephone and online technologies until it was safe to return to the field and practices allowed representatives back in their offices. Our commercial partner for our Cologuard test, Pfizer, took similar precautions, including suspending face-to-face interactions between sales representatives and healthcare providers. The decline in field-based, face-to-face interactions with health care providers negatively impacted Cologuard test orders during the second quarter of 2020 in our Screening business, notwithstanding the availability of alternative ordering channels such as telehealth. Starting in the third quarter, orders began to recover to pre-pandemic levels and continued to recover during the fourth quarter. Our Precision Oncology business started to see weakening underlying conditions in April 2020 because of COVID-19, more notably in the U.S. prostate business and in certain international geographies. The widespread decrease in preventive services, including mammograms and prostate cancer screenings, negatively impacted Precision Oncology test volumes beginning in May 2020 and continuing throughout the third quarter of 2020 due to the typical lag between cancer screening and genomic test ordering. We began to see orders recovering during the fourth quarter of 2020 to near pre-pandemic levels. As a result of the pandemic, we began providing COVID-19 testing in March 2020, the revenue from which has partially offset the pandemic's impact on our Screening and Precision Oncology testing revenue.
During 2020, business continuity plans were in place at all of our sites to help sustain operations and ensure continuity of services for patients during this unprecedented time. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, many people still needed to be screened for colorectal cancer, and treated for breast, colon, and prostate cancers. Our lab facilities remained operational so that we could continue to process results of our Cologuard, Oncotype IQ and COVID-19 tests.
We expect to adjust our precautionary measures at our various locations based on local recovery levels and applicable governmental regulations. For example, a portion of the Company’s and Pfizer’s sales force has recommenced field-based interactions, although access to healthcare providers remains limited and the resumption of normal activities is expected to be gradual. Our business could be negatively affected if we take excessive, ineffective or inadequate precautions.
In order to minimize the adverse impacts to our business and operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic, beginning in April 2020, we initiated proactive measures to achieve cost savings. Actions we took included a temporary reduction of base pay for our executive officers and other employees at or above the director level, a reduction in the annual retainer payable to our board of directors, and a reduction of quarterly sales commissions. We implemented a workforce reduction, involuntary furloughs, work schedule reductions, as well as a voluntary furlough program. Additionally, we reduced investments in marketing and other promotional activities, paused certain clinical trial activities, reduced travel and professional services, and delayed or terminated certain capital projects. We also saw a reduction in certain volume based cost of goods sold expenses consistent with the reduction in revenue. These actions contributed to significant cost savings in 2020.
As our Screening and Precision Oncology businesses started to recover, we adjusted the proactive cost-saving measures discussed above in order to support the recovery as well as prepare for future growth. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we continued to plan for future growth through investing in our existing operations and through the business combinations further discussed above.
We also ensured that we were well capitalized to meet our future goals by raising $1.13 billion, net of issuance costs, through an underwritten public offering of convertible notes completed in February 2020 and $861.7 million, net of issuance costs, through a registered direct offering of our common stock completed in October 2020. We finished the year with $1.84 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue. Our revenue is primarily generated by our laboratory testing services, from our Cologuard, Oncotype IQ, and COVID-19 tests. Our Screening revenue, which primarily includes laboratory service revenue from our Cologuard tests, was $815.1 million and $810.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase was primarily due to an increase in the number of completed Cologuard tests. Our Precision Oncology revenue, which primarily includes laboratory service revenue from our global Oncotype products, was $440.5 million and $66.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase was primarily due to a full year of Precision Oncology operations in 2020 after completing our combination with Genomic Health in November 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we also generated $235.8 million in revenue from our COVID-19 testing.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our Screening and Precision Oncology laboratory service revenue was impacted by the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak as discussed above. In response to the pandemic, we are conducting COVID-19 testing, which has served as additional source of revenue outside our normal Screening and Precision Oncology laboratory testing services.
Our cost structure. Our selling, general, and administrative expenses consist primarily of non-research personnel salaries, office expenses, professional fees, sales and marketing expenses incurred in support of our commercialization efforts and non-cash stock-based compensation.
Cost of sales includes costs related to inventory production and usage, shipment of collection kits and tissue samples, royalties and the cost of services to process tests and provide results to healthcare providers.
We expect that revenue and cost of sales for our services will continue to fluctuate and be affected by the test volume of our products, our operating efficiencies, patient adherence rates, payer mix, the levels of reimbursement, and payment patterns of payers and patients.
Cost of sales (exclusive of amortization of acquired intangible assets). Cost of sales increased to $354.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $216.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cost of sales is primarily due to costs incurred to support Oncotype DX products after the completion of our combination with Genomic Health in November 2019 and costs incurred from COVID-19 testing, which began in March 2020. We also incurred an increase in personnel and facility and support services to support future growth of our Cologuard test.
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses increased to $554.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $139.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to our acquisition of Base Genomics in October 2020, which was accounted for as an asset acquisition and resulted in an expense of $412.6 million that is included in research and development expenses. The acquisition is further described in Note 19 of our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, there was an increase in personnel related costs and facility and support services as a result of our combination with Genomic Health in November 2019. This increase was partially offset by decreased clinical trial activity, professional fees, and other direct research and development expenses due to measures taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic for a portion of the year.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses increased to $481.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $352.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily related to the inclusion of a full year of Genomic Health's operations after the completion of our combination in November 2019. As part of the combination with Genomic Health, we incurred $62.8 million in acquisition and integration related costs during the year ended December 31, 2019. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the protective measures put in place in the first half of 2020, we saw a decrease in expected spend in our personnel and professional fees. As our business began to recover in the second half of 2020, personnel expenses and stock-based compensation increased due to additional headcount. We also incurred additional costs as we invested in our information technology infrastructure and customer care center costs to support the growth of the Company.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses increased to $589.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $385.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily a result of the additional personnel, facility and support services, and stock-based compensation costs incurred after completing the combination with Genomic Health in November 2019. As discussed above, our sales force and Pfizer took several steps to limit exposure to COVID-19 and many healthcare provider offices prohibited sales representatives throughout the year, which ultimately reduced certain professional and personnel related costs, primarily in the second and third quarters of 2020. As our business began to recover in the second half of 2020, we ended our involuntary furloughs and hired additional sales and marketing personnel, and we also increased our direct marketing spend to support the future growth of our products, which resulted in an overall increase in spend during the year.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets. Amortization of acquired intangible assets increased to $93.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in amortization of acquired intangible assets was primarily due to the Genomic Health combination.
Intangible asset impairment charge. Intangible asset impairment charge was $209.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to zero for the year ended December 31, 2019. The impairment charge recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to the impairment charges recorded on the in-process research and development intangible asset acquired as part of the combination with Genomic Health of $200.0 million and the intangible asset acquired through an asset purchase agreement with Armune Biosciences, Inc. of $9.7 million.
Other operating income. Other operating income increased to $23.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to zero for the year ended December 31, 2019. The income generated during the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the funding received under the CARES Act Provider Relief Fund, which was accepted from the Department of Health & Human Services in May 2020.
Investment income, net. Investment income, net decreased to $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $26.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in investment income, net was due to a decrease in realized gains generated from the sale of marketable securities and a decrease in the average rate of return on investments due to a decrease in market interest rates and a lower average balance in marketable securities for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019.
Interest expense. Interest expense increased to $96.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $61.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to the issuance of additional convertible notes in February 2020. Interest expense recorded from our outstanding convertible notes totaled $86.1 million and $49.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Of the $86.1 million and $49.6 million in interest expense recorded on outstanding convertible notes, $76.5 million and $42.3 million of interest expense relates to amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The remaining interest expense recorded on outstanding convertible notes relates to the stated interest that is paid out in cash. In addition to the interest expense recorded on outstanding convertible notes, an additional $8.0 million and $10.6 million was recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, as a result of the settlement of convertible notes. The convertible notes are further described in Note 10 of our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The remaining interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 relates to the stated interest on our construction loan further described in Note 9 of our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Income tax benefit (expense). An income tax benefit of $8.6 million was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a benefit of $184.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The income tax benefit recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily a result of a change in deferred tax asset valuation allowance resulting from the Genomic Health combination. The income tax benefit of $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was recorded primarily as a result of future limitations on and expiration of certain Federal and State deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations since inception primarily through public offerings of our common stock and convertible debt and through revenue generated by the sale of our Cologuard test, and since the completion of our Genomic Health combination, of Oncotype IQ tests. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.49 billion in unrestricted cash and cash equivalents and approximately $348.7 million in marketable securities.
The majority of our investments in marketable securities consist of fixed income investments, and all are deemed available-for-sale. The objectives of this portfolio are to provide liquidity and safety of principal while striving to achieve the highest rate of return. Our investment policy limits investments to certain types of instruments issued by institutions with investment grade credit ratings and places restrictions on maturities and concentration by type and issuer.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $136.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to cash used in operating activities of $111.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the increase in cash receipts as a result of an increase in revenue. The increase in revenue was driven by having a full year of Precision Oncology operations in 2020 after completing our combination with Genomic Health in November 2019. This was partially offset by an increase in cash payments made related to an increase in inventory and other expenses necessary to process our tests. Additionally, we saw a reduction in discretionary spend due to proactive cost saving measures taken throughout the year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Net cash used in investing activities was $702.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We purchased $1.09 billion in marketable securities, while $886.7 million of our marketable securities were sold or matured during the year. We used net cash of $411.4 million in the acquisition of Base, and also invested $64.4 million in property and equipment, and $15.9 million in strategic investments in privately held companies. Net cash used in investing activities was $124.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We purchased $634.1 million in marketable securities, while $1.66 billion of our marketable securities were sold or matured during the year in order to prepare for our combination with Genomic Health in November 2019, which resulted in using net cash of $973.9 million. Additionally, we invested $171.8 million in property and equipment, consisting primarily of increased laboratory equipment purchases, computer equipment and computer software purchases, and assets under construction in order to support our operations for future expected growth of our business.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.88 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. We received proceeds of $1.13 billion from the issuance of convertible notes with a maturity date of March 1, 2028 (the “2028 Notes”), and we used $150.1 million of cash to settle convertible notes with an original maturity date of January 15, 2025 (the "2025 Notes"). We also received proceeds of $861.7 million from the sale of common stock, net of issuance costs. Additionally, we received proceeds of $27.1 million from the exercise of stock options, $18.4 million from our employee stock purchase plan, and made payments on the principal of our outstanding construction loan and finance leases of $3.0 million. Net cash provided by financing activities was $253.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We received proceeds of $729.5 million from the issuance of convertible notes with a maturity date of March 15, 2027 (the "2027 Notes," and collectively with the 2025 Notes and 2028 Notes, the "Notes"), and we used $493.4 million of cash to settle a portion of the 2025 Notes. Additionally, we received proceeds of $8.8 million from the exercise of stock options, and $8.4 million from our employee stock purchase plan.
As described above, on January 4, 2021, we completed the Thrive Merger in a cash and stock transaction valued at approximately $2.15 billion, of which $1.70 billion was paid at closing including cash consideration of approximately $600 million.
We expect that cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities on hand at December 31, 2020 will be sufficient to fund our current operations for at least the next twelve months including the cash consideration paid as part of the Thrive Merger in January 2021, based on current operating plans. However, we may need to raise additional capital to fully fund our current strategic plan, which includes successfully commercializing our Cologuard and Oncotype IQ products and developing a pipeline of future products. Additionally, we may enter into transactions to acquire other businesses, products, services, or technologies as part of our strategic plan. If we are unable to obtain sufficient additional funds to enable us to fund our operations through the completion of such plan, our results of operations and financial condition would be materially adversely affected, and we may be required to delay the implementation of our plan and otherwise scale back our operations. Even if we successfully raise sufficient funds to complete our plan, there is no certainty that we will be successful in generating sufficient cash flow from operations or achieving and maintaining profitable operations in the future to enable it to meet our obligations as they come due.
The following table sets forth certain information concerning our obligations to make contractual future payments, such as pursuant to debt and lease agreements, as of December 31, 2020:
_________________________________
(1) Includes the principal amount of our senior convertible notes due in 2025, 2027, and 2028, as well as the interest payments associated with the notes. The notes are presented in the table in line with their maturity dates, but they may be converted earlier if certain conditions are met. The holders of the convertible notes with a maturity date in 2025 will have the right to convert beginning on January 1, 2021 and are classified as current on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. See Note 10 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
(2) Includes obligations associated with outstanding construction loan agreement. See Note 9 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
(3) Primarily includes obligations under a financing obligation. This also includes miscellaneous unrestricted grants that were made to third parties.
(4) Primarily includes fixed obligations under the Restated Promotion Agreement with Pfizer, which is further discussed in Note 12 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. This also includes payments to Mayo under our license agreement discussed in Note 11 and a land purchase obligation agreement with the owner of the land adjacent to one of our current Madison, Wisconsin facilities.
(5) Contingent consideration and contingent license payments are excluded from this table as the amount and timing of such outflows cannot be reasonably determined. See Note 7 and Note 11 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards
As of December 31, 2020, we had federal, state, and foreign NOL carryforwards of approximately $1.55 billion, $709.2 million, $4.3 million, respectively. We also had federal and state research tax credit carryforwards of approximately $54.3 million and $34.0 million, respectively. The net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards will expire at various dates through 2040, if not utilized. The Internal Revenue Code and applicable state laws impose substantial restrictions on a corporation’s utilization of net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards if an ownership change is deemed to have occurred. Additionally, tax law limitations may result in our NOLs expiring before we have the ability to use them. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (H.R. 1) of 2017 limits the deduction for NOLs to 80 percent of current year taxable income and provides for an indefinite carryover period for federal NOLs. Both provisions are applicable for losses arising in tax years beginning after December 31, 2017. As of December 31, 2020, we had $615.1 million of NOLs incurred after December 31, 2017. For these reasons, even if we attain profitability our ability to utilize our NOLs may be limited, potentially significantly so.
A valuation allowance is provided for deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not these items will either expire before we are able to realize their benefit, or that future deductibility is uncertain. In general, companies that have a history of operating losses are faced with a difficult burden of proof on their ability to generate sufficient future income in order to realize the benefit of the deferred tax assets. We have recorded a valuation against our deferred tax assets based on our history of losses and current uncertainty as to timing of future taxable income. Given the future limitations on and expiration of certain Federal and State deferred tax assets, the recording of a valuation allowance resulted in a deferred tax liability of approximately $19.5 million remaining at the end of 2020, which is included in other long-term liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet. Additionally, an income tax benefit of $8.6 million was recorded primarily as a result of future limitations on and expiration of certain Federal and State deferred tax assets.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be appropriate under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, we believe that the following accounting policies and judgments are most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition. Revenues are recognized when we release a result to the ordering healthcare provider, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to collect in exchange for those services. The amount of revenue we recognize is based on the established billing rates less contractual and other adjustments, which yields the constrained amount that we expect to ultimately collect. We determine the amount we expect to ultimately collect using historical collections, established reimbursement rates and other adjustments. The expected amount is typically lower than, if applicable, the agreed-upon reimbursement amount due to several factors, such as the amount of any patient co-payments, out-of-network payers, the existence of secondary payers and claim denials. The consideration derived from our contracts is fixed when we contract with a direct bill payer. Our ability to collect is not contingent on the customer’s ability to collect through their downstream billing efforts.
In the case of some of our laboratory service agreements (“LSAs”) with various organizations, the right to bill and collect exists prior to the receipt of a specimen and release of a test result to the ordering healthcare provider, which results in deferred revenue. The deferred revenue balance is generally relieved upon the release of the applicable patient’s test result to the ordering healthcare provider or as of the date the customer has surpassed the window of time in which they are able to exercise their rights for testing services. We believe these points in time represent our fulfillment of our obligations to the customer.
The quality of our billing operations, most notably those activities that relate to obtaining the correct information in order to bill effectively for services provided, directly impacts the collectability of our receivables and revenue estimates. As such, we continually assess the state of our order to cash cycle for areas of opportunity as we believe adequate operations support our ability to appropriately estimate receivables and revenue. Upon ultimate collection, the aggregate amount received from payers and patients where reimbursement was estimated is compared to previous collection estimates and, if necessary, the contractual allowance is adjusted. Finally, should we later determine the judgments underlying estimated collections change, our financial results could be negatively impacted in future quarters.
Tax Positions. A valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax assets is reported if, based on the weight of the evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We have incurred significant losses since our inception and due to the uncertainty of the amount and timing of future taxable income, management has determined that a valuation allowance of $157.6 million and $120.7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively is necessary to reduce the tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Due to the existence of the valuation allowance, future changes in our unrecognized tax benefits will not impact our effective tax rate.
Convertible Notes. We account for convertible debt instruments that may be settled in cash or equity upon conversion by separating the liability and equity components of the instruments in a manner that reflects our nonconvertible debt borrowing rate. We determined the carrying amount of the liability component of the convertible debt instruments by using assumptions that market participants would use in pricing a debt instrument, including market interest rates, credit standing, yield curves, volatilities, and the expected life of the instrument. Determining the fair value of the debt component requires the use of accounting estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions are judgmental in nature and could have a significant impact on the determination of the debt component, and the associated non-cash interest expense.
The amount allocated to the equity component is the difference between the principal value of the instrument and the fair value of the liability component at issuance. The equity component, less any premium, is treated as a discount on the liability component. The debt discount is amortized to interest expense over the contractual term of the debt instrument using the effective interest rate method. In addition, debt issuance costs related to the debt instrument are allocated to the liability and equity components based on their relative values. The debt issuance costs allocated to the liability component are amortized over the contractual term of the debt instrument as additional non-cash interest expense. The transaction costs allocated to the equity component are netted with the equity component of the convertible debt instrument in stockholders equity.
Business Combinations. Business Combinations are accounted for under the acquisition method in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations. The acquisition method requires identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed and any non-controlling interest in the business acquired be recognized and measured at fair value on the acquisition date, which is the date that the acquirer obtains control of the acquired business. The amount by which the fair value of consideration transferred as the purchase price exceeds the net fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Acquisitions that do not meet the definition of a business combination under the ASC are accounted for as asset acquisitions. Asset acquisitions are accounted for by allocating the cost of the acquisition to the individual assets acquired and liabilities assumed on a relative fair value basis. Goodwill is not recognized in an asset acquisition with any consideration in excess of net assets acquired allocated to acquired assets on a relative fair value basis. Transaction costs are expensed in a business combination and are considered a component of the cost of the acquisition in an asset acquisition.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. We evaluate the fair value of long-lived assets, which include property, plant and equipment, intangible assets, and investments in privately held companies, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of the assets may not be fully recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for the discussion of Recent Accounting Pronouncements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.