Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Exelon
Executive Overview
Exelon is a utility services holding company engaged in the generation, delivery, and marketing of energy through Generation and the energy distribution and transmission businesses through ComEd, PECO, BGE, Pepco, DPL, and ACE.
Exelon has eleven reportable segments consisting of Generation’s five reportable segments (Mid-Atlantic, Midwest, New York, ERCOT, and Other Power Regions), ComEd, PECO, BGE, Pepco, DPL, and ACE. See Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies and Note 5 - Segment Information of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding Exelon's principal subsidiaries and reportable segments.
Exelon’s consolidated financial information includes the results of its eight separate operating subsidiary registrants, Generation, ComEd, PECO, BGE, PHI, Pepco, DPL, and ACE, which, along with Exelon, are collectively referred to as the Registrants. The following combined Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations summarizes results for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, and is separately filed by Exelon, Generation, ComEd, PECO, BGE, PHI, Pepco, DPL, and ACE. However, none of the Registrants makes any representation as to information related solely to any of the other Registrants. For discussion of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS in the 2019 Form 10-K, which was filed with the SEC on February 11, 2020.
COVID-19. The Registrants have taken steps to mitigate the potential risks posed by the global outbreak (pandemic) of COVID-19. The Registrants provide a critical service to our customers which means that it is paramount that we keep our employees who operate our businesses safe and minimize unnecessary risk of exposure to the virus. The Registrants have taken extra precautions for our employees who work in the field and for employees who continue to work in our facilities. The Registrants have implemented work from home policies where appropriate, and imposed travel limitations on their employees. In addition, the Registrants have updated existing business continuity plans in the context of this pandemic.
The Registrants continue to implement strong physical and cyber-security measures to ensure that our systems remain functional in order to both serve our operational needs with a remote workforce and keep them running to ensure uninterrupted service to our customers.
There were no changes in internal control over financial reporting in 2020 as a result of COVID-19 that materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, any of the Registrants’ internal control over financial reporting. See ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES for additional information.
Unfavorable economic conditions due to COVID-19 have impacted the demand for electricity and natural gas at Generation and the Utility Registrants, which has resulted in a decrease in operating revenues.
As a result of COVID-19, Generation temporarily suspended interruption of service for all retail residential customers for non-payment and temporarily ceased new late payment fees for all retail customers from March to May of 2020. Starting in March of 2020, the Utility Registrants also temporarily suspended customer disconnections for non-payment and temporarily ceased new late payment fees for all customers and restored service to customers upon request who were disconnected in the last twelve months. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on such measures at the Utility Registrants. At Generation, such measures resulted in an increase in credit loss expense. ComEd and ACE recorded regulatory assets for the incremental credit loss expense based on existing mechanisms. BGE, PECO, Pepco, and DPL also recorded regulatory assets for substantially all the incremental credit loss expense incurred in 2020. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Generation and the Utility Registrants have also incurred direct costs related to COVID-19 consisting primarily of costs to acquire personal protective equipment, costs for cleaning supplies and services, and costs to hire healthcare professionals to monitor the health of their employees. At Generation and PECO, such costs are recorded as Operating and maintenance expense and are excluded from Adjusted (non-GAAP) Operating Earnings. At ComEd, BGE, Pepco, DPL, and ACE, such costs are primarily recorded as regulatory assets. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The estimated impact to Generation’s and the Utility Registrants’ Net income is approximately $170 million and $75 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively.
To offset the unfavorable impacts from COVID-19, the Registrants identified approximately $250 million in cost savings across Generation and the Utility Registrants in 2020. The cost savings achieved in 2020 were higher than originally anticipated.
The Registrants rely on the capital markets for publicly offered debt as well as the commercial paper markets to meet their financial commitments and short-term liquidity needs. As a result of the disruptions in the commercial paper markets in March of 2020, Generation borrowed $1.5 billion on its revolving credit facility to refinance commercial paper, which Generation repaid on April 3, 2020. Generation also entered into two short-term loan agreements in March of 2020 for an aggregate of $500 million. On April 8, 2020, Generation received approximately $500 million in cash after entering into an accounts receivable financing arrangement. On April 24, 2020, Exelon Corporate entered into a credit agreement establishing a $550 million 364-day revolving credit facility to be used as an additional source of short-term liquidity. In addition, the Registrants issued long-term debt of $5.3 billion and were able to successfully complete their planned long-term debt issuances in 2020. See Liquidity and Capital Resources, Note 17 - Debt and Credit Agreements, and Note 6 - Accounts Receivable of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The Registrants assessed long-lived assets, goodwill, and investments for recoverability and there were no material impairment charges recorded in 2020 as a result of COVID-19. See Note 12 - Asset Impairments for additional information related to other impairment assessments in the third quarter of 2020. Certain assumptions are highly sensitive to changes. Changes in significant assumptions could potentially result in future impairments, which could be material.
This is an evolving situation that could lead to extended disruption of economic activity in our markets. The Registrants will continue to monitor developments affecting their workforce, customers, and suppliers and will take additional precautions that they determine to be necessary in order to mitigate the impacts. The extent to which COVID-19 may impact the Registrants’ ability to operate their generating and transmission and distribution assets, the ability to access capital markets, and results of operations, including demand for electricity and natural gas, will depend on the spread and proliferation of COVID-19 around the world and future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time.
Financial Results of Operations
GAAP Results of Operations. The following table sets forth Exelon's GAAP consolidated Net Income attributable to common shareholders by Registrant for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. For additional information regarding the financial results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 see the discussions of Results of Operations by Registrant.
__________
(a)Primarily includes eliminating and consolidating adjustments, Exelon’s corporate operations, shared service entities, and other financing and investing activities.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019. Net income attributable to common shareholders decreased by $973 million and diluted earnings per average common share decreased to $2.01 in 2020 from $3.01 in 2019 primarily due to:
•One-time charges and accelerated depreciation and amortization associated with Generation's decisions in the third quarter of 2020 to early retire Byron and Dresden nuclear facilities in 2021 and Mystic Units 8 and 9 in 2024, partially offset by the absence of accelerated depreciation and amortization due to the early retirement of TMI in September 2019;
•Impairment of the New England asset group;
•Payments that ComEd made under the Deferred Prosecution Agreement. See Note 19 - Commitments and Contingencies of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information;
•Lower capacity revenue;
•Reduction in load due to COVID-19 at Generation;
•Lower realized energy prices;
•Higher nuclear outage days;
•Impact of Generation's annual update to the nuclear ARO for Non-Regulatory Agreement Units;
•Lower net unrealized and realized gains on NDT funds;
•COVID-19 direct costs;
•Lower electric distribution earnings from lower allowed ROE due to a decrease in treasury rates, partially offset by higher rate base at ComEd;
•Higher storm costs related to the June 2020 and August 2020 storms at PECO, net of tax repairs, and related to the August 2020 storm at DPL;
•Unfavorable weather conditions at PECO, DPL Delaware, and ACE; and
•A net increase in depreciation and amortization expense due to ongoing capital expenditures at PECO, BGE, Pepco, DPL, and ACE, partially offset at Generation due to the impact of extending the operating license at Peach Bottom.
The decreases were partially offset by;
•Higher mark-to-market gains;
•Unrealized gains resulting from equity investments without readily determinable fair values that became publicly traded entities in the fourth quarter and were fair valued based on quoted market prices of the stocks as of December 31, 2020;
•Lower operating and maintenance expense at Generation primarily due to previous cost management programs, lower contracting costs, and lower travel costs, partially offset by lower NEIL insurance distributions;
•Lower nuclear fuel costs;
•A tax benefit related to a settlement in the first quarter of 2020, partially offset by the absence of a tax benefit related to certain research and development activities recorded in the fourth quarter of 2019 at Generation; and
•Regulatory rate increases at BGE, DPL, and ACE.
Adjusted (non-GAAP) Operating Earnings. In addition to net income, Exelon evaluates its operating performance using the measure of Adjusted (non-GAAP) operating earnings because management believes it represents earnings directly related to the ongoing operations of the business. Adjusted (non-GAAP) operating earnings exclude certain costs, expenses, gains and losses, and other specified items. This information is intended to enhance an investor’s overall understanding of year-to-year operating results and provide an indication of Exelon’s baseline operating performance excluding items that are considered by management to be not directly related to the ongoing operations of the business. In addition, this information is among the primary indicators management uses as a basis for evaluating performance, allocating resources, setting incentive compensation targets, and planning and forecasting of future periods. Adjusted (non-GAAP) operating earnings is not a presentation defined under GAAP and may not be comparable to other companies’ presentations or deemed more useful than the GAAP information provided elsewhere in this report.
The following table provides a reconciliation between Net income attributable to common shareholders as determined in accordance with GAAP and Adjusted (non-GAAP) operating earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019:
__________
Note:
Amounts may not sum due to rounding.
Unless otherwise noted, the income tax impact of each reconciling item between GAAP Net Income and Adjusted (non-GAAP) Operating Earnings is based on the marginal statutory federal and state income tax rates for each Registrant, taking into account whether the income or expense item is taxable or deductible, respectively, in whole or in part. For all items except the unrealized gains and losses related to NDT funds, the marginal statutory income tax rates for 2020 and 2019 ranged from 26.0% to 29.0%. Under IRS regulations, NDT fund investment returns are taxed at different rates for investments if they are in qualified or non-qualified funds. The effective tax rates for the unrealized gains and losses related to NDT funds were 52.1% and 47.3% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(a)Reflects the impact of net unrealized gains and losses on Generation’s NDT fund investments for Non-Regulatory and Regulatory Agreement Units. The impacts of the Regulatory Agreement Units, including the associated income taxes, are contractually eliminated, resulting in no earnings impact.
(b)In 2020, reflects an impairment at ComEd in the second quarter of 2020 related to the acquisition of transmission assets and an impairment of the New England asset group in the third quarter of 2020. In 2019, primarily reflects the impairment of equity method investments in certain distributed energy companies. The impact of such impairment net of noncontrolling interest is $0.02.
(c)In 2020, primarily reflects one-time charges and accelerated depreciation and amortization associated with Generation's decisions in the third quarter of 2020 to early retire Byron and Dresden nuclear facilities in 2021 and Mystic Units 8 and 9 in 2024. In 2019, primarily reflects accelerated depreciation and amortization expenses associated with the early retirement of the TMI nuclear facility and certain fossil sites and the loss on the sale of Oyster Creek to Holtec, partially offset by net realized gains related to Oyster Creek's NDT fund investments, a net benefit associated with remeasurements of the TMI ARO, and a gain on the sale of certain wind assets.
(d)Primarily represents reorganization and severance costs related to cost management programs.
(e)Reflects an adjustment to Generation's nuclear ARO for Non-Regulatory Agreement Units resulting from the annual update.
(f)Represents direct costs related to COVID-19 consisting primarily of costs to acquire personal protective equipment, costs for cleaning supplies and services, and costs to hire healthcare professionals to monitor the health of employees.
(g)Reflects the payments made by ComEd under the Deferred Prosecution Agreement, which ComEd entered into on July 17, 2020 with the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of Illinois.
(h)Reflects costs related to the acquisition of EDF's interest in CENG.
(i)Reflects costs related to a multi-year ERP system implementation.
(j)Primarily reflects the adjustment to deferred income taxes due to changes in forecasted apportionment.
(k)Represents elimination from Generation’s results of the noncontrolling interests related to certain exclusion items. In 2020, primarily related to unrealized gains and losses on NDT fund investments for CENG units. In 2019, primarily related to the impact of unrealized gains on NDT fund investments and the impact of the Generation's annual nuclear ARO update for CENG units, partially offset by the impairment of certain equity investments in distributed energy companies.
Significant 2020 Transactions and Developments
Planned Separation
On February 21, 2021, Exelon’s Board of Directors approved a plan to separate the Utility Registrants and Generation, creating two publicly traded companies with the resources necessary to best serve customers and sustain long-term investment and operating excellence. The separation gives each company the financial and strategic independence to focus on its specific customer needs, while executing its core business strategy. See Note 26 - Subsequent Events of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Impacts of February 2021 Weather Events and Texas-based Generating Assets Outages
Beginning on February 15, 2021, Generation’s Texas-based generating assets within the ERCOT market, specifically Colorado Bend II, Wolf Hollow II, and Handley, experienced periodic outages as a result of historically severe cold weather conditions. In addition, those weather conditions drove increased demand for service, limited the availability of natural gas to fuel power plants, and dramatically increased wholesale power and gas prices.
Exelon and Generation estimate the impact to their Net income for the first quarter of 2021 arising from these market and weather conditions to be approximately $560 million to $710 million. The estimated impact includes favorable results in certain regions within Generation’s wholesale gas business. The ultimate impact to Exelon’s and Generation’s consolidated financial statements may be affected by a number of factors, including final settlement data, the impacts of customer and counterparty credit losses, any state sponsored solutions to address the financial challenges caused by the event, and litigation and contract disputes which may result. Exelon expects to offset between $410 million and $490 million of this impact primarily at Generation through a combination of enhanced revenue opportunities, deferral of selected non-essential maintenance, and primarily one-time cost savings.
See Note 26 - Subsequent Events of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Agreement for Sale of Generation’s Solar Business
On December 8, 2020, Generation entered into an agreement with an affiliate of Brookfield Renewable, for the sale of a significant portion of Generation’s solar business, including 360 megawatts of generation in operation or under construction across more than 600 sites across the United States, for a purchase price of $810 million. Completion of the transaction is expected to occur in the first half of 2021. Generation will retain certain solar assets not included in this agreement, primarily Antelope Valley. See Note 2 - Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Early Retirement of Generation Facilities
In August 2020, Generation announced that it intends to retire the Byron Generating Station in September 2021, Dresden Generating Station in November 2021, and Mystic Units 8 and 9 at the expiration of the cost of service commitment in May 2024. As a result, in the third quarter of 2020, Exelon and Generation recognized a $500 million impairment of its New England asset group and one-time non-cash charges for Byron, Dresden, and Mystic related to materials and supplies inventory reserve adjustments, employee-related costs, and construction work-in-progress impairments, among other items. In addition, there will be ongoing annual financial impacts stemming from shortening the expected economic useful lives of these facilities, primarily related to accelerated depreciation of plant assets (including any ARC) and accelerated amortization of nuclear fuel. Such ongoing charges are excluded from Adjusted (non-GAAP) Operating Earnings.
The following table summarizes the incremental expense recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the estimated amounts of incremental expense expected to be incurred through the retirement dates.
_________
(a)Actual results may differ based on incremental future capital additions, actual units of production for nuclear fuel amortization, future revised ARO assumptions, etc.
(b)Reflects incremental accelerated depreciation of plant assets, including any ARC.
(c)Reflects primarily the net impacts associated with the remeasurement of the ARO for Dresden. See Note 10 - Asset Retirement Obligations of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(d)Reflects contractual offset for ARO accretion, ARC depreciation, and net impacts associated with the remeasurement of the ARO for Byron and Dresden. Based on the regulatory agreement with the ICC, decommissioning-related activities are offset within Exelon's and Generation's Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income as long as the net cumulative decommissioning-related activities result in a regulatory liability at ComEd. Recognition of a regulatory asset for nuclear decommissioning-related activities at ComEd is not permissible. The offset results in an equal adjustment to the noncurrent payables to ComEd at Generation and an adjustment to the regulatory liabilities at ComEd. See Note 10 - Asset Retirement Obligations of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Deferred Prosecution Agreement
On July 17, 2020, ComEd entered into a Deferred Prosecution Agreement (DPA) with the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of Illinois (USAO) to resolve the USAO’s investigation into ComEd’s lobbying activities in the State of Illinois. Under the DPA, the USAO filed a single charge alleging that ComEd improperly gave and offered to give jobs, vendor subcontracts, and payments associated with those jobs and subcontracts for the benefit of the Speaker of the Illinois House of Representatives and the Speaker’s associates, with the intent to influence the Speaker’s action regarding legislation affecting ComEd’s interests. The DPA provides that the USAO will defer any prosecution of such charge and any other criminal or civil case against ComEd in connection with the matters identified therein for a three-year period subject to certain obligations of ComEd, including payment to the United States Treasury of $200 million, with $100 million payable within thirty days of the filing of the DPA with the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois and an additional $100 million within ninety days of such filing date. The payments will not be recovered in rates or charged to customers, and ComEd will not seek or accept reimbursement or indemnification from any source other than Exelon. See Note 19 - Commitments and Contingencies for additional information.
Utility Distribution Base Rate Case Proceedings
The Utility Registrants file base rate cases with their regulatory commissions seeking increases or decreases to their electric transmission and distribution, and gas distribution rates to recover their costs and earn a fair return on their investments. The outcomes of these regulatory proceedings impact the Utility Registrants’ current and future financial statements.
The following tables show the Utility Registrants’ completed and pending distribution base rate case proceedings in 2020. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on these and other regulatory proceedings.
Completed Distribution Base Rate Case Proceedings
Pending Distribution Base Rate Case Proceedings
Transmission Formula Rates
The following total increases/(decreases) were included in the Utility Registrants' 2020 annual electric transmission formula rate updates. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Sales of Customer Accounts Receivable
On April 8, 2020, NER, a bankruptcy remote, special purpose entity, which is wholly owned by Generation, entered into an accounts receivable financing facility with a number of financial institutions and a commercial paper conduit to sell certain customer accounts receivables. Generation received approximately $500 million of cash in accordance with the initial sale of approximately $1.2 billion receivables. See Note 6 - Accounts Receivable of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Exelon’s Strategy and Outlook
On February 21, 2021, Exelon’s Board of Directors approved a plan to separate the Utility Registrants and Generation, creating two publicly traded companies with the resources necessary to best serve customers and sustain long-term investment and operating excellence. The separation gives each company the financial and strategic independence to focus on its specific customer needs, while executing its core business strategy. See Note 26 - Subsequent Events of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
In 2021, the businesses remain focused on maintaining industry leading operational excellence, meeting or exceeding their financial commitments, ensuring timely recovery on investments to enable customer benefits, supporting enactment of clean energy policies, and continued commitment to corporate responsibility.
Exelon’s utility strategy is to improve reliability and operations and enhance the customer experience, while ensuring ratemaking mechanisms provide the utilities fair financial returns. The Utility Registrants only invest in rate base where it provides a benefit to customers and the community by improving reliability and the service experience or otherwise meeting customer needs. The Utility Registrants make these investments at the lowest
reasonable cost to customers. Exelon seeks to leverage its scale and expertise across the utilities platform through enhanced standardization and sharing of resources and best practices to achieve improved operational and financial results. Additionally, the Utility Registrants anticipate making significant future investments in smart grid technology, transmission projects, gas infrastructure, and electric system improvement projects, providing greater reliability and improved service for our customers and a stable return for the company.
Generation’s competitive businesses create value for customers by providing innovative energy solutions and reliable, clean, and affordable energy. Generation’s electricity generation strategy is to pursue opportunities that provide stable revenues and match supply to customers. Generation leverages its energy generation portfolio to deliver energy to both wholesale and retail customers. Generation’s customer-facing activities foster development and delivery of other innovative energy-related products and services for its customers. Generation operates in well-developed energy markets and employs an integrated hedging strategy to manage commodity price volatility. Its generation fleet, including its nuclear plants which consistently operate at high capacity factors, also provide geographic and supply source diversity. These factors help Generation mitigate the current challenging conditions in competitive energy markets.
Various market, financial, regulatory, legislative and operational factors could affect the Registrants' success in pursuing their strategies. Exelon continues to assess infrastructure, operational, commercial, policy, and legal solutions to these issues. One key issue is ensuring the ability to properly value nuclear generation assets in the market, solutions to which Exelon is actively pursuing in a variety of jurisdictions and venues. See ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS for additional information regarding market and financial factors.
Growth Opportunities
Management continually evaluates growth opportunities aligned with Exelon’s businesses, assets and markets, leveraging Exelon’s expertise in those areas and offering sustainable returns.
Regulated Energy Businesses. The Utility Registrants anticipate investing approximately $27 billion over the next four years in electric and natural gas infrastructure improvements and modernization projects, including smart grid technology, storm hardening, advanced reliability technologies, and transmission projects, which is projected to result in an increase to current rate base of approximately $15 billion by the end of 2024. The Utility Registrants invest in rate base where beneficial to customers and the community by increasing reliability and the service experience or otherwise meeting customer needs. These investments are made at the lowest reasonable cost to customers.
Competitive Energy Businesses. Generation continually assesses the optimal structure and composition of its generation assets as well as explores wholesale and retail opportunities within the power and gas sectors. Generation’s strategy is to ensure appropriate valuation of its generation assets, in part through public policy efforts, identify and capitalize on opportunities that match supply to customers as a means to provide stable earnings, and identify emerging technologies where strategic investments provide the option for significant future growth or influence in market development.
Other Key Business Drivers and Management Strategies
Utility Rates and Rate Proceedings
The Utility Registrants file rate cases with their regulatory commissions seeking increases or decreases to their electric transmission and distribution, and gas distribution rates to recover their costs and earn a fair return on their investments. The outcomes of these regulatory proceedings impact the Utility Registrants’ current and future results of operations, cash flows, and financial positions. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on these regulatory proceedings.
Power Markets
Price of Fuels
The use of new technologies to recover natural gas from shale deposits is increasing natural gas supply and reserves, which places downward pressure on natural gas prices and, therefore, on wholesale and retail power prices, which results in a reduction in Exelon’s revenues. Forward natural gas prices have declined significantly
over the last several years; in part reflecting an increase in supply due to strong natural gas production (due to shale gas development).
Section 232 Uranium Petition
On January 16, 2018, two Canadian-owned uranium mining companies with operations in the U.S. jointly submitted a petition to the U.S. Department of Commerce ("DOC") seeking relief under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 from imports of uranium products, alleging that these imports threaten national security.
The United States Nuclear Fuel Working Group ("Working Group") report was made public on April 23, 2020. The Working Group report states that nuclear power is intrinsically tied to national security, and promises that the U.S. government will take bold actions to strengthen all parts of the nuclear fuel industry in the U.S. It recommends the Agreement Suspending the Antidumping Investigation on Uranium from the Russian Federation (the “Russian Suspension Agreement” or "RSA") be extended and to consider reducing the amount of Russian imports of nuclear fuel. The Russian Suspension Agreement is the historical resolution of a 1991 DOC investigation that found that the Russians had been selling or “dumping” cheap uranium products into the U.S. The RSA has been amended several times in the intervening years to allow Russia to supply limited amounts of uranium products into the U.S. It was set to expire at the end of 2020, but was amended on October 5, 2020 to extend for another 20 years.
The Working Group report should be viewed as policy recommendations that may be implemented by executive agencies, congress, and or regulatory bodies. Exelon and Generation cannot currently predict the outcome of all of the policy changes recommended by the Working Group.
Complaint at FERC Seeking to Alter Capacity Market Default Offer Caps
On February 21, 2019, PJM's Independent Market Monitor (IMM) filed a complaint alleging that the number of performance assessment intervals used to calculate the default offer cap for bids to supply capacity in PJM is too high, resulting in an overstated default offer cap that obviates the need for most sellers to seek unit-specific approval of their offers. The IMM claims that this allows for the exercise of market power. The IMM asks FERC to require PJM to reduce the number of performance assessment intervals used to calculate the opportunity costs of a capacity supplier assuming a capacity obligation. This would, in turn, lower the default offer cap and allow the IMM to review more offers on a unit-specific basis. It is too early to predict the final outcome of this proceeding or its potential financial impact, if any, on Exelon or Generation.
Energy Demand
Load growth at the Utility Registrants is driven by recovery from COVID-19 impacts. ComEd and PECO are projecting modest growth in load of 2.5% and 1.8%, respectively, in 2021 as compared to reduced load in 2020. BGE, Pepco, DPL, and ACE are projecting slower growth as prolonged COVID-19 impacts decrease load by (2.0)%, (0.8)%, (0.9)%, and (2.4)%, respectively, in 2021 compared to 2020.
Retail Competition
Generation’s retail operations compete for customers in a competitive environment, which affect the margins that Generation can earn and the volumes that it is able to serve. Forward natural gas and power prices are expected to remain low and thus we expect retail competitors to stay aggressive in their pursuit of market share, and that wholesale generators (including Generation) will continue to use their retail operations to hedge generation output.
Hedging Strategy
Exelon’s policy to hedge commodity risk on a ratable basis over three-year periods is intended to reduce the financial impact of market price volatility. Generation is exposed to commodity price risk associated with the unhedged portion of its electricity portfolio. Generation enters into non-derivative and derivative contracts, including financially-settled swaps, futures contracts and swap options, and physical options and physical forward contracts, all with credit-approved counterparties, to hedge this anticipated exposure. As of December 31, 2020, the percentage of expected generation hedged for the Mid-Atlantic, Midwest, New York, and ERCOT reportable segments is 94%-97% for 2021. Generation has been and will continue to be proactive in using hedging strategies to mitigate commodity price risk.
Generation procures natural gas through long-term and short-term contracts and spot-market purchases. Nuclear fuel assemblies are obtained predominantly through long-term uranium concentrate supply contracts, contracted conversion services, contracted enrichment services, or a combination thereof, and contracted fuel fabrication services. The supply markets for uranium concentrates and certain nuclear fuel services are subject to price fluctuations and availability restrictions. Approximately 60% of Generation’s uranium concentrate requirements from 2021 through 2025 are supplied by three suppliers. In the event of non-performance by these or other suppliers, Generation believes that replacement uranium concentrate can be obtained, although at prices that may be unfavorable when compared to the prices under the current supply agreements. Non-performance by these counterparties could have a material adverse impact on Exelon’s and Generation’s consolidated financial statements.
See Note 16 - Derivative Financial Instruments of the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and