Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Some of the statements under in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” are forward-looking statements. These statements are based on our current expectations, assumptions, estimates and projections about our business and our industry and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our company’s or our industry’s results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied in, or contemplated by, the forward-looking statements. Our actual results and the timing of events may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such a difference include those discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” as well as those discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These and many other factors could affect our future financial and operating results. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events after the date of this report.
We have adopted a 52- or 53-week fiscal year policy that ends on the Friday closest to December 31st. Fiscal year 2020, which was a 52-week fiscal year, ended on January 1, 2021, fiscal year 2019, which was a 53-week fiscal year, ended on January 3, 2020, and fiscal year 2018, which was a 52-week fiscal year, ended on December 28, 2018. For convenience, references in this report as of and for the fiscal years ended January 1, 2021, January 3, 2020 and December 28, 2018 are indicated as being as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
This discussion and analysis generally addresses 2020 and 2019 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2020.
Overview
We are an oncology-focused biotechnology company that strives to accelerate the discovery, development and commercialization of new medicines for difficult-to-treat cancers. Since we were founded in 1994, four products resulting from our discovery efforts have progressed through clinical development, received regulatory approval and established a commercial presence in various geographies around the world. Two are derived from cabozantinib, our flagship molecule, an inhibitor of multiple tyrosine kinases including MET, AXL, VEGF receptors and RET. Our cabozantinib products are: CABOMETYX tablets approved for advanced RCC, both alone and in combination with OPDIVO, and for previously treated HCC; and COMETRIQ capsules approved for progressive, metastatic MTC. For these types of cancer, cabozantinib has become or is becoming a standard of care. The other two products resulting from our discovery efforts are: COTELLIC, an inhibitor of MEK, approved as part of multiple combination regimens to treat specific forms of advanced melanoma and marketed under a collaboration with Genentech; and MINNEBRO, an oral, non-steroidal, selective blocker of the MR, approved for the treatment of hypertension in Japan and licensed to Daiichi Sankyo.
The FDA first approved CABOMETYX for previously treated patients with advanced RCC in April 2016, and in December 2017 the FDA expanded CABOMETYX’s approval to include previously untreated patients with advanced RCC. Additionally, in January 2019, the FDA approved CABOMETYX for the treatment of patients with HCC who have been previously treated with sorafenib. Most recently on January 22, 2021, the FDA approved CABOMETYX in combination with OPDIVO as a first-line treatment of patients with advanced RCC.
To develop and commercialize CABOMETYX and COMETRIQ outside the U.S., we have entered into license agreements with Ipsen and Takeda. We granted to Ipsen the rights to develop and commercialize cabozantinib outside of the U.S. and Japan, and to Takeda the rights to develop and commercialize cabozantinib in Japan. Both Ipsen and Takeda also contribute financially and operationally to the further global development and commercialization of the cabozantinib franchise in other potential indications, and we continue to work closely with them on these activities. Utilizing its regulatory expertise and established international oncology marketing network, Ipsen has continued to execute on its commercialization plans for CABOMETYX, having received regulatory approvals and launched in multiple territories outside of the U.S., including in the EU and Canada, as a treatment for advanced RCC and for HCC in adults who have previously been treated with sorafenib. In addition, in September 2020, Ipsen and BMS submitted type II variation applications to the EMA to approve the combination of CABOMETYX and OPDIVO as a treatment for advanced RCC, with the EMA validating the type II variations and beginning its centralized review process, and both Ipsen and BMS plan to submit applications to approve the combination in other territories beyond the EU. With respect to the Japanese market, Takeda achieved important milestones in 2020, including receipt of Manufacturing and Marketing Approvals from the Japanese MHLW of
CABOMETYX as a treatment of patients with curatively unresectable or metastatic RCC and as a treatment of patients with unresectable HCC who progressed after cancer chemotherapy. In October 2020, Takeda and Ono submitted a supplemental application to the Japanese MHLW for Manufacturing and Marketing Approval of CABOMETYX in combination with OPDIVO for the treatment of patients with unresectable, advanced or metastatic RCC.
In addition to our regulatory and commercialization efforts in the U.S. and the support provided to our collaboration partners for rest-of-world regulatory and commercialization activities, we are also pursuing other indications for cabozantinib that have the potential to increase the number of cancer patients who could benefit from this medicine. We are evaluating cabozantinib, both as a single agent and in combination with other therapies, in a broad development program comprising over 100 ongoing or planned clinical trials across multiple indications. We, along with our collaboration partners, sponsor some of the trials, and independent investigators conduct the remaining trials through our CRADA with NCI-CTEP or our IST program. Informed by the available data from these clinical trials, we continue to advance the development program for the cabozantinib franchise with potentially label-enabling trials. One pivotal trial that has resulted from this effort is COSMIC-311, our ongoing phase 3 pivotal trial evaluating cabozantinib versus placebo in patients with RAI-refractory DTC who have progressed after up to two VEGF receptor-targeted therapies. In December 2020, we announced that COSMIC-311 had met its co-primary endpoint of demonstrating significant improvement in PFS. We intend to discuss the study results, proposed changes to the study conduct, as well as plans for filing an sNDA with the FDA in 2021.
We are particularly interested in continuing to evaluate cabozantinib’s potential in combination with ICIs to determine if these combinations further improve outcomes for patients. Building on preclinical and clinical observations that cabozantinib may promote a more immune-permissive tumor environment potentially resulting in cooperative activity of cabozantinib in combination with these products, we are evaluating cabozantinib in combination with a variety of ICIs. CheckMate -9ER, a phase 3 pivotal trial evaluating the combination of cabozantinib and nivolumab compared to sunitinib in previously untreated advanced or metastatic RCC, for which we and our collaboration partner BMS announced positive top-line results in April 2020, is reflective of this strategy. The trial met its primary endpoint of PFS at final analysis, as well as the secondary endpoints of OS at a pre-specified interim analysis and ORR, and showed that the combination of cabozantinib with nivolumab significantly reduced the risk of disease progression or death compared with sunitinib. Data from CheckMate -9ER were presented at Presidential Symposium I at the ESMO Virtual Congress 2020 in September 2020 and served as the basis for the FDA’s approval of CABOMETYX in combination with OPDIVO as a first-line treatment of patients with advanced RCC in January 2021. We have also collaborated with BMS on CheckMate 040, a multi-cohort phase 1/2 trial evaluating cabozantinib in combination with nivolumab and in combination with both nivolumab and ipilimumab in patients with previously treated or previously untreated advanced HCC, for which initial clinically meaningful results were presented at the ASCO Gastrointestinal Cancers Symposium in January 2020, and COSMIC-313, a phase 3 pivotal trial evaluating the triplet combination of cabozantinib, nivolumab and ipilimumab versus the combination of nivolumab and ipilimumab in patients with previously untreated advanced intermediate- or poor-risk RCC. We expect to complete enrollment for COSMIC-313 in early 2021 and report top-line results of the event-driven analyses from the trial in 2022.
In an effort to diversify our exploration of combinations with ICIs, we have also initiated multiple trials evaluating cabozantinib in combination with Roche’s ICI, atezolizumab. COSMIC-312 is a phase 3 pivotal trial evaluating cabozantinib in combination with atezolizumab versus sorafenib in previously untreated advanced HCC, for which we announced in August 2020 that enrollment was completed. Based on current event rates, we anticipate announcing top-line results in the first half of 2021, and if the data are supportive, we anticipate filing an sNDA with the FDA in 2021. COSMIC-021 is a broad phase 1b study evaluating the safety and tolerability of cabozantinib in combination with atezolizumab in patients with locally advanced or metastatic solid tumors. Based on continuing encouraging efficacy and safety data certain cohorts have been or may be further expanded, including the cohorts of patients with NSCLC who have been previously treated with an ICI and mCRPC who have been previously treated with enzalutamide and/or abiraterone acetate and experienced radiographic disease progression in soft tissue. We anticipate completing enrollment of up to 1,732 patients in the trial in the first half of 2021, although both the timing and final number of patients are subject to the initiation of additional cohorts or expansion of selected existing cohorts, as well as any further delays resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Since the initiation of the trial, data from COSMIC-021 have been instrumental in guiding our clinical development strategy for cabozantinib in combination with ICIs, including supporting the initiation of COSMIC-312, and three phase 3 pivotal trials in collaboration with Roche, CONTACT-01, CONTACT-02 and CONTACT-03, evaluating the combination of cabozantinib with atezolizumab in patients with metastatic NSCLC, mCRPC and advanced RCC, respectively. Encouraging results from interim analyses from the mCRPC, NSCLC, clear cell RCC and non-clear cell RCC cohorts of COSMIC-021 were presented at various medical conferences throughout 2020. Based on regulatory feedback from the FDA, and if supported by the clinical data, we intend to file with the FDA for accelerated approval in an mCRPC indication in 2021.
We remain committed to expanding our oncology product pipeline through drug discovery efforts, which encompass both small molecule and biologics programs with multiple modalities and mechanisms of action. Our small molecule discovery programs are supported by a robust and expanding infrastructure, including a library of 4.6 million compounds. We have extensive experience in the identification and optimization of drug candidates against multiple target classes for oncology, inflammation and metabolic diseases. We also augment our small molecule discovery activities through research collaborations and in-licensing arrangements with other companies engaged in small molecule discovery, including StemSynergy and Aurigene. For additional information on these research collaborations and in-licensing arrangements related to our small molecule programs, see “Business-Collaborations-Research Collaborations and In-licensing Arrangements” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The first compound to advance from our recent internal drug discovery efforts is XL092, a next-generation oral TKI that is currently in a phase 1 clinical trial in patients with advanced solid malignancies for which dose-escalation cohorts evaluating the compound, both as a single agent and in combination with atezolizumab, are currently enrolling. We presented data that support the ongoing clinical development of XL092 at the 32nd EORTC-NCI-AACR (ENA) Symposium in October 2020, and we expect that once recommended doses of both single-agent XL092 and XL092 in combination with atezolizumab are established, the trial will begin to enroll expansion cohorts for patients with clear cell and non-clear cell RCC, hormone-receptor positive breast cancer and mCRPC. We also submitted an IND in November 2020 for XL102, the lead Aurigene program targeting CDK7, and initiated a phase 1 clinical trial in January 2021.
We are also focusing our drug discovery activities on discovering and advancing various biologics, such as bispecific antibodies, ADCs and other innovative biologics that have the potential to become anti-cancer therapies. We believe that biotherapeutics of these classes have the potential to be significant cancer therapies, as evidenced, for example, by the multiple regulatory approvals for the commercial sale of ADCs in the past year. To facilitate the growth of our biologics programs, we have established multiple research collaborations and in-licensing arrangements that provide us with access to antibodies or other binders, which are the starting point for use with additional technology platforms that we employ to generate next-generation ADCs or bispecific antibodies. Our current research collaborations and in-licensing arrangements for biologics programs include Invenra, Iconic, NBE, Catalent and Adagene. We have already made significant progress under these research collaborations and in-licensing arrangements and believe we will continue to do so in 2021. For example, XB002, the lead Tissue Factor ADC program with Iconic, has continued to progress through preclinical development, and we plan to submit an IND once the drug product release assays are finalized. For additional information on these research collaborations and in-licensing arrangements related to our biologics programs, see “Business-Collaborations-Research Collaborations and In-licensing Arrangements” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We will continue to engage in business development initiatives aimed at acquiring and in-licensing promising oncology platforms and assets and then further characterize and develop them utilizing our established preclinical and clinical development infrastructure. In total, we are advancing drug candidates across approximately 20 ongoing discovery programs toward and through preclinical development, and subject to preclinical data, we have the potential to submit multiple INDs in 2021.
COVID-19 Update
As of the date of this Annual Report, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a modest impact on our business operations, in particular on our clinical trial, drug discovery and commercial activities. We have and continue to undertake considerable efforts to mitigate the various problems presented by this crisis, including as described below:
Clinical Trials. To varying degrees and at different rates across our clinical trials being conducted in regions impacted by COVID-19, we have experienced declines in screening and enrollment activity, delays in new site activations, and restrictions on the access to treatment sites that is necessary to monitor clinical study progress and administration. However, beginning with the second quarter of 2020 and throughout the rest of 2020, we experienced an increase in screening and enrollment activity, and overall, we and our collaboration partners, including principal investigators and personnel at clinical trial sites, have been successful in preventing material delays to our ongoing and planned clinical trials. We have done this through ongoing assessment of the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact and, wherever possible, taking proactive steps in compliance with guidance issued by the FDA, EMA and other regulatory agencies to support the safety of our patients and their access to treatment, as well as to maintain the high quality of our clinical trials. We recognize, however, that we may have to make further operational adjustments to our ongoing and planned clinical trials and that patient enrollment, and new clinical trial site initiations may be further slowed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, especially if it is further prolonged or grows in severity.
Drug Discovery and Preclinical Development. We have partially resumed internal drug discovery in our laboratories following a temporary suspension of these activities while we observed the shelter in place orders issued by the State of California and Alameda County. While this temporary suspension did not result in any significant changes to the timelines for our late-stage discovery work, we did experience modest delays in the advancement of certain of our early-stage programs. We also experienced some modest delays with respect to the portion of drug discovery work outsourced to third-party contractors in regions first impacted by COVID-19. However, those service providers have resumed discovery work and are meeting their contractual obligations in accordance with planned timelines. With respect to the preclinical development work outsourced to third-party contractors, to date that work has continued without substantial delay or interference resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. While we continue to utilize our resources effectively to move new product candidates toward the clinic, we may ultimately be unable to achieve our drug discovery and preclinical development objectives within the previously disclosed timelines due to the COVID-19 pandemic, especially if it is further prolonged or grows in severity.
Commercial Activities. Although our field employees have limited their in-person promotional activities and transitioned to primarily telephonic and virtual interactions, they remain engaged with healthcare professionals and are available to them as an informational resource. Nevertheless, with healthcare professionals acutely focused on the COVID-19 pandemic and patient access to healthcare professionals limited due to shelter in place orders, we experienced a decrease in prescriptions for CABOMETYX in 2020, which we believe was, at least in part, attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. We also observed fluctuations in CABOMETYX ordering, and we believe that this effect could continue depending on developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Overall, despite the challenges posed by the pandemic, our commercial business has only experienced a modest impact. We believe this is the case largely because of the gravity of the cancer conditions that our products are indicated to treat and the fact that CABOMETYX has been available as an orally administrable cancer treatment in the U.S. since 2016, thereby establishing a safety and efficacy profile that is well known to healthcare professionals. It remains possible, however, that over a longer period, changes to our standard sales and marketing practices resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, including the shift from in-person to primarily telephonic and virtual interactions with healthcare professionals, along with obstacles to patient access to healthcare professionals, could diminish sales of our marketed products.
Supply Chain. We have not experienced production delays or seen any significant impairment to our supply chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, we continue to maintain substantial safety stock inventories for our commercial drug substance and drug products, which should be sufficient to maintain robust long-term supply. We continue to work closely with our third-party contract manufacturers, distributors, suppliers, comparator drug sourcing vendors and collaboration partners to safeguard both the timely production and delivery of our products. If the COVID-19 pandemic is further prolonged or becomes more severe, however, we are prepared to modify our manufacturing and supply chain operations as appropriate in response.
General Business Operations. We have taken numerous temporary precautions to help mitigate the risk of transmission of the virus, including reducing the number of our employees working on-site at our Alameda headquarters under enhanced safety and social distancing protocols and initiating an on-site testing program. Although having most of our employees continue to work remotely has required that we devise new ways of working and collaborating, to date, the COVID-19 pandemic has only had a modest impact on our productivity and has not caused significant interruptions in our general business operations. If the COVID-19 pandemic is further prolonged or becomes more severe, however, we may find it more challenging to maintain that level of productivity, to grow the company as we have anticipated, and to execute on our long-term business plans. For a discussion of workplace safety measures we have taken as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Business-Environmental, Health and Safety-Workplace Safety Measures in Response to COVID-19” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The circumstances surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic are volatile and subject to rapid change. Despite our mitigation efforts, we may experience delays or an inability to execute on our clinical and preclinical development plans, reduced revenues or other adverse impacts to our business, which are described in more detail in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We recognize that this pandemic will continue to present unique challenges for us throughout 2021, and potentially into 2022.
For additional information regarding our business, see “Business” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
2020 Business Updates and Financial Highlights
During 2020, we continued to execute on our business objectives, generating significant revenue from operations and enabling us to continue to seek to maximize the clinical and commercial potential of our products and expand our product pipeline. Significant business updates and financial highlights for 2020 and subsequent to year-end include:
Business Updates
•In January 2020, clinically meaningful data from CheckMate 040, the phase 1/2 trial evaluating cabozantinib in combination with nivolumab and in combination with both nivolumab and ipilimumab in patients with previously treated or previously untreated advanced HCC, were presented at the ASCO Gastrointestinal Cancers Symposium.
•In February 2020, we presented clinically meaningful results from the mCRPC cohort of COSMIC-021 at the ASCO Genitourinary Cancers Symposium.
•In March 2020, Takeda received regulatory approval from the Japanese MHLW to manufacture and market CABOMETYX as a treatment for patients in Japan with curatively unresectable or metastatic RCC.
•In May 2020, we filed a second complaint in our patent infringement lawsuit against MSN, following receipt of notice from MSN that it had amended its ANDA, originally filed with the FDA in September 2019, to assert additional Paragraph IV certifications. For a more detailed discussion of this litigation matter, see “Legal Proceedings” in Part I, Item 3 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•In June 2020, we announced the initiation of CONTACT-01, a global phase 3 pivotal trial evaluating cabozantinib in combination with atezolizumab in patients with metastatic NSCLC who have been previously treated with an ICI and platinum-containing chemotherapy. The primary endpoint of the trial is OS, and the secondary endpoints include PFS, ORR and DOR.
•In June 2020, we announced the initiation of CONTACT-02, a global phase 3 pivotal trial evaluating cabozantinib in combination with atezolizumab in patients with mCRPC who have been previously treated with one novel hormonal therapy. The co-primary endpoints of the trial are PFS and OS, and the secondary endpoints include ORR, prostate-specific antigen response rate and DOR.
•In July 2020, we announced the initiation of CONTACT-03, a global phase 3 pivotal trial evaluating cabozantinib in combination with atezolizumab in patients with inoperable, locally advanced or metastatic RCC who progressed during or following treatment with an ICI as the immediate preceding therapy. The co-primary endpoints for the trial are PFS per RECIST v. 1.1 as assessed by independent review and OS, and secondary endpoints include PFS, ORR and DOR as assessed by the investigators.
•In July 2020, the FDA approved the sBLA submitted by Genentech for atezolizumab plus cobimetinib and vemurafenib for the treatment of BRAF V600-mutation positive advanced melanoma in previously untreated patients.
•In August 2020, we announced the completion of patient enrollment in COSMIC-312, a global phase 3 pivotal trial evaluating cabozantinib in combination with atezolizumab versus sorafenib in previously untreated advanced HCC, providing the patient population for the event-driven analyses of the study’s endpoints of PFS and OS. Separately, patient enrollment remains open in China in order to enroll a sufficient number of patients to potentially enable local registration. We anticipate announcing top-line results in the first half of 2021, and if the data are supportive, we anticipate filing an sNDA with the FDA in 2021.
•In September 2020, we announced a collaboration and license agreement with Catalent’s subsidiary Redwood Bioscience to develop multiple ADCs using Catalent’s proprietary SMARTag® site-specific bioconjugation technology.
•In September 2020, we announced a collaboration and license agreement with NBE to discover and develop multiple ADCs for oncology applications by leveraging NBE’s unique expertise and proprietary platforms in ADC discovery, including NBE’s SMAC-Technology and novel payloads.
•In September 2020, we announced that our collaboration partners Ipsen and BMS each submitted type II variation applications for the combination of CABOMETYX and OPDIVO as a treatment for advanced RCC to the EMA.
•In October 2020, we presented data that support the ongoing clinical development of XL092 at the 32nd ENA Symposium and announced enrollment of the first patient into the dose-escalation cohort of the combination arm of the phase 1 trial evaluating the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics and preliminary anti-tumor activity of XL092 alone and in combination with atezolizumab in patients with advanced solid tumors.
•In October 2020, our collaboration partner Takeda, along with Ono, submitted a supplemental application to the Japanese MHLW for Manufacturing and Marketing Approval of the combination of CABOMETYX and OPDIVO as a treatment for patients with advanced RCC.
•In November 2020, Takeda received regulatory approval from the Japanese MHLW to manufacture and market CABOMETYX as a treatment for patients in Japan with unresectable HCC that progressed after cancer chemotherapy.
•In December 2020, we and Iconic announced that we exercised our exclusive option for XB002, Iconic’s lead oncology ADC program under the collaboration, resulting in our assuming responsibility for all subsequent clinical development, manufacturing and commercialization for XB002. We anticipate submitting an IND for XB002 in 2021 once the drug product release assays are finalized and, pending the FDA’s acceptance of the IND, initiating a phase 1 clinical trial.
•In December 2020, we and Aurigene announced that we exercised our exclusive option for XL102, Aurigene’s lead program targeting CDK7, resulting in our assuming responsibility for all subsequent clinical development, manufacturing and commercialization of XL102. Following the FDA’s acceptance of the IND for XL102, in January 2021, we initiated a phase 1 clinical trial evaluating XL102, both as a single agent and in combination with other anti-cancer therapies for the treatment of inoperable, locally advanced or metastatic solid tumors.
•In December 2020, we announced that COSMIC-311, our phase 3 pivotal trial evaluating cabozantinib in patients with RAI-refractory DTC who have progressed after up to two prior VEGF receptor-targeted therapies, met its co-primary endpoint of significantly improving PFS. We intend to discuss the study results, proposed changes to the study conduct, as well as plans for filing an sNDA with the FDA in 2021.
•In January 2021, the FDA approved the combination of CABOMETYX and OPDIVO as a first-line treatment of patients with advanced RCC, and we and BMS commenced the commercial launch of the combination upon such approval. The approval was based on positive results from the phase 3 pivotal trial, CheckMate -9ER, in which the combination met its primary endpoint of significantly improving PFS at final analysis, as well as the secondary endpoints of OS at a pre-specified interim analysis and ORR, versus sunitinib. Data from the study were presented as part of the Presidential Symposium I at the ESMO Virtual Congress 2020 in September 2020 and will be presented at the virtual ASCO Genitourinary Cancers Symposium in February 2021
•In February 2021, we announced a collaboration and license agreement with Adagene to utilize Adagene’s SAFEbody technology platform to generate masked versions of mAbs from our growing preclinical pipeline for the development of ADCs or other innovative biologics.
2020 Financial Highlights
•Net product revenues for 2020 were $741.6 million, compared to $760.0 million for 2019.
•Total revenues for 2020 were $987.5 million, compared to $967.8 million for 2019.
•Research and development expenses for 2020 were $547.9 million, compared to $337.0 million for 2019.
•Selling, general and administrative expenses for 2020 were $293.4 million, compared to $228.2 million for 2019.
•Provision for income taxes for 2020 was $19.1 million, compared to $77.1 million for 2019.
•Net income for 2020 was $111.8 million, or $0.36 per share, basic and $0.35 per share, diluted, compared to $321.0 million, or $1.06 per share, basic and $1.02 per share diluted, for 2019.
•Cash and investments increased to $1.5 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.4 billion at December 31, 2019.
See “Results of Operations” below for a discussion of the detailed components and analysis of the amounts above.
Challenges and Risks
In addition to the challenges and risks imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic and described under “-COVID-19 Update” above, we will also continue to face challenges and risks that may impact our ability to execute on our 2021 business objectives, and some of these risks to our business have been or may be exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, for the foreseeable future, we expect our ability to generate sufficient cash flow to fund our business operations and growth will depend upon the continued commercial success of CABOMETYX, both alone or in combination with other therapies, as a treatment for the highly competitive indications for which it is approved, and possibly for other indications for which cabozantinib has been or is currently being evaluated in potentially label-enabling clinical trials, if warranted by the data generated from these trials. However, we cannot be certain that the clinical trials we and our
collaboration partners are currently conducting, or may conduct in the future, will demonstrate adequate safety and efficacy in these additional indications to receive regulatory approval in the major commercial markets where CABOMETYX is approved. Even if we and our collaboration partners receive the required regulatory approvals to market cabozantinib for additional indications, we and our collaboration partners may not be able to commercialize CABOMETYX effectively and successfully in these additional indications. In addition, CABOMETYX will only continue to be commercially successful if private third-party and government payers continue to provide coverage and reimbursement. However, as is the case for all innovative pharmaceutical therapies, obtaining and maintaining coverage and reimbursement for CABOMETYX is becoming increasingly difficult, both within the U.S. and in foreign markets, because of growing concerns over healthcare cost containment and corresponding policy initiatives and activities aimed at limiting access to, and restricting the prices of, pharmaceuticals.
Achievement of our 2021 business objectives will also depend on our ability to maintain a competitive position with respect to the shifting landscape of therapeutic strategy for the treatment of cancer, which we may not be able to do. While we have had success in adapting our development strategy for the cabozantinib franchise and other product candidates to address the expanding role of therapies that combine targeted agents with ICIs and/or with other mechanisms of action, it is uncertain whether current and future clinical trials will lead to regulatory approvals, or whether physicians will prescribe regimens containing our products instead of competing product combinations. Moreover, the complexities of such a development strategy have required and are likely to continue to require collaboration with some of our competitors. In the longer term, we may eventually face competition from potential manufacturers of generic versions of our marketed products, including the proposed generic version of CABOMETYX tablets that is the subject of an ANDA submitted to the FDA by MSN, which if approved, could significantly decrease our revenues derived from the U.S. sales of CABOMETYX and thereby materially harm our business, financial condition and results of operations. Separately, our research and development objectives may be impeded by the challenges of scaling our organization to meet the demands of expanded drug development, unanticipated delays in clinical testing and the inherent risks and uncertainties associated with drug discovery operations, all of which may be increased as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In connection with efforts to expand our product pipeline, we may be unsuccessful in discovering new drug candidates or identifying appropriate candidates for in-licensing or acquisition.
Some of these challenges and risks are specific to our business, and others are common to companies in the biotechnology, biopharmaceutical and pharmaceutical industries with development and commercial operations. Moreover, as described under “-COVID-19 Update” above, these risks have been or may be exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. For a more detailed discussion of challenges and risks we face, including those relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
We have adopted a 52- or 53-week fiscal year policy that ends on the Friday closest to December 31st. Fiscal year 2020, which was a 52-week fiscal year, ended on January 1, 2021, fiscal year 2019, which was a 53-week fiscal year, ended on January 3, 2020, and fiscal year 2018, which was a 52-week fiscal year, ended on December 28, 2018. For convenience, references in this report as of and for the fiscal years ended January 1, 2021, January 3, 2020 and December 28, 2018 are indicated as being as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
This discussion and analysis generally addresses 2020 and 2019 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2020.
Revenues
Revenues by category were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Net Product Revenues
Gross product revenues, discounts and allowances, and net product revenues were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Net product revenues by product were as follows (dollars in thousands):
The decrease in net product revenues for CABOMETYX for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to a decrease in sales volume and an increase in discounts and allowances, partially offset by an increase in the average selling price. The decrease in sales volume was driven by a decrease in prescriptions, consistent with a decline in the market for TKIs, and which we believe was, at least in part, attributable to the COVID -19 pandemic.
The decrease in net product revenues for COMETRIQ for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to a decrease in the number of units of COMETRIQ sold, including a decrease in units sold for use as a comparator in clinical trials, partially offset by an increase in the average selling price.
We project our 2021 net product revenues to increase over 2020, primarily as a result of the growth in the number of units sold following the FDA’s approval of CABOMETYX in combination with OPDIVO as a first line treatment of patients with advanced RCC, as well as an increase in selling price, reflecting the continued evolution of the metastatic RCC and HCC treatment landscapes.
We recognize product revenues net of discounts and allowances as described in “Note 1. Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The increase in discounts and allowances for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily the result of an increase in Public Health Service hospital utilization and the dollar amount of the related chargebacks, and to a lesser extent, an increase in utilization and the dollar amount of the related Medicaid utilization. We expect an increase in our discounts and allowances as a percentage of gross product revenues during 2021 as the number of patients participating in government programs continues to increase, and as the discounts given and rebates paid to government payers also increase.
License Revenues
License revenues include the recognition of the portion of milestone revenues allocated to the transfer of intellectual property licenses for which it had become probable in the related period that the milestone would be achieved and a significant reversal of revenues would not occur, as well as royalty revenues and the profit on the U.S. commercialization of COTELLIC from Genentech.
Milestone Revenues. Milestone revenues, which are allocated between license revenues and collaboration services revenues, were $86.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $96.2 million for 2019. Due to the nature and timing of milestone events, their achievement can vary significantly from year to year. Milestone revenues by period primarily included the following:
•Milestone revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily included: (1) recognition of $25.7 million in revenues in connection with a $31.0 million milestone achieved upon Takeda’s first commercial sale of CABOMETYX for the treatment of patients with curatively unresectable or metastatic RCC in Japan; (2) recognition of $19.0 million in revenues in connection with a $20.0 million development milestone from Ipsen for the initiation of a phase 3 pivotal trial; (3) recognition of $9.3 million in revenues in connection with a $10.0 million milestone for Takeda’s and Ono’s submission of a supplemental application to the Japanese MHLW for Manufacturing and Marketing Approval of CABOMETYX in combination with OPDIVO for the treatment of patients with unresectable, advanced or metastatic RCC; (4) recognition of $14.0 million in revenues in connection with a $15.0 million in milestone we achieved upon Takeda’s first commercial sale of CABOMETYX for the treatment of patients with advanced HCC; and (5) recognition of $14.0 million in revenues in connection with $15.0 million milestones from Takeda for the initiation of two phase 3 pivotal clinical trials that were deemed probable of being achieved in 2021.
•Milestone revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily included: (1) recognition of a $50.0 million milestone from Ipsen upon their achievement of $250.0 million in net sales of cabozantinib in their territories over four consecutive quarters; (2) recognition of a $20.0 million milestone from Daiichi Sankyo for the first commercial sale of MINNEBRO tablets as a treatment for patients with hypertension in Japan; (3) recognition of $9.9 million in revenues related to a $16.0 million milestone from Takeda for the submission of a regulatory application for cabozantinib as a treatment for patients with advanced RCC to the Japanese MHLW; (4) recognition of $9.1 million in revenues related to a $10.0 million milestone from Takeda for the submission of a regulatory application in January 2020 for cabozantinib as a treatment for patients with advanced HCC to the Japanese MHLW; and (5) recognition of two milestones totaling $5.0 million from Ipsen on the approvals by Health Canada of cabozantinib for the treatment of adults with first-line RCC and for the treatment of adults with advanced HCC who have been previously treated with sorafenib.
Due to uncertainties surrounding the timing and achievement of regulatory and development milestones, it is difficult to predict future milestones revenues and milestones can vary significantly from period to period.
Royalties. Royalties increased primarily as a result of an increase in royalties on Ipsen’s net sales of cabozantinib outside of the U.S. and Japan driven by increased demand for CABOMETYX, which, as of December 31, 2020, is approved and commercially available in 57 countries outside of the U.S. Royalties also increased due to the commercial launch of CABOMETYX for the treatment of patients with curatively unresectable or metastatic RCC in Japan by Takeda during the second quarter of 2020 and of HCC in the fourth quarter of 2020.
COTELLIC Profit Share. Our share of profits on the U.S. commercialization of COTELLIC under our collaboration agreement with Genentech was $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $4.6 million for 2019. We also earned royalties on ex-U.S. net sales of COTELLIC by Genentech of $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $5.7 million for 2019.
We project our license revenues to decrease in 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, as a result of the anticipated achievement of fewer milestones in 2021, partially offset by an increase in royalty revenues related to an increase in product sales by Ipsen and Takeda.
Collaboration Services Revenues
Collaboration services revenues include the recognition of deferred revenue for the portion of upfront and milestone payments that have been allocated to research and development services performance obligations, development cost reimbursements earned under our collaboration agreements, product supply revenues, net of product supply costs and the royalties we pay to GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) on sales by Ipsen and Takeda of products containing cabozantinib.
Development cost reimbursements increased to $76.3 million in 2020, as compared to $44.8 million in 2019, primarily as a result of reimbursements from Ipsen and Takeda associated with their decisions in 2020 to opt in and co-fund CONTACT-01, CONTACT-02 and additional cohorts of COSMIC-021, and their respective share of the increase in spending on the COSMIC-312, COSMIC-021 and CONTACT-02 studies.
Collaboration services revenues were reduced by $10.6 million for the 3% royalty we are required to pay GSK on the net sales by Ipsen and Takeda of any product incorporating cabozantinib for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $8.4 million in 2019. As royalty generating sales of cabozantinib by Ipsen and Takeda have increased as described above, our royalty payments to GSK have also increased.
We project our collaboration services revenues to decrease in 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily as a result of lower development cost reimbursements projected to be earned under our collaboration agreements.
Cost of Goods Sold
The cost of goods sold and our gross margins were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Cost of goods sold is related to our product revenues and consists primarily of a 3% royalty payable to GSK on U.S. net sales of any product incorporating cabozantinib, as well as the cost of inventory sold, indirect labor costs, write-downs related to expiring and excess inventory, and other third-party logistics costs. The increase in cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily the result of increases in write-downs of excess and expiring inventory and certain other period costs. We project our 2021 gross margin to remain consistent with 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
We do not track fully burdened research and development expenses on a project-by-project basis. We group our research and development expenses into three categories: (1) development; (2) drug discovery; and (3) other. Our development group leads the development and implementation of our clinical and regulatory strategies and prioritizes disease indications in which our compounds are being or may be studied in clinical trials. Our drug discovery group utilizes a variety of technologies, including in-licensed technologies, to enable the rapid discovery, optimization and extensive characterization of lead compounds such that we are able to select development candidates with the best potential for further evaluation and advancement into clinical development.
Research and development expenses by category were as follows (dollars in thousands):
____________________
(1) Primarily includes personnel expenses, consulting and outside services and laboratory supplies.
(2) Includes stock-based compensation and the allocation of general corporate costs to research and development services, and development cost reimbursements in connection with the December 2019 collaboration arrangement with Roche.
The increase in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily related to increases in clinical trial costs, license and other collaboration costs, personnel expenses and stock-based compensation, partially offset by the impact of increased development cost reimbursements. Clinical trial costs, which include services performed by third-party contract research organizations and other vendors who support our clinical trials, increased primarily due to costs associated with the expanding clinical trial program for cabozantinib. License and other collaboration costs increased primarily due to increases in upfront license fees, option exercise fees and research funding commitments related to business development activities. Personnel expenses increased primarily due to increases in headcount to support our expanding discovery and development organization. Stock-based compensation increased primarily due to the performance-based restricted stock units (PSUs) granted in 2019 that became probable of achievement during 2020.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were offset by $15.1 million and $1.1 million, respectively, as a result of development cost reimbursements in connection with our collaboration arrangement with Roche.
In addition to reviewing the three categories of research and development expenses described above, we principally consider qualitative factors in making decisions regarding our research and development programs. These factors include enrollment in clinical trials for our drug candidates, preliminary data and final results from clinical trials, the potential indications for our drug candidates, the clinical and commercial potential for our drug candidates, and competitive dynamics. We also make our research and development decisions in the context of our overall business strategy.
We are focusing our development efforts primarily on cabozantinib to maximize the therapeutic and commercial potential of this compound and, as a result, we project that a significant portion of our research and development expenses will relate to the continuing clinical development program of cabozantinib, which includes over 100 ongoing or planned clinical trials across multiple indications. Notable company-sponsored studies resulting from this program include: COSMIC-021 and COSMIC-312, for which Roche is providing atezolizumab free of charge; COSMIC-313, for which BMS is providing nivolumab and ipilimumab free of charge; CONTACT-02 for which Roche is sharing in the development costs including the provision of atezolizumab free of charge; and COSMIC-311.
We remain committed to expanding our oncology product pipeline through our drug discovery efforts, which encompass both small molecule and biologics programs with multiple modalities and mechanisms of action. In this regard, we conduct drug discovery activities with the goal of identifying new product candidates to advance into clinical trials. In addition, we will continue to engage in business development initiatives aimed at acquiring and in-licensing promising oncology platforms and assets and then further characterize and develop them utilizing our established preclinical and clinical development infrastructure.
We project our research and development expenses will continue to increase in 2021 as compared to 2020, driven by our ongoing clinical evaluation of cabozantinib, the initiation of clinical trials evaluating other product candidates in our pipeline, (including XL092 and XL102) and anticipated business development activities.
The length of time required for clinical development of a particular product candidate and our development costs for that product candidate may be impacted by the scope and timing of enrollment in clinical trials for the product candidate, our decisions to develop a product candidate for additional indications and whether we pursue development of the product candidate or a particular indication with a collaborator or independently. For example, cabozantinib is being developed in multiple indications, and we do not yet know for how many of those indications we will ultimately pursue regulatory approval. In this regard, our decisions to pursue regulatory approval of cabozantinib for additional indications depend on several variables outside of our control, including the strength of the data generated in our prior, ongoing and potential future clinical trials. Furthermore, the scope and number of clinical trials required to obtain regulatory approval for each pursued indication is subject to the input of the applicable regulatory authorities, and we have not yet sought such input for all potential indications that we may elect to pursue. Even after having given such input, applicable regulatory authorities may subsequently require additional clinical studies prior to granting regulatory approval based on new data generated by us or other companies, or for other reasons outside of our control. As a condition to any regulatory approval, we may also be subject to post-marketing development commitments, including additional clinical trial requirements. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration of, or total costs associated with the development of cabozantinib or any of our other research and development projects.
Our potential therapeutic products are subject to a lengthy and uncertain regulatory process that may not result in our receipt of the necessary regulatory approvals. Failure to receive the necessary regulatory approvals would prevent us from commercializing the product candidates affected, including cabozantinib in any additional indications. In addition, clinical trials of our potential product candidates may fail to demonstrate safety and efficacy, which could prevent or significantly delay regulatory approval. A discussion of the risks and uncertainties with respect to our research and development activities, including completing the development of our product candidates, and the consequences to our business, financial position and growth prospects can be found in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, stock-based compensation, marketing costs and certain other administrative costs.
The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily related to the increases in stock-based compensation, corporate giving and personnel expenses. The
increase in stock-based compensation was primarily due to PSUs granted in 2019 that became probable of achievement during 2020. Personnel expenses increased primarily due to increases in administrative headcount to support our commercial and research and development organizations.
We project our selling, general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in 2021, as compared to 2020 in support of our continued commercial investment in CABOMETYX and the growth in the broader organization.
Non-Operating Income
Non-operating income was as follows (dollars in thousands):
The decrease in non-operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily the result of lower interest income due to lower interest rates.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was as follows (in thousands):
The decrease in provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to the decrease in pre-tax income. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to excess tax benefits related to the exercise of certain stock options and federal tax credits, offset by non-deductible executive compensation during the periods. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to excess tax benefits related to the exercise of certain stock options and federal tax credits during the periods. We project that our effective tax rate will be between 20% and 22% in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.5 billion in cash and investments, compared to $1.4 billion as of December 31, 2019. We anticipate that the aggregate of our current cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments available for operations, net product revenues and collaboration revenues will enable us to maintain our operations for a period of at least 12 months following the filing date of this report.
We project that we will continue to spend significant amounts to fund the continued development and commercialization of cabozantinib. In addition, we intend to continue to expand our oncology product pipeline through our drug discovery efforts, including additional research collaborations and in-licensing arrangements that align with our oncology drug development, regulatory and commercial expertise. Financing these activities could materially impact our liquidity and capital resources and may require us to incur debt or raise additional funds through the issuance of equity. Furthermore, even though we believe we have sufficient funds for our current and future operating plans, we may choose to incur debt or raise additional funds through the issuance of equity due to market conditions or strategic considerations.
Letters of Credit
We have obtained standby letters of credit related to our lease obligations and certain other obligations with combined credit limits of $1.6 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. None of our letters of credit have been drawn upon. All of the letters of credit are fully collateralized by certificates of deposit.
In January 2021, we entered into standby letter of credit of $45.9 million in the aggregate as guarantee of our obligation to fund our portion of the total tenant improvements related to our build-to-suit lease at our corporate campus. The letter of credit is secured by our short-term investments, which will be recorded as restricted cash and will be reduced as we fund our portion of the tenant improvements.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Cash flow activities were as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash flows provided by operating activities represent the cash receipts and disbursements related to all of our activities other than investing and financing activities. Cash provided by operating activities is derived by adjusting our net income for: non-cash operating items such as stock-based compensation, deferred taxes, depreciation, non-cash lease expense, and changes in operating assets and liabilities which reflect timing differences between the receipt and payment of cash associated with transactions and when they are recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Income.
The most significant factors that contributed to the decrease in cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, were the decrease in net income, and changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily trade receivables, prepaid expenses and other assets and inventory.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of investment purchases of $1.1 billion, and purchases of property, equipment and other of $30.3 million, partially offset by cash provided by the maturity and sale of investments of $969.4 million.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of investment purchases of $1.2 billion and purchases of property and equipment of $12.8 million, partially offset by cash provided by the maturity and sale of investments of $608.3 million.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $50.0 million of withholding taxes paid related to net share settlements of equity awards, partially offset by $24.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our equity incentive plans.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $22.5 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our equity incentive plans, partially offset by $9.9 million of withholding taxes paid related to net share settlements of equity awards.
Contractual Obligations
Contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
____________________
(1) In addition to the amounts presented, we have committed to make payments for potential future milestones, research funding commitments and royalties to certain collaboration partners as part of our agreements with those parties. Because the amount and timing of those payments are uncertain, they have not been included in the table above. For more information about these obligations, see “Note 3. Collaboration Agreements” in our “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) We entered into the build-to-suit lease agreement in October 2019, the term of the lease is for a period of 242 months, which is expected to begin in April 2022. The amounts presented include the estimated lease commitment payments at the estimated commencement of the lease, subject to adjustment dependent upon the actual total development costs of the premises. For more information about our lease obligations, see “Note 11. Commitments” in our “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(3) Purchase obligations include firm purchase commitments related to manufacturing and maintenance of inventory, software services and other facilities and equipment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any material off-balance-sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable SEC regulations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements conforms to accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. which requires management to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, equity, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures. An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact our Consolidated Financial Statements. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates including, but not limited to: those related to revenue recognition, including determining the nature and timing of satisfaction of performance obligations, and determining the standalone selling price of performance obligations, and variable consideration such as rebates, chargebacks, sales returns and sales allowances as well as milestones included in collaboration arrangements; the amounts of revenues and expenses under our profit and loss sharing agreement; recoverability of inventory; the accrual for certain liabilities including accrued clinical trial liabilities; and valuations of equity awards used to determine stock-based compensation, including certain awards with vesting subject to market or performance conditions; and the amounts of deferred tax assets and liabilities including the related valuation allowance. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other market-specific and other relevant assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
We believe our critical accounting policies relating to revenue recognition, inventory, clinical trial accruals, stock-based compensation and income taxes reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
For a complete description of our significant accounting policies, see “Note 1. Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Net Product Revenues and Discounts and Allowances
We recognize revenues when our customers obtain control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we are entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. We calculate gross product revenues based on the price that we charge to the specialty pharmacies and distributors in the U.S. We estimate our domestic net product revenues by deducting from our gross product revenues: (a) trade allowances, such as discounts for prompt payment; (b) estimated government rebates and chargebacks; (c) certain other fees paid to specialty pharmacies, distributors and commercial payors; and (d) returns. Discounts and allowances are complex and require significant judgment by management. Management assesses estimates each period and updates them to reflect current information.
We initially record estimates for these deductions at the time we recognize the related gross product revenue. We base our estimates for the expected utilization on customer and payer data received from the specialty pharmacies and distributors and historical utilization rates as well as third-party market research data. For a further description of our discounts and allowances, see “Note 1. Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
License Revenues & Collaboration Services Revenues
We assess whether our collaboration agreements are subject to ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements (Topic 808) based on whether they involve joint operating activities and whether both parties have active participation in the arrangement and are exposed to significant risks and rewards. To the extent that the arrangement falls within the scope of Topic 808, we apply by analogy the unit of account guidance under Topic 606 to identify distinct performance obligations, and then determine whether a customer relationship exists for each distinct performance obligation. If we determine a performance obligation within the arrangement is with a customer, we apply the guidance in Topic 606. If a portion of a distinct bundle of goods or services within an arrangement is not with a customer, then the unit of account is not within the scope of Topic 606, and the recognition and measurement of that unit of account shall be based on analogy to authoritative accounting literature or, if there is no appropriate analogy, a reasonable, rational, and consistently applied accounting policy election.
We enter into collaboration arrangements, under which we license certain rights to our intellectual property to third parties. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment to us for one or more of the following: non-refundable, up-front license fees; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; product supply services; development cost reimbursements; profit sharing arrangements; and royalties on net sales of licensed products. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the standalone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. We use key assumptions to determine the standalone selling price, which may include forecast revenues and costs, clinical development timelines and costs, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, discount rates and probabilities of technical and regulatory success. At the inception of each arrangement that includes development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of earning of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. In addition, in recording revenues for our research and development services performance obligations, we use projected development cost estimates to determine the amount of revenue to record as we satisfy this performance obligation.
Inventory
We value inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We determine the cost of inventory using the standard-cost method, which approximates actual cost based on a first-in, first-out method. We analyze our inventory levels quarterly and write down inventory subject to expiry in excess of expected requirements, or that has a cost basis in excess of its expected net realizable value. On a quarterly basis, we analyze our estimated production levels for the following twelve-month period, which is our normal operating cycle, and reclassify inventory we expect to use or sell in periods beyond the next twelve months into other long-term assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Clinical Trial Accruals
We execute all of our clinical trials with support from contract research organizations and other vendors and we accrue costs for clinical trial activities performed by these third parties based upon the estimated amount of work
completed on each trial. For clinical trial expenses, the significant factors used in estimating accruals include the number of patients enrolled, the activities to be performed for each patient, the number of active clinical sites and the duration for which the patients will be enrolled in the trial. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activities to the extent possible through internal reviews, correspondence with contract research organizations and review of contractual terms. We base our estimates on the best information available at the time. However, additional information may become available to us, which may allow us to make a more accurate estimate in future periods. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense requires us to estimate the fair value of stock options, including performance-based stock options, and the estimated the number of shares subject to PSUs that will ultimately vest.
Fair value models require a number of complex and subjective assumptions including our stock price volatility, employee exercise patterns and risk-free interest rates. The most significant assumptions are our estimates of the expected volatility and the expected term of the stock option. The value of a stock option is derived from its potential for appreciation. The more volatile the stock, the more valuable the option becomes because of the greater possibility of significant changes in stock price. Because there is a market for options on our common stock, we consider implied volatilities as well as our historical volatilities when developing an estimate of expected volatility. The expected option term also has a significant effect on the value of the option. The longer the term, the more time the option holder has to allow the stock price to increase without a cash investment and thus, the more valuable the option. Further, lengthier option terms provide more opportunity to take advantage of market highs. However, empirical data show that employees typically do not wait until the end of the contractual term of a nontransferable option to exercise. Accordingly, we are required to estimate the expected term of the option for input to an option-pricing model. As required under generally accepted accounting principles, we review our valuation assumptions at each grant date and, as a result, from time to time we change the valuation assumptions we use to value stock options granted. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock options represent management’s best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation could be materially different in the future.
We recognize stock-based compensation for PSUs over the requisite service period only for awards which we estimate will ultimately vest, which requires judgment as to the probability and timing of the achievement of the underlying performance goals. Significant factors we consider in making those judgments include forecasts of our product revenues and those of our collaboration partners, estimates regarding the operational progress of late-stage clinical development programs and discovery pipeline expansion performance targets. To the extent actual results, or updated estimates, differ from current estimates, such amounts are recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period estimates are revised.
For additional description of our stock-based compensation, see “Note 8. Employee Benefit Plans” to our “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Taxes
We compute our income tax provision or benefit under the asset and liability method. Significant estimates are required in determining our income tax provision or benefit. We base some of these estimates on interpretations of existing tax laws or regulations. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the difference between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their respective financial reporting amounts (temporary differences) at enacted tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is established for deferred tax assets for which it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets, including net operating losses and tax credits, will not be realized. We periodically re-assess the need for a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets based on various factors including our historical earnings experience by taxing jurisdiction, and forecasts of future operating results and utilization of net operating losses and tax credits prior to their expiration. Significant judgment is required in making this assessment and, to the extent that we deem a reversal of any portion of our valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets to be appropriate, we recognize a tax benefit against our income tax provision in the period of such reversal. Prior to 2018, we recorded a valuation allowance that fully offset our deferred tax assets. In the fourth quarter of 2018, based on our evaluation of various factors, including our achievement of a cumulative three-year income position as of December 31, 2018 and forecasts of future operating
results, we released substantially all of our valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets and recorded a corresponding income tax benefit as described in “Note 9. Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes”, below. We continue to maintain a valuation allowance against our California state deferred tax assets.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of the expected impact of recent accounting pronouncements, see “Note 1. Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.