ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity, and cash flows of the Company as of and for the periods presented below. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related Notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the section entitled “Risk Factors.” All references herein to "2020" and "2019" refer to the 52-week periods ended January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020, respectively.
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended February 1, 2020, which was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 17, 2020.
Our management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is presented in the following sections:
OVERVIEW
Express is a modern, versatile, dual gender apparel and accessories brand that helps people get dressed for every day and any occasion. Launched in 1980 with the idea that style, quality and value should all be found in one place, Express has always been a brand of the now, offering some of the most important and enduring fashion trends. Express aims to Create Confidence and Inspire Self-Expression through a design and merchandising view that brings forward The Best of Now for Real Life Versatility. The Company operates over 500 retail and factory outlet stores in the United States and Puerto Rico, as well as an online destination.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared a novel strain of coronavirus ("COVID-19") a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures. In response to the pandemic, many states and localities in which we operate issued stay-at-home orders and other social distancing measures. Effective March 17, 2020, we temporarily closed all of our retail and factory outlet stores and offices, and as a result all store associates and a number of home office employees were furloughed. As mandated shutdowns and stay-at-home orders went into effect across the country, we experienced an immediate reduction in sales levels compared to the prior year. We continued to be materially impacted by COVID-19 throughout 2020, even after all of our stores re-opened, as customer traffic continued to be depressed, especially in our retail stores, and two of our key categories, wear to work and occasion wear, saw significant declines in demand.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 31
In response to the uncertainty of the circumstances described above, and in accordance with federal and state guidelines, we took the following actions to provide a safe and comfortable environment for our associates and customers:
▪Trained associates on a wide range of health and safety protocols;
▪Practiced proper social distancing, and provided contact-free customer service and payment options;
▪Implemented enhanced cleaning and sanitizing procedures across all stores;
▪Designated a maximum capacity for each store;
▪Installed plexiglass shields at all checkout counters;
▪Required all associates in all stores to wear face coverings;
▪Enabled curbside pickup at key locations; and
▪Introduced enhanced ship from store and buy online pick-up in store ("BOPIS") capabilities in our retail stores.
In response to COVID-19, we took several actions intended to strengthen our liquidity position. In the first quarter of 2020, we accessed $165.0 million available to us under our Revolving Credit Facility and in the fourth quarter of 2020 we borrowed an additional $90.0 million under a Term Loan Facility and also borrowed an additional $50.0 million in the first quarter of 2021. Upon receipt of proceeds from the Term Loan Facility we repaid $59.0 million of our Revolving Credit Facility. See Note 6 of our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
To further manage our liquidity, we have also significantly reduced expenses, capital expenditures and working capital; this included inventory reductions, furloughing most store associates while stores were closed, suspending merit pay increases and reducing home office headcount. See "Liquidity and Capital Resources" included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Further spread of COVID-19, and the requirements to take action to help limit the spread of the illness, will impact our ability to carry out our business as usual and may materially adversely impact global economic conditions, our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial condition. The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business and financial results will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak (including any mutations or related strains of the virus) within the markets in which we operate, the related impact on consumer confidence and spending, any disruptions in our supply chain, and the effect of governmental regulations imposed in response to the pandemic, the availability of, and prevalence of access to, effective medical treatments and vaccines for COVID-19, and the pace of recovery when the pandemic subsides, all of which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. The sweeping nature of the COVID-19 pandemic makes it extremely difficult to predict how our business and operations will be affected in the long run. However, the likely overall economic impact of the pandemic is viewed as highly negative to the general economy. Any of the foregoing factors, or other cascading effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, could materially increase our costs, negatively impact our sales and damage our results of operations and liquidity, possibly to a significant degree. The duration of any such impacts cannot be predicted with certainty. Given the dynamic and unpredictable nature of this situation, we cannot reasonably estimate with certainty the impacts of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows in the future. We will continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from domestic authorities.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 32
OUTLOOK
As previously mentioned, COVID-19 led to the temporary closure of all Express stores in mid-March and into the second quarter of 2020, as over 30% of our stores were closed for more than half of the second quarter. Even after re-opening, our stores continued to be impacted by COVID-19 with reduced hours and temporary re-closures. These factors led to significant decreases in customer traffic and reduced consumer spending, which negatively impacted our 2020 results. The pandemic began while we were in the early stages of a transformation. Our new corporate strategy, the EXPRESSway Forward, had been set in motion, and while much work was ahead of us, a great deal had been accomplished such as:
▪We completed a comprehensive restructuring of our organization, in order to better align our teams with our objective;
▪We implemented a more streamlined and efficient go-to-market process, established a new design and merchandising vision, called Express Edit;
▪We developed a new brand positioning based on what our customers told us would be relevant and compelling to them; and
▪We identified a total of $80.0 million in cost savings opportunities that were announced in January of 2020 that we expect to achieve over a three-year period.
While we expect our results to remain challenging in the near-term, we believe that by focusing on our foundational elements we have a significant opportunity to improve the trend of the business and return the business to long term profitable growth. The following defines each area and provides an update on each priority:
PRODUCT BRAND CUSTOMER EXECUTION
Product
We will put product first. Our product vision is called the Express Edit. This vision is about standing for certain elements of fashion and style that we know matter to our customers. This includes providing the customer with a wardrobe that has the functionality to cover multiple needs and wearing occasions. One of our historical strengths has been in occasion-based dressing, and as a result, we were disproportionately impacted during 2020, as occasions and celebrations were cancelled or delayed and our customers continued to work from home. As a result, during the third quarter of 2020, we pulled back on our investment in occasion-based categories and increased our investment in more casual, versatile categories, significantly changing their penetration in our product mix versus a year ago.
"Versatility Adds Value" is one of the core ideas within the Express Edit philosophy, and we are seeing strength in our most versatile product categories especially what is becoming our "new core" which is comprised of denim bottoms and Express Essentials tops. In denim, we saw continued strength in our newest fabric platforms Luxe Comfort Knit and Temp Control Hyperstretch that rolled out in the third quarter of 2020 and Super Soft and 4-Way Hyperstretch that launched in the fourth quarter of 2020. Express Essentials are our new foundational knit tops for women and men, and they are represented across all of our channels. This product is modern, relevant and versatile and beautifully meets the modern weekday and weekend wardrobe needs.
These new deliveries have performed well and while we are pleased with this performance, it did not fully offset the decreases we saw in occasion-based categories, such as men’s suits and dress shirts and women’s dresses and suits, that resulted from the prolonged pandemic. However, we expect that as occasions and celebrations of all kinds come back, these occasion-based categories will represent an opportunity for us going forward and we will continue to provide dimensions of versatility and comfort within our assortments throughout 2021.
Brand
In 2020, we introduced our new brand purpose: to create confidence and inspire self-expression. This is based on the belief that clothing can serve a higher purpose in people's lives. We also introduced our new brand promise: to edit the best of now for real-life versatility. Throughout the year, we presented our brand and engaged with our customers in new and more creative ways as we fulfilled our purpose and promise through social engagement, influencer relationships, and customer co-creation. In addition, we implemented a wide variety of initiatives and
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 33
activations that created deeper, more meaningful connections with our most loyal, and our newest, Express fans. As a result we have seen increased engagement with our marketing, increased followers on our social media platforms, and a stronger sense of connectivity between our customers and our messaging.
To bring another dimension to our brand positioning, and to reflect the importance of the purpose-driven view of many of our customers, we launched the Express Dream Big Project ("Dream Big") in the third quarter of 2020. Dream Big is a fundraising initiative created to champion organizations that empower people to believe in themselves, and follow their dreams.
In 2020 we laid the foundation for our brand transformation, and in 2021, we plan to accelerate our momentum by launching a new customer experience model in our physical and digital stores, expanding and enhancing our styling capabilities, and offering more localized assortments.
Customer
We know that to be successful we must remain focused on engaging our existing customers and acquiring new ones. As a result, in 2020, we refined our approach to identify and connect with our customers, sharpened our digital spend, and drove greater personalization of messages through owned and paid media channels. We more effectively engaged current customers and acquired new ones with increases in engagement across our paid social channels. We also engaged our customers in new, and creative ways during 2020. For example, these efforts included our beginning a dialogue with our top loyalty members to better understand their wardrobe needs and style preferences which led to our first-ever Express designer and Express customer co-created product capsule. We plan to launch additional co-created product capsules in 2021.
In August 2020, we completed the soft relaunch of our loyalty program, now called Express Insider. Our loyalty program members have the greatest lifetime value to Express. This program is a critical factor in gaining additional share of existing customers' spend and bringing new customers into the brand. We anticipate implementing additional enhancements to our Express Insider program in the first quarter of 2021, including the expansion of loyalty tiers, new Insider benefits, a digital wallet feature, and an easier way for customers to access and redeem benefits to incentivize and reward our best customers in a more timely and engaging manner.
Execution
Execution is the through line across all of our initiatives, and both within, and across functions we have improved the efficiency of our operating and decision-making processes. During 2020, we advanced our eCommerce and omnichannel capabilities by introducing enhanced and expanded buy-online-pick-up-in-store and ship-from-store functionalities, both of which contribute to more efficient and effective inventory management. Additionally, we enhanced the way we engage and service our customers in the digital channel. We expanded our Digital Stylist program by increasing the resources available, to provide more real-time, virtual assistance to express.com customers. Conversion is another key component of execution, and we have successfully driven increases in conversion across our channels during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Another aspect of execution is our physical stores. We still intend to close the 100 stores we previously announced in January 2020 as part of our fleet rationalization plan. While that fleet rationalization plan focuses on our number of stores, our current focus-fleet optimization-concerns where our stores should be located, the type of store that is optimal for each location, and the role each store plays in our customers' lives. As part of this plan, we are testing smaller footprints in our mall-based stores and also testing new store concepts, such as pop up stores.
At the end of 2020, our inventory position was not where we would like to be, but a plan is in place to improve inventory levels and improve profitability. Our margin has already improved on clearance merchandise which improves our inventory composition, and at the end of 2020, most of our legacy inventory has been sold through and the composition of our inventory we consider "aged" is primarily core, season-less product with low markdown risk. We expect our inventory to be more aligned with our sales trend as we move into the back half of 2021 and business continues to recover.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 34
HOW WE ASSESS THE PERFORMANCE OF OUR BUSINESS
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. These key measures include net sales, comparable sales, eCommerce demand, transactions, cost of goods sold, buying and occupancy costs, gross profit/(loss)/gross margin, and selling, general, and administrative expenses. The following describes and discusses these measures.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 35
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 36
FISCAL YEAR COMPARISON
Net Sales
Net sales decreased by approximately $810.8 million, or 40%, between 2020 and 2019. The sales decrease is primarily attributed to the temporary closure of all Express stores from mid-March into the second quarter of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the continued material impact of COVID-19 through the remainder of the year, as customer traffic continued to be pressured, especially in our retail stores. In addition, our customers have shifted away from purchasing products in our occasion-based categories, such as suits, dress shirts and dresses, which previously made up a large portion of our sales. This had a negative impact on our comparable sales as well as our net sales during 2020.
Gross (Loss)/Profit
The following table shows cost of goods sold, buying and occupancy costs, gross (loss)/profit in dollars, and gross margin percentage for the stated periods:
The 2,770 basis point decrease in gross margin percentage, or gross (loss)/profit as a percentage of net sales, in 2020 compared to 2019 was comprised of a 1,330 basis point decrease in merchandise margin and a 1,440 basis point increase in buying and occupancy costs as a percentage of net sales. The decrease in merchandise margin was primarily driven by high levels of promotions as we sold through existing inventory that accumulated as a result of store closures in the first half of 2020. These promotions allowed us to liquidate a significant amount of clearance inventory. In addition, we recorded higher valuation reserves related to our inventory as well as higher levels of reserves against certain fabric commitments. Buying and occupancy costs deleveraged as a result of the reduction in sales and was also impacted by $34.4 million in impairment charges related to certain long-lived store related assets and right of use assets. Refer to Note 2 in our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding the impairment charges for 2020.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 37
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
The following table shows selling, general, and administrative expenses in dollars and as a percentage of net sales for the stated periods:
The $113.5 million decrease in selling, general, and administrative expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily payroll related and was the result of our COVID-19 mitigation actions, a reduction in variable costs driven by the sales decline, and the cost reductions associated with our corporate restructuring announced in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Restructuring Costs
The following table shows restructuring costs for the stated periods:
Restructuring costs of $7.3 million in 2019 represent the costs in connection with the announcement of the Company’s new strategy and the restructuring of the Company’s work force to align to this strategy. Refer to Note 12 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the restructuring costs.
Interest Expense/(Income), Net
The following table shows interest expense/(income) in dollars for the stated periods:
The $6.4 million increase in interest expense, net in 2020 compared to 2019 is the result of borrowing under our Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan Facility, which bear interest at variable rates. Refer to Note 6 in our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding our borrowings during 2020.
Other Expense, Net
The following table shows other expense in dollars for the stated periods:
The $2.7 million increase in other expense in 2020 compared to 2019 was the result of a $2.7 million pre-tax write-off of our remaining 2016 investment in Homage, LLC, a privately held retail apparel company based in Columbus, Ohio ("Homage"). Refer to Note 2 in our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding the write-off during 2020.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 38
Income Tax Benefit
The following table shows income tax benefit in dollars for the stated periods:
The effective tax rate was 12.1% in 2020 compared to 23.5% in 2019. The effective tax rate for 2020 was less than the statutory tax rate due to the impact of establishing a valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets, which includes $54.3 million of discrete tax expense from a valuation allowance against previously recognized deferred tax assets and $51.5 million valuation allowance against 2020 U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets and other tax credits of which a portion relates to 2020 U.S. federal net operating losses that could not be carried back to offset taxable income in the five-year carryback period as part of the CARES Act. This was partially offset by a $42.1 million tax benefit related to the portion of the 2019 and 2020 U.S. federal net operating losses that are able to be carried back to years with a higher federal statutory tax rate than is currently enacted. The effective tax rate for 2019 includes a non-cash tax benefit of approximately $49.7 million related to the impairment of intangible assets, offset by a net tax expense of approximately $2.0 million attributable to certain discrete items, predominately related to a tax shortfall for share-based compensation. Refer to Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the tax rate.
Operating Loss, Net Loss, Diluted Earnings Per Share and EBITDA
Included in the table below is operating loss, net loss, diluted earnings per share and Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization ("EBITDA") for 2020 and 2019, respectively. We supplement the reporting of our financial information determined under United States generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") with certain non-GAAP financial measures: adjusted operating loss, adjusted net loss, adjusted diluted earnings per share and EBITDA. The following table presents these financial measures, each a non-GAAP financial measure, for the stated periods which eliminate certain non-core operating costs:
How These Measures Are Useful
We believe that these non-GAAP measures provide additional useful information to assist stockholders in understanding our financial results and assessing our prospects for future performance. Management believes adjusted operating loss, adjusted net loss, adjusted diluted earnings per share and EBITDA are important indicators of our business performance because they exclude items that may not be indicative of, or are unrelated to, our underlying operating results, and may provide a better baseline for analyzing trends in the business. In addition, adjusted diluted earnings per share and EBITDA are used as a performance measures in the Company's long-term executive compensation program for purposes of determining the number of equity awards that are ultimately earned and EBITDA is also a metric used in our short-term cash incentive compensation plan.
Limitations of the Usefulness of These Measures
Because non-GAAP financial measures are not standardized, it may not be possible to compare these financial measures with other companies' non-GAAP financial measures having the same or similar names. These adjusted financial measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for reported net loss, operating loss, or diluted earnings per share. These non-GAAP financial measures reflect an additional way of viewing our operations
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 39
that, when viewed with the GAAP results and the below reconciliations to the corresponding GAAP financial measures, provide a more complete understanding of our business. Management strongly encourages investors and stockholders to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure.
The following table reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures (adjusted operating loss, adjusted net loss, and adjusted diluted earnings per share) with the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures (operating loss, net loss, and diluted earnings per share, respectively) for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
a.Items tax affected at the applicable deferred or statutory rate.
b.Impairment before tax was $2.7 million and was recorded in other expense, net.
c.Valuation allowance provided against previously recognized deferred tax assets and 2020 losses, less net operating losses utilized under the CARES Act.
d.Income tax benefit primarily due to a net operating loss carryback under the CARES Act to years with a higher federal statutory tax rate than is currently enacted.
e.Represents the tax impact related to the expiration of former executive non-qualified stock options.
a.Items tax affected at the applicable deferred or statutory rate.
b.Represents the tax impact of the expiration of the former CEO's non-qualified stock options.
c.Represents the tax impact of executive departure costs offset by the tax impact related to the expiration of the executive non-qualified stock options.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 40
The following table reconciles the non-GAAP financial measure EBITDA with the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
In 2020, we took a number of steps to manage liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic. Examples of these actions include:
■Accessed $165.0 million from our $250.0 million Revolving Credit Facility;
■Secured $140.0 million in additional financing; $90.0 million that was received in the fourth quarter of 2020 (of which $59.0 million was used to pay down a portion of our Revolving Credit Facility) and $50.0 million of which was drawn down in 2021;
■Reduced $250.0 million of costs through expense reductions, capital reductions and inventory cuts;
■Negotiated $85.0 million in savings through rent abatements, deferrals, and rent reductions; and
■Expecting $120.0 million tax benefit from the CARES Act, including the expanded operating loss carry back, employer payroll tax credit and deferral provisions. The majority of these liquidity benefits are expected to be realized in 2021, including a $95.0 million income tax refund which is expected to be received at the end of the second quarter of 2021. We are required to repay $50.0 million of our term loan upon receipt of the tax refund.
In addition to the actions above, we also have contingency plans in which it would further reduce or defer additional expenses and cash outlays, should operations weaken beyond current forecasts as well as potential access to capital markets.
Forward-Looking Liquidity Discussion
Our liquidity position benefits from the fact that we generally collect cash from sales to customers the same day or, in the case of credit or debit card transactions, within three to five days of the related sale, and we have up to 75 days to pay certain merchandise vendors and 45 days to pay the majority of our non-merchandise vendors. We also have commitments under lease agreements and debt agreements that will require future cash outlays. For information on future payments required under lease agreements see Note 4 of our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and for future payment information related to our long-term debt see Note 6 of our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As previously disclosed, the COVID-19 pandemic has and continues to result in significant disruption to our business. As a result, our revenues, results of operations and cash flows continue to be materially adversely impacted. For the 52-week period ended January 30, 2021, we reported a net loss of $405.4 million and negative operating cash flows of $323.6 million. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic we borrowed $165.0 million under our Revolving Credit Facility and an additional $90.0 million under our Term Loan Facility. Upon receipt of proceeds from the Term Loan Facility we repaid $59.0 million of the Revolving Credit Facility. In addition, under the Term Loan Facility, we borrowed $50.0 million subsequent to year-end, that will be repaid upon receipt of the CARES Act receivable. The Revolving Credit Facility and the Term Loan Facility contain certain affirmative and negative covenants. Refer to Note 6 in our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details regarding the Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan Facility. We are currently in compliance with the covenants and expect to remain in compliance, however, due to the uncertainty related to the
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 41
duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its continuing impacts, we could experience material changes to forecasted revenues and cash flows and may experience difficulty remaining in compliance with financial covenants under the Revolving Credit Facility and the Term Loan Facility. When conditions and events, in the aggregate, impact an entity's ability to continue as a going concern, management evaluates the mitigating effect of its plans to determine if it is probable that the plans will be effectively implemented and, when implemented, the plans will mitigate the relevant conditions or events.
Our plans are focused on improving our results and liquidity through increased sales and cost reductions. Our current forecasts include sales and profitability improvements over fiscal year 2020 results. In addition, we have entered into agreements, or are in discussions with, most of our retail landlords to modify rent payments, receive rent concessions or otherwise reduce operating costs. We also have $111.3 million in income tax refunds that are receivable from the U.S. government based primarily on provisions in the CARES Act. Any legislative changes to the CARES Act or significant delays in receiving this tax refund could adversely impact our financial position and results. We have contingency plans to further reduce or defer additional expenses and cash outlays, should operations weaken beyond current forecasts or if cash inflows from tax receivables are not received when expected. We believe these plans are probable of being successfully implemented, which will result in adequate cash flows to support our ongoing operations and to meet our covenant requirements under the Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan Facility for one year following the date these financial statements are issued.
Analysis of Cash Flows
A summary of cash provided by or used in operating, investing, and financing activities is shown in the following table:
Operating Activities
Our business historically relies on cash flows from operations as our primary source of liquidity, with the majority of those cash flows being generated in the fourth quarter of the year. Our primary operating cash needs are for merchandise inventories, payroll, store rent and marketing. Net cash used in operating activities was $323.6 million in 2020 compared to $90.7 million provided by operating activities in 2019. The decrease in cash flows from operating activities in 2020 was primarily driven by the temporary closure of our stores as a result of COVID-19 and the continued impact of COVID-19 on our business. This was partially offset by the fact that we did not initially make our store rent payments for April, May or June 2020, as a result of the COVID-19 store closures. We established an accrual for the rent payments that were not made and have continued to recognize accrued rent expense. As a result of negotiations with certain landlords, we have since made rent payments for certain stores and some landlords have agreed to abate certain rent payments. The appropriate adjustments were made to accrued rent and are reflected in the cash flows from operations.
Investing Activities
We also use cash for investing activities. Our capital expenditures consist primarily of new and remodeled store construction and fixtures and investments in information technology. We had capital expenditures of approximately $16.9 million in 2020 and $37.0 million in 2019. The decrease in 2020 was primarily driven by reduced capital expenditures as a result of COVID-19 and the aggressive management to improve our liquidity.
Financing Activities
Credit Facilities
In addition to cash flow from operations, we have access to additional liquidity, as needed, through borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan Facility. On January 13, 2021, we entered into a definitive loan agreement with Sycamore Partners as lead lender, along with Wells Fargo and Bank of America Merrill Lynch, that strengthens our liquidity position. The new financing includes a $90.0 million FILO Term Loan received in 2020, and
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 42
a $50.0 million Delayed Draw Term Loan (DDTL), that was drawn down in March of 2021. The DDTL is to be repaid upon receipt of a CARES Act tax refund expected to be received in the second quarter of 2021. This financing is in addition to our existing $250.0 million Revolving Credit Facility under which we drew down $165.0 million in the first quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 outbreak that led to the temporary closure of all of our Express and Express Factory Outlet stores. Upon the receipt of the proceeds from the FILO Term Loan we repaid $59.0 million of the amount borrowed under our Revolving Credit Facility. The expiration date of the facilities is May 24, 2024.
As of January 30, 2021, the net amount outstanding under our facilities was $196.1 million, which is classified as long-term debt on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, net of unamortized costs, and approximately $35.6 million was available for borrowing under our facilities subject to certain borrowing base limitations and after outstanding letters of credit in the amount of $36.1 million, primarily related to our third party logistics contract. Refer to Note 6 of our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on our Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan Facility.
Share Repurchases
On November 28, 2017, the Board approved a share repurchase program that authorizes us to repurchase up to $150.0 million of our outstanding common stock using available cash. During 2020, we did not repurchase shares under the stock repurchase program. During 2019, we repurchased $15.6 million of common stock, including commissions, under the share repurchase program.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 43
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of our assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Management evaluates its accounting policies, estimates, and judgments on an on-going basis. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Management evaluated the development and selection of its critical accounting policies and estimates and believes that the following policies involve a higher degree of judgment or complexity and are most significant to reporting our results of operations and financial position and are, therefore, discussed as critical. The following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements. More information on all of our significant accounting policies can be found in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
EXPRESS, INC. | 2020 Form 10-K | 44