Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation
The following discussion and analysis is based on, and should be read in conjunction with our financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains statements that are forward-looking. These statements are based on current expectations and assumptions that are subject to risk, uncertainties and other factors. These statements are often identified by the use of words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “estimate,” or “continue,” and similar expressions or variations. Actual results could differ materially because of the factors discussed in “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and other factors that we have not identified.
Overview
We are a clinical stage ophthalmic company developing a pipeline of advanced therapeutics based on our proprietary microdose array print (MAP™) platform technology. We aim to achieve clinical microdosing of next-generation formulations of well-established ophthalmic pharmaceutical agents using our high-precision targeted ocular delivery system, branded the Optejet®, which has the potential to replace conventional eye dropper delivery and improve safety, tolerability, patient compliance and topical delivery success for ophthalmic eye treatments. In the clinic, the Optejet has demonstrated the ability to horizontally deliver ophthalmic medication with a success rate significantly higher than traditional eye drops (~ 90% vs. ~ 50%). Our technology also can deliver up to a 75% reduction in ocular drug and preservative exposure and has demonstrated significant improvement in the therapeutic index in drugs used for mydriasis and IOP lowering through three Phase II and Phase III trials. Using the Optejet, we are developing the next generation of smart ophthalmic therapeutics which target new indications or new combinations where there are currently no comparable drug therapies approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or the FDA. Our microdose therapeutics follow the FDA-designated pharmaceutical registration and regulatory process. Our products are classified by the FDA as drugs, and not medical devices or drug-device combination products. Our pipeline is currently focused on the late-stage development of microdosed medications for progressive myopia, presbyopia, and mydriasis.
MicroPine is our first-in-class topical therapy for the treatment of progressive myopia, a back-of-the-eye ocular disease associated with pathologic axial elongation and sclero-retinal stretching. In the United States, myopia is estimated to affect approximately 25 million children, with up to 5 million considered to be at risk for high myopia. In February 2019, the FDA accepted our investigational new drug application, or IND, to initiate a Phase III registration trial of MicroPine (the CHAPERONE study) to reduce the progression of myopia in children. We enrolled the first patient in the CHAPERONE study in June 2019. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we previously experienced delays in trial enrollment and initiation as a result of reduced clinical trial activities and operations at investigator sites. However, we have since been able to resume enrollment in the CHAPERONE study.
On October 9, 2020, we entered into the Bausch License Agreement, pursuant to which Bausch Health may develop and commercialize MicroPine in the United States and Canada. Under the terms of the Bausch License Agreement, we received an upfront payment of $10.0 million and we may receive up to a total of $35.0 million in additional payments, based on the achievement of certain regulatory and launch-based milestones. Bausch Health also will pay us royalties on a tiered basis (ranging from mid-single digit to mid-teen percentages) on gross profits from sales of MicroPine in the United States and Canada, subject to certain adjustments. Under the terms of the Bausch License Agreement, Bausch Health has assumed oversight and costs related to the ongoing CHAPERONE study.
MicroLine is our pharmacologic treatment for presbyopia. Presbyopia is a non-preventable, age-related hardening of the lens, which causes the gradual loss of the eye’s ability to focus on nearby objects. There currently are no known FDA-approved drugs for the improvement of near vision in patients with presbyopia, although other companies have related therapies in their pipeline. We have two planned Phase III VISION trials for MicroLine, and initiated the first of these trials in December 2020.
On August 10, 2020, we entered into the Arctic Vision License Agreement, pursuant to which Arctic Vision may develop and commercialize MicroPine and MicroLine in Greater China (mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan) and South Korea. Under the terms of the Arctic Vision License Agreement, we received an upfront payment of $4.0 million before any payments to Senju. In addition, we may receive up to a total of $41.75 million in additional payments, based on various development and regulatory milestones, including the initiation of clinical research and approvals in Greater China and South Korea, and development costs. Arctic Vision also will purchase its supply of MicroPine and MicroLine from us or, for such products not supplied by us, pay us a mid-single digit percentage royalty on net sales of such products, subject to certain adjustments. We will pay a mid-double digit percentage of such payments, royalties, or net proceeds of such supply to Senju pursuant to the Senju License Agreement.
MicroStat (or Mydcombi™) is our fixed combination formulation of phenylephrine-tropicamide for mydriasis, designed to be a novel approach for the estimated 80 million office-based comprehensive eye exams performed every year in the United States. We have completed two Phase III trials for MicroStat and announced positive results from these studies, known as MIST-1 and MIST-2. In March 2021, the FDA accepted our NDA for MydCombi with an expected PDUFA date of October 28, 2021.
Historically, we have financed our operations principally through equity offerings, including our initial public offering, numerous public offerings in 2018, 2019 and August 2020, and our private placement that closed in March 2020. Recently we also have generated cash through licensing arrangements. Based upon our current operating plan, there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of at least the next twelve months. Our ability to continue as a going concern depends on our ability to raise additional capital, through the sale of equity or debt securities to support our future operations. If we are unable to secure additional capital, we may be required to curtail our research and development initiatives and take additional measures to reduce costs.
Our net losses were $19.8 million and $21.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital and an accumulated deficit of $15.2 million and $77.4 million, respectively.
Financial Overview
Revenue and Cost of Revenue
In August and October 2020, we entered into the Arctic Vision License Agreement and Bausch License Agreement, respectively. Both of these agreements provide for the Company to earn revenue from an upfront licensing fee, the achievement of various development and regulatory milestones, and royalty income on sales of licensed products. Pursuant to the Senju License agreement, we will pay a mid-double digit percentage of such payments from the Arctic Vision License Agreement to Senju. See Note 9 - Commitments and Contingencies and Note 10 - Related Party Transactions.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses are incurred in connection with the research and development of our microdose therapeutics and consist primarily of contract service expenses. Given where we are in our life cycle, we do not separately track research and development expenses by project. Our research and development expenses consist of:
· direct clinical and non-clinical expenses, which include expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, contract manufacturing organizations, and costs associated with preclinical activities, development activities and regulatory activities;
· personnel-related expenses, which include expenses related to consulting agreements with individuals that have since entered into employment agreements with us as well as salaries and other compensation of employees that is attributable to research and development activities; and
· facilities and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, marketing, insurance and other supplies used in research and development activities.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We record costs for some development activities, such as clinical trials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as subject enrollment, clinical site activations or other information our vendors provide to us.
We expect that our research and development expenses will increase with the continuation of the aforementioned initiatives.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll and related expenses, legal and other professional services, and non-cash stock-based compensation expense. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research and development and the potential commercialization of our product candidates. We also anticipate increased expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with our exchange listing and SEC requirements. In addition, director and officer insurance premiums and investor relations costs associated with being a public company are expected to increase in future periods.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue and Cost of Revenue
In August 2020, we received a $4.0 million upfront payment under the Arctic Vision License Agreement, and made a related payment of $1.6 million to Senju. This upfront payment has not yet met the revenue recognition criteria under U.S. GAAP, and has been recorded as $4.0 million of deferred license fee and $1.6 million of deferred cost of revenue. In October 2020, we received a $10.0 million upfront payment under the Bausch Health License Agreement. This upfront payment has also not yet met the revenue recognition criteria under U.S. GAAP and has been recorded as $10.0 million of deferred license fee. In December 2020, in connection with the achievement of a milestone under the Arctic Vision License Agreement, we recognized $2.0 million of revenue, and accrued $0.8 million of cost of revenue (due to Senju).
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $13.3 million, a decrease of $0.8 million, or 6%, as compared to $14.1 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019. Research and development expenses consisted of the following:
The decrease in direct clinical and non-clinical expenses is primarily due to cost reimbursements from Arctic Vision and Bausch Health (contra expense) and reduced activity due to COVID-19 austerity measures. The increase in personnel-related expenses is primarily due to new hires in the R&D group. The decrease in supplies and materials is primarily due to COVID-19 austerity measures. The decrease in stock-based compensation expense is primarily due to the timing of vesting of certain equity awards. The increase in other expense reflects the depreciation of additional equipment purchased for clinical trials.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $7.7 million, an increase of $0.5 million, or 7%, as compared to $7.2 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of $0.2 million in payroll related expenses due to new hires, $0.4 million in patent expense, and $0.8 million in legal costs related to business development activities. This was offset by decreases of $0.4 million in travel expense and $0.2 million in meetings primarily due to COVID-19 austerity measures, as well as decreases of $0.1 million in filing fees and $0.1 million in consulting fees.
Liquidity and Going Concern
Since inception, we have experienced negative cash flows from operations. At December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit since inception was $77.4 million.
At December 31, 2020, we had a cash and cash equivalents balance of $28.4 million, working capital of $15.2 million and stockholders’ equity of $15.3 million.
At December 31, 2020, we had $0.5 million of debt outstanding. On May 8, 2020, we received cash proceeds of $463,353 pursuant to a loan provided in connection with the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act (the “PPP Loan”). The PPP Loan provides for monthly installment payments of $19,508 beginning in August 2021 with the remaining balance due on May 3, 2022, the maturity date. The PPP Loan bears interest at a fixed rate of 1.00% per annum.
These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for at least one year from the date that the financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are issued. Our financial statements do not include adjustments to the amounts and classification of assets and liabilities that may be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern. Our ability to continue as a going concern depends on our ability to raise additional capital through the sale of equity or debt securities to support our future operations. Our operating needs include the planned costs to operate our business, including amounts required to fund research and development activities including clinical studies, working capital and capital expenditures. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of our available funds will depend on many factors, including our ability to successfully commercialize our products and services, competing technological and market developments, and the need to enter into collaborations with other companies or acquire other companies or technologies to enhance or complement our product and service offerings. If we are unable to secure additional capital, we may be required to curtail our research and development initiatives and take additional measures to reduce costs in order to conserve our cash.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our sources and uses of cash were as follows:
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.4 million, which includes cash used to fund a net loss of $19.8 million, reduced by $2.6 million of non-cash expenses, offset by $10.8 million of net cash provided by changes in the levels of operating assets and liabilities. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $18.9 million, which includes cash used to fund a net loss of $21.2 million, reduced by $2.5 million of non-cash expenses and $0.3 million of net cash used in changes in the levels of operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.3 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which was attributable to purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $20.9 million, which was primarily attributable to $12.4 million of net proceeds from the sale of common stock in our August 2020 public offering, $5.6 million of net proceeds from the sale of common stock and warrants in our March 2020 private placement, $2.9 million of proceeds from the exercise of warrants issued in our March 2020 private placement and options and $0.5 million from the proceeds of the PPP Loan, offset by $0.5 million from the repayment of notes payable. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $13.5 million, which was primarily attributable to $13.0 million of net proceeds from the sale of common stock in our July 2019 public offering and $0.6 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Risks and Uncertainties
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we previously experienced delays in trial enrollment and initiation of our Phase III registration trial of our MicroPine drug candidate (the CHAPERONE study) as a result of reduced clinical trial activities and operations at investigator sites. However, we have since been able to resume enrollment in that study.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There are no off-balance sheet arrangements between us and any other entity that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on financial conditions, changes in financial conditions, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our critical accounting policies are included in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of our financial statements included within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Our recently issued accounting standards are included in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of our financial statements included within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.