ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of predictive, future-tense or forward-looking terminology, such as “believes,” “anticipates,” “expects,” “estimates,” “plans,” “may,” “intends,” “will,” or similar terms. Investors are cautioned that any forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve significant risks and uncertainties, and that actual results may differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements. The following discussion should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and notes to those financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
OVERVIEW
FalconStor is a data protection leader that enables enterprises to modernize their data backup and archival operations across sites and public clouds, delivering increased data security and providing the fastest recovery from a ransomware attack while driving down costs by up to 95 percent. A proven technology leader with 47 patents and patent applications, FalconStor has over an exabyte of data under management and is trusted by more than 600 enterprise customers and an ecosystem of managed service providers and resellers worldwide.
Our products are utilized by enterprises and managed service providers across the globe and address two key areas of enterprise data protection; long-term data retention and recovery, and business continuity driven data replication. Our innovative integration with modern cloud-based data storage environments, such as AWS and Microsoft Azure, enables our customers to significantly reduce costs, and improve the portability, security, and accessibility of their enterprise data. This accessibility is key in our modern world, where data is not only protected, but also intelligently leveraged to facilitate learning, improve product design, and drive competitive advantage. Our products are software-defined, which means that our technology allows our solutions to be hardware, cloud, and source-data agnostic, giving our customers maximum leverage of existing hardware and software investments.
In 2020, we focused our go to market efforts on long-term data retention and recovery data protection segment, building on the momentum we generated in 2019 and increasing profitability. We increased our go-to-market investment within our core regions of the Americas, EMEA, Japan, Korea, and Southeast Asia, and we released StorSafe, the next generation of our Virtual Tape Library (“VTL”) product family built for the cloud, while carefully managing operating expenses.
During 2020, we delivered 26% year-over-year new customer bookings growth despite the economic turmoil caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic. While uncertainties continue to exist as a result of COVID-19, we have seen our customers and prospects continue to invest in the business critical area of data production in which we sell our solutions.
GAAP revenue decreased by $1.8 million during the year, compared to 2019. However, the proactive expense management plan we implemented at the end of Q1, allowed us to deliver $1.1 million of net income in the quarter, compared to a net loss of $1.8 million in 2019. Our significantly improved profitability has allowed us to make additional targeted investments, primarily related to Sales, R&D, and Support personnel, while maintaining a profitable expense base.
During 2020, our strategy was to continue focus within our core regions of the Americas, EMEA, Japan, Korea, and Southeast Asia. As result of this strategy, we delivered:
•26% increase in new customer bookings year-over-year across all product lines,
•A reduction in our commercial exposure in China to less than 3% of total sales.
During 2020, we continued to deliver innovation and enhance each of our products. Our StorSafe solution is a vital backup long-term archive retention tool in enterprise IT departments’ data protection arsenal. It enables them to modernize their backup and archive environments, leverage efficient hybrid- and public-cloud storage environments, such as those provided by AWS and Microsoft Azure, save operational costs, and improve restore performance for rapid remote disaster recovery.
Through StorSafe, we are making significant progress expanding our technology to deliver an enterprise-class, highly flexible backup and archive data storage optimization solution.
By leveraging patent pending industry-standard container technology to enable persistent long-term archive storage, StorSafe not only retains the data reduction delivered as it exports data to lower cost on premise repositories and industry
leading cloud providers like AWS, Microsoft Azure and IBM but also enables archive data portability, accessibility, security, and integrity validation. As a result, a full spectrum of archive data storage options will be made available to our enterprise customers to efficiently utilize essentially any storage environment, while confidently ensuring data security and efficient archive access.
Beyond our long-term archive retention and reinstatement products, our NSS and CDP business continuity driven data replication products give our customers the ability to move workloads to the right destination, on-premise or in the cloud, with advanced insight. These products are designed for organizations with complex, heterogeneous IT environments and the full spectrum of data management use cases, including but not limited to large enterprises, universities, health care entities and governmental institutions. These products are modern, comprehensive and easy-to-use software solutions that enable IT professionals to have complete insight into and control over their organization’s data. Data is an organization’s most precious resource which, if managed and protected properly, can help an enterprise unlock competitive advantage, whether by gaining a better understanding of customers, uncovering ways to improve operations and reduce costs, or inventing new products, services and business models.
To provide for greater ease of use for all our products, we also made significant enhancements to our central data management console, now called StorSightTM, to interface with each of our products to provide a holistic view of an enterprise’s entire data protection environment - whether legacy data centers, hyper-converged infrastructure, cloud and/or hybrids.
FalconStor continues to focus on enterprise customers, managed service providers, and OEM partners. These markets offer the most significant opportunity and are best suited to realize the value of FalconStor products, and provide an efficient and effective access to broad, worldwide markets. Most of our revenue comes from sales to enterprise customers through resellers. As service providers to companies, resellers’ reputations are dependent on satisfying their customers’ needs efficiently and effectively. Resellers have wide choices in fulfilling their customers’ needs. If resellers determine that a product they have been providing to their customers is not functioning as promised, or is not providing adequate return on investment, or if the customers are not satisfied with the level of support they are receiving from the suppliers, the resellers will move quickly to offer different solutions to their customers. Additional sales by resellers are therefore an important indicator of our business prospects.
Our “Business Partner” program for our resellers provides financial incentives, for those resellers that are willing to make a commitment to FalconStor through training, marketing and revenue. As part of our review of all of our operations to maximize savings without sacrificing sales, and in connection with our Business Partner program, we continually review our relationship with each of our resellers in all regions. We decided to focus on only those resellers who have the expertise, personnel and networks to identify potential customers and to service our end users.
Historically, the majority of our software licenses have been sold on a capacity basis and have included a perpetual right to use the licensed capacity. Now, we also offer our capacity-based licenses on a subscription or term-based model, which gives a customer the right to utilize the licensed terabyte capacity over a designated period of time. We expect revenue from subscription-based capacity licensing to increase over the next several years.
Fluctuation in our revenue is driven by the volume and mix of sales from period to period. Revenue allocated to perpetual and term software licenses are recognized at a point in time upon electronic delivery of the download link and the license keys, as these products have significant standalone functionality. Product maintenance and support services are satisfied over time as they are stand-ready obligations throughout the support period. As a result, revenues associated with maintenance services are deferred and recognized as revenue ratably over the term of the contract. Revenues associated with professional services are recognized at a point in time upon customer acceptance.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED WITH THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $14.8 million in revenue, as compared to $16.5 million during the prior year period. While revenue benefited from a 26% increase in new customer bookings, this benefit was offset by an overall decline in support and services revenue, and revenue from China in 2020.
Total cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 37% to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Total gross profit decreased $0.7
million, or 5%, to $12.9 million for the current year, compared with $13.6 million for 2019. Total gross margin increased to 88% for the current year, compared with 82% for 2019. The increase in our total gross margin percentage was primarily due to product mix, and as a result of an intentional shift away from selling hardware, which yields significantly lower profit margins, compared to our key proprietary software license offerings. Generally, our total gross profits and total gross margins fluctuate based on several factors, including (i) revenue growth levels, (ii) changes in personnel headcount and related costs, and (iii) our product offerings and mix of sales.
Overall, our total operating expenses decreased 22.1% from $14.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily attributable to our tighter expense controls and overall operational efficiencies which better align our current business plan on a run-rate basis. These efficiencies include among other items, stream-lined personnel related costs, global overhead costs and efficiencies realized on our redesigned go-to-market coverage models. We will continue to evaluate the appropriate headcount levels to properly align our resources with our current and long-term outlook and to take actions in areas of the Company that are not performing.
Our net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.1 million, compared with a net loss of $1.8 million for the previous year.
Net loss attributable to common stockholders, which includes the effects of the Series A Preferred Stock dividends (including accrued dividends) and accretion, was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with a net loss of $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We ended the year with $1.9 million of cash and cash equivalents, compared to $1.5 million at December 31, 2019 and deferred revenue of $6.4 million as of December 31, 2020, compared with $7.4 million as of December 31, 2019.
Revenue
Product revenue
Product revenue is comprised of sales of both licenses for our software solutions and sales of the platforms on which the software is installed. This includes stand-alone software applications and software integrated with industry standard hardware, sold as one complete integrated solution or sold on a subscription or consumption basis. The products are sold through our OEMs, and through (i) value-added resellers, (ii) distributors, and/or (iii) directly to end-users (collectively “non-OEMs”). These revenues are recognized when all the applicable criteria under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States are met.
Product revenue increased 5% from $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Product revenue represented 48% and 41% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We continue to invest in our product portfolio by refreshing and updating our existing product lines and developing our next generation of innovative product offerings to drive our sales volume in support of our long-term outlook.
Support and services revenue
Support and services revenue is comprised of revenue from (i) maintenance and technical support services, (ii) professional services primarily related to the implementation of our software, and (iii) engineering services. Revenue derived from maintenance and technical support contracts are deferred and recognized ratably over the contractual maintenance term. Revenues associated with professional and engineering services are recognized at a point in time upon customer acceptance. Support and services revenue decreased 22% from $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in support and services revenue was attributable to a decreases in both maintenance and technical support services revenue and professional services revenue from legacy contracts which have termed.
Maintenance and technical support services revenue decreased from $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $7.5 million for the year ended 2020. Our maintenance and technical support service revenue results primarily from (i) the purchase of maintenance and support contracts by our customers, and (ii) the renewal of maintenance and support contracts by our existing and new customers after their initial contracts expire. The decrease in maintenance and technical support service revenue over the previous year reflects a decline in maintenance renewals revenue as a result of customer conversion to subscription contracts and customer attrition.
Professional services revenue decreased from $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Professional services revenue can vary from period to period based upon (i) the number of solutions sold during the existing and previous periods, (ii) the number of our customers who elect to purchase professional services, (iii) the number of professional services contracts that are performed during the period, and (iv) the number of customers who elect to purchase engineering services. We expect professional services revenue to continue to vary from period to period based upon the number of customers who elect to utilize our professional services upon purchasing any of our solutions.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue, gross profit and gross margin
Cost of product revenue consists primarily of personnel costs and amortization of capitalized software costs. Cost of support and service consists primarily of personnel and other costs associated with providing software implementations, technical support under maintenance contracts and training.
Cost of product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $0.4 million, or 59%, to $0.3 million, compared with $0.7 million for the same period in 2019. Product gross margin increased to 96% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with 89% for the same period in 2019. The decrease in cost of product revenue and increase in product gross margin for the current year was primarily due to an intentional shift away from hardware sales in the current period, compared to the prior year period. Our cost of support and service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $0.7 million, or 30%, to $1.5 million, compared with $2.2 million for the same period in 2019. Support and service gross margin increased to 80% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 78% for the same period in 2019. The increase in support and service gross margin, as compared to the previous year, was primarily attributable to an increase in maintenance and support services revenue that was greater in proportion to the increase in costs, year over year.
Total gross profit decreased $0.7 million, or 5%, from $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $12.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Total gross margin increased to 88% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with 82% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in our total gross margin was primarily due to product mix, as a result of an intentional shift away from selling hardware, which yields significantly lower profit margins, compared to our key proprietary software license offerings. Generally, our total gross profits and total gross margins fluctuate based on several factors, including (i) revenue growth levels, (ii) changes in personnel headcount and related costs, and (iii) our product offerings and mix of sales.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs consist primarily of personnel costs for product development, and other related costs associated with the development of new products, enhancements to existing products, quality assurance and testing. Research and development costs decreased $0.7 million, or 23%, to $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $3.2 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily related to a decrease in personnel related costs resulting from our realignment and reduction in workforce and continued efforts to allocate the appropriate level of resources based upon the product development roadmap schedule. We continue to provide substantial resources in support of our research and development activities to continue to enhance and to test our core products and in the development of new innovative products, features and options.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of sales and marketing personnel and related costs, travel, public relations expense, marketing literature and promotions, commissions, trade show expenses, and the costs associated with our foreign sales offices. Selling and marketing expenses increased $0.3 million, or 6%, to $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in selling and marketing expenses was primarily attributable to increased investments made in the Americas and EMEA.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs of general and administrative functions, public company related costs, directors’ and officers’ insurance, legal and professional fees, and other general corporate overhead costs. General and administrative expenses decreased $2.6 million, or 46%, to $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was due primarily to positions eliminated and facilities closed as part of the Company's restructuring plans. For further information, refer to Note (14) Restructuring Costs, to our consolidated financial statements.
Restructuring costs
In June 2017, the Board approved a comprehensive plan to increase operating performance (the “2017 Plan”). The 2017 Plan resulted in a realignment and reduction in workforce. The 2017 Plan was substantially completed by the end of our fiscal year ended December 31, 2017 and when combined with previous workforce reductions in the second quarter of Fiscal 2017 reduced our workforce to approximately 81 employees at December 31, 2017. As part of this consolidation effort, the Company vacated a portion of the Melville, NY office space during the three months ended June 30, 2018. In accordance with accounting standards governing costs associated with exit or disposal activities, expenses related to future rental payments for which the Company no longer intends to receive any economic benefit are accrued, net of any anticipated sublease income, when the Company ceases use of the leased space. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company incurred lease disposal-related costs for this property of $1.0 million and $0.9 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2019, $0.1 million of the Company's remaining accrued lease disposal cost has been recorded as a component of operating lease liabilities.
During the three months ended September 30, 2019, the Company adopted a plan to better align the Company’s cost structure with the skills and resources required to more effectively execute the Company’s long-term growth strategy and to support revenue levels the Company expected to achieve on a go forward basis (the "2019 Plan"), implemented tighter expense controls, ceased non-core activities and downsized several facilities. During the three months ended ended March 31, 2020, the Company incurred $0.1 million in severance expense as a result of this action. The 2019 Plan was substantially completed by March 31, 2020.
Given the commercial uncertainty caused by the novel coronavirus pandemic, or COVID-19, the Company developed and implemented an even more aggressive expense control plan in March 2020, that it is kept in place for the remainder of 2020 (the "2020 Plan"). The 2020 Plan reduced the Company's annual cash expense run rate by $4.0 million or 29%. The Company furloughed 21 positions worldwide, and 20 of these positions were reinstated by the fourth quarter of 2020. As a result, in part from the reduced expense level, FalconStor was able to generate net income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Restructuring expense decreased $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1.0 million, compared to a $1.1 million restructuring charge in the prior year period. For further information, refer to Note (14) Restructuring Costs, to our consolidated financial statements.
Interest and Other Expense
Interest and other expense increased $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.7 million, compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest and other expense is comprised of interest expense on our term loan, foreign currency gains and losses and the change in fair value our embedded derivatives.
Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax benefit of $14,319, consisting of federal, state and local and foreign taxes. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was (1.3)%.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Principal Sources of Liquidity
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash, cash equivalents generated from operating, investing and financing activities. Our cash and cash equivalents balance as of December 31, 2020 totaled $1.9 million, compared with $1.5 million as of December 31, 2019.
On December 27, 2019, the Company entered into an amendment to the Amended and Restated Term Loan Agreement. Such an amendment was by and among the Company, certain of the Company’s affiliates in their capacities as guarantors, HCP-FVA, as administrative agent for the Lenders party thereto, ESW, as co-agent, and the Lenders, and provides for, among other things, a new $2,500,000 term loan facility to the Company. The Amendment also provides for certain financial covenants. On December 27, 2019, the Company drew down $1,000,000 of the 2019 Term Loan which required a fixed amount of interest on such advance equal to 15% of the principal amount advanced. Pursuant to the Amendment, we were required to repay such $1,000,000 advance by September 27, 2020 (as may be extended pursuant to the terms of Amendment). On September 27, 2020, the Company paid the 2019 Term Loan in full.
The Amended and Restated Term Loan Credit Agreement has customary representations, warranties and affirmative and negative covenants. The negative covenants include financial covenants by the Company to maintain minimum cash denominated in U.S. dollars plus accounts receivable outstanding for less than 90 days of $2 million to maintain liquidity at least at $300,000 until the 2019 Term Loan is repaid, other financial covenants relating to In-Force annual contract value. The Amended and Restated Term Loan Credit Agreement also contains customary events of default, including but not limited to payment defaults, cross defaults with certain other indebtedness, breaches of covenants, bankruptcy events and a change of control. In the case of an event of default, as administrative agent under the Amended Restated Term Loan Credit Agreement, HCP-FVA, an affiliate of Hale Capital may (and upon the written request of lenders holding in excess of 50% of the Term Loans, which must include HCP-FVA, is required to) accelerate payment of all obligations under the Amended and Restated Term Loan Credit Agreement, and seek other available remedies.
The restrictions in the Amended and Restated Term Loan Credit Agreement may prevent us from taking actions that we believe would be in the best interests of our business, and may make it difficult for us to successfully execute our business strategy or effectively compete with companies that are not similarly restricted. In addition, our ability to comply with the financial and other covenants and restrictions in the Amended and Restated Term Loan Credit Agreement will largely depend on the pricing of our products and services, and our ability to successfully implement our overall business strategy. We cannot assure you that we will be granted waivers or amendments to the Amended and Restated Term Loan Credit Agreement if for any reason we are unable to comply with these covenants and restrictions. The breach of any of these covenants and restrictions could result in a default under the Amended and Restated Term Loan Credit Agreement, which could result in an acceleration of our indebtedness.
Hale Capital Partners and affiliated entities (“HCP”) has agreed if necessary to renegotiate or extend the maturity date of the Company’s outstanding debt under Amendment No. 1 to the Amended and Restated Term Loan Credit Agreement dated December 27, 2019 by and among FalconStor Software, Inc., HCP-FVA, EW Capital, LLC and the other lender parties thereto (the “Loan Agreement”) so that the maturity date of the outstanding promissory notes issued pursuant to the Loan Agreement is extended from June 30, 2021 to April 1, 2022. Similarly, HCP has agreed if necessary to extend the mandatory redemption date of the Company’s Series A Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Preferred Stock”) from July 31,2021 to at least April 1, 2022. Other than the extension, it is the intention of HCP and the Company that the terms of the Loan Agreement and the Preferred Stock would have substantially similar terms as are currently in effect.
As described in Part II, Item 8, Note (7) "Notes Payable and Stock Warrants", to help ensure adequate liquidity during this period and in light of uncertainties posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company entered into a loan with Peapack-Gladstone Bank on April 28, 2020 (the “Loan”), pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. The Loan has an aggregate principal amount of $754,000. Subject to the terms and limitations of the PPP, the Loan may be forgiven in whole or in part. Our intent is that the entire loan amount will be used to fund our payroll, rent and utilities.
Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, we had a working capital deficiency of $4.5 million, which is inclusive of current deferred revenue of $4.6 million, and a stockholders' deficit of $14.6 million. Our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 was $1.9 million, an increase of $0.4 million as compared to December 31, 2019. On April 28, 2020, the Company entered into a loan with Peapack-Gladstone Bank in an aggregate principal amount of $754,000 (the "Loan"), pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the "PPP") under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act").
In the third quarter of 2019, the Company adopted a plan to better align the Company’s cost structure with the skills and resources required to more effectively execute the Company’s long-term growth strategy and to support revenue levels the Company expected to achieve on a go forward basis (the "2019 Plan"). In connection with the 2019 Plan, the Company eliminated 23 positions worldwide, implemented tighter expense controls, ceased non-core activities and downsized several facilities. As of December 31, 2020, the 2019 Plan is considered to be completed.
On December 27, 2019, the Company entered into Amendment No. 1 to Amended and Restated Term Loan Credit Agreement (the “Amendment”), by and among the Company, certain of the Company’s affiliates in their capacities as guarantors, HCP-FVA, LLC (“HCP-FVA”) as administrative agent for the lenders party thereto (the “Lenders”), ESW Capital, LLC (“ESW”), as co-agent, and the Lenders, to provide for, among other things, a new $2,500,000 term loan facility to the Company with an interest rate of 15% (the “2019 Term Loan”). The Amendment also provides for certain financial covenants. On December 27, 2019, the Company drew down $1,000,000 of the 2019 Term Loan which required a fixed amount of interest on such advance equal to 15% of the principal amount advanced. The Company paid the 2019 Term Loan in full on September 27, 2020.
Given the commercial uncertainty caused by the novel coronavirus pandemic, or COVID-19, the Company developed and implemented an even more aggressive expense control plan in March 2020 (the "2020 Plan"), that it kept in place for the remainder of 2020. This plan reduced the Company's annual cash expense run rate by $4.0 million or 29%. The Company has furloughed 21 positions worldwide, and 20 of these positions were reinstated by December 31, 2020. The 2020 Plan was completed on December 31, 2020.
Based on its projected cash flows from operations, commitments from HCP, ongoing financing activities, cost cutting measures in place and existing cash on hand, the Company is projecting to have sufficient liquidity and to be cash flow positive through March 10, 2022.
Cash Flow Analysis
Cash flow information is as follows:
Net cash provided by operating activities totaled $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $1.9 million of net cash used in operating activities in the prior year period. The changes in net cash provided by and used by operating activities for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were primarily due to our net income (loss) and adjustments for net changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily changes in our accounts receivable, deferred revenue, prepaid expenses, inventory, other assets, accounts payable, and other accrued expenses.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with net cash used in investing activities of $0.1 million for the prior year period. Included in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are purchases of property and equipment, intangible assets and cash received from security deposits.
Net cash used in financing activities totaled $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with net cash provided by financing activities of $0.5 million for the prior year period. Included in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 are $0.8 million in proceeds from the PPP loan and the $1.0 million payoff of the term loan. Included in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 are $0.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of our 2019 Term Loan in December 2019 and the partial repayment of $$0.5 million of principal under our Term Loan in January 2019.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, our significant commitments related to (i) the Amended and Restated Term Loan Credit Agreement, (ii) our operating leases for our office facilities, (iii) dividends (including accrued dividends) on our Series A Preferred Stock, and (iv) the potential redemption of the Series A Preferred Stock as discussed above.
The following is a schedule summarizing our significant obligations to make future payments under contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (at such date, the holders of the Series A Preferred Stock had not exercised their redemption rights):
(a) See Note (7) Notes Payable and Stock Warrants to our consolidated financial statements for further information.
(b) Represents our liability for uncertain tax positions. We are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, accounts receivable allowances, deferred income taxes, accounting for share-based payments, goodwill and other intangible assets, software development costs, fair value measurements and litigation.
Revenue Recognition. Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment.
Judgment is required to determine the standalone selling price (“SSP”) for each distinct performance obligation. For products and services aside from maintenance and support, we estimate SSP by adjusting the list price by historical discount percentages. SSP for software and hardware maintenance and support fees is based on the stated percentages of the fees charged for the respective products.
Our perpetual and term software licenses have significant standalone functionality and therefore revenue allocated to these performance obligations are recognized at a point in time upon electronic delivery of the download link and the license keys.
Product maintenance and support services are satisfied over time as they are stand-ready obligations throughout the support period. As a result, revenues associated with maintenance services are deferred and recognized as revenue ratably over the term of the contract.
Revenues associated with professional services are recognized at a point in time upon customer acceptance.
Accounts Receivable. We review accounts receivable to determine which receivables are doubtful of collection. In making the determination of the appropriate allowance for uncollectible accounts and returns, we consider (i) historical return rates, (ii) specific past due accounts, (iii) analysis of our accounts receivable aging, (iv) customer payment terms, (v) historical collections, write-offs and returns, (vi) changes in customer demand and relationships, (vii) actual cash collections on our accounts receivables and (viii) concentrations of credit risk and customer credit worthiness. When determining the appropriate allowance for uncollectable accounts and returns each period, the actual customer collections of outstanding account receivable balances impact the required allowance for returns. We recorded an expense of $0.0 million and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These amounts are included within our consolidated statement of operations in each respective year. Changes in the product return rates, credit worthiness of customers, general economic conditions and other factors may impact the level of future write-offs, revenue and our general and administrative expenses.
Income Taxes. As discussed further in Note (5) Income Taxes, to our consolidated financial statements, in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued by the FASB on income taxes, we regularly evaluate our ability to recover deferred tax assets, and report such deferred tax assets at the amount that is determined to be more-likely-than-not recoverable. The Company records income taxes under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be realized or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. In determining the period in which related tax benefits are realized for financial reporting purposes, excess share-based compensation deductions included in net operating losses are realized after regular net operating losses are exhausted.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued by the FASB on income taxes, which addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return, should be recorded in the financial statements. Pursuant to the authoritative guidance, we may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it meets the “more likely than not” threshold that the position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authority, based on the technical merits of the position or under statute expirations. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood
of being realized upon ultimate settlement. In addition, the authoritative guidance addresses de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties on income taxes, accounting in interim periods, and also requires increased disclosures.
Accounting for Share-Based Payments. As discussed further in Note (10) Share-Based Payment Arrangements, to our consolidated financial statements, we account for share-based awards in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued by the FASB on stock compensation.
We have used and expect to continue to use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to compute the estimated fair value of share-based compensation expense. We have used the Monte Carlo simulation model to compute the estimated fair value of share-based compensation expense for awards with a market condition. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model includes assumptions regarding dividend yields, expected volatility, expected option term and risk-free interest rates. The Monte Carlo simulation model includes assumptions regarding expected volatility, expected option term and risk-free interest rates. The assumptions used in computing the fair value of share-based compensation expense reflect our best estimates, but involve uncertainties relating to market and other conditions, many of which are outside of our control. We estimate expected volatility based primarily on historical daily price changes of our stock and other factors. The expected option term is the number of years that we estimate that the stock options will be outstanding prior to exercise. The estimated expected term of the stock awards issued has been determined pursuant to SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin SAB No. 110. If other assumptions or estimates had been used, the share-based compensation expense that was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 could have been materially different. Furthermore, if different assumptions or estimates are used in future periods, share-based compensation expense could be materially impacted in the future.
Goodwill. As discussed further in Note (1) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements, we account for goodwill and other intangible assets in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued by the FASB on goodwill and other intangibles. The authoritative guidance requires an impairment-only approach to accounting for goodwill and other intangibles with an indefinite life. Absent any prior indicators of impairment, we perform an annual impairment analysis during the fourth quarter of each of our fiscal years.
As of both December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $4.2 million of goodwill. As of both December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $0.1 million (net of accumulated amortization), respectively, of other identifiable intangible assets. We do not amortize goodwill, but we assess for impairment at least annually on December 31st and more often if a trigger event occurs. In accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 350, "Goodwill and Other" ("ASC 350") our goodwill impairment test includes only one step, which is a comparison of the carrying value of our one reporting unit to its fair value. Pursuant to ASC 350, any excess carrying value, up to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit, is impaired. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the fair value of the Company's single reporting unit for purposes of its goodwill impairment test exceeded it carrying value and thus the Company determined there was no impairment of goodwill.
Software Development Costs. As discussed further in Note (1) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements, we account for software development costs in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued by the FASB on costs of software to be sold, leased or marketed.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $0.0 million and $0.0 million, respectively, of software development costs, net of amortization. The authoritative guidance requires that the costs associated with the development of new software products and enhancements to existing software products be expensed as incurred until technological feasibility of the product has been established. Once technological feasibility is established, all software costs are capitalized until the product is available for general release to customers. Judgment is required in determining when technological feasibility of a product is established and assumptions are used that reflect our best estimates. If other assumptions had been used in the current period to estimate technological feasibility, the reported product development and enhancement expense could have been affected. Annual amortization of capitalized software costs is the greater of the amount computed using the ratio that current gross revenue for a product bear to the total of current and anticipated future gross revenue for that product or the straight-line method over the remaining estimated economic life of the software product, generally estimated to be five years from the date the product became available for general release to customers. Software development costs are reported at the lower of amortized cost or net realizable value. Net realizable value is computed as the estimated gross future revenue from each software solution less the amount of estimated future costs of completing and disposing of that product. Because the development of projected net future revenue related to our software solutions used in our net realizable value computation is based on estimates, a significant reduction in our future revenue could impact the recovery of our capitalized software development costs.
Fair Value Measurement. As discussed further in Note (3) Fair Value Measurements, to our consolidated financial statements, we determine fair value measurements of both financial and nonfinancial assets and liabilities in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued by the FASB on fair value measurements and disclosures. The FASB authoritative guidance establishes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value. Each level of input has different levels of subjectivity and difficulty involved in determining fair value.
Level 1-Valuations based on quoted prices for identical assets and liabilities in active markets.
Level 2-Valuations based on observable inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1, such as quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets that are not active, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data.
Level 3-Valuations based on unobservable inputs reflecting our own assumptions, consistent with reasonably available assumptions made by other market participants. These valuations require significant judgment.
Other-Than-Temporary Impairment
After determining the fair value of our available-for-sale debt instruments, gains or losses on these investments are recorded to other comprehensive income, until either the investment is sold or we determine that the decline in value is other-than-temporary. Determining whether the decline in fair value is other-than-temporary requires management judgment based on the specific facts and circumstances of each investment. For investments in debt instruments, these judgments primarily consider the financial condition and liquidity of the issuer, the issuer’s credit rating, and any specific events that may cause us to believe that the debt instrument will not mature and be paid in full; and our ability and intent to hold the investment to maturity.
Litigation. As discussed further in Note (13) Litigation, to our consolidated financial statements, in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued by the FASB on contingencies, we accrue anticipated costs of settlement, damages and losses for claims to the extent specific losses are probable and estimable. We record a receivable for insurance recoveries when such amounts are probable and collectable. In such cases, there may be an exposure to loss in excess of any amounts accrued. If, at the time of evaluation, the loss contingency related to a litigation is not both probable and estimable, the matter will continue to be monitored for further developments that would make such loss contingency both probable and estimable and, we will expense these costs as incurred. If the estimate of a probable loss is a range and no amount within the range is more likely, we will accrue the minimum amount of the range.
Impact of Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Item 8 of Part II, Consolidated Financial Statements - Note (1) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements.