Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors. The results of operations for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any future period. This discussion, which presents our results for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes and Part II, Item 7 "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Form 10-K for fiscal 2020, filed with the SEC on September 11, 2020, which provides additional information on comparisons of fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019.
Our Business
We are a national coffee roaster, wholesaler and distributor of coffee, tea and culinary products manufactured under supply agreements, under our owned brands, as well as under private labels on behalf of certain customers. We were founded in 1912, incorporated in California in 1923, and reincorporated in Delaware in 2004. Our principal office is located in Northlake, Texas. We operate in one business segment.
We serve a wide variety of customers, from small independent restaurants and foodservice operators to large institutional buyers like restaurants, department and convenience store chains, hotels, casinos, healthcare facilities, and gourmet coffee houses, as well as grocery chains with private brand and consumer-branded coffee and tea products, and foodservice distributors. We are a coffee company dedicated to deliver the coffee people want, the way they want it. We are focused on being a growing and profitable forward-thinking industry leader, championing coffee culture through understanding, leading, building and winning in the business of coffee. Through our sustainability, stewardship, environmental efforts, and leadership we are not only committed to serving the finest products available, considering the cost needs of the customer, but also insist on their sustainable cultivation, manufacture and distribution whenever possible.
Our product categories consist of a robust line of roast and ground coffee, including organic, Direct Trade, Project D.I.R.E.C.T.® and other sustainably-produced offerings; frozen liquid coffee; flavored and unflavored iced and hot teas; including organic and Rainforest Alliance Certified™; culinary products including premium spices, pancake and biscuit mixes, gravy and sauce mixes, soup bases, dressings, syrups and sauces, and coffee-related products such as coffee filters, cups, sugar and creamers; and other beverages including cappuccino, cocoa, granitas, and other blender-based beverages and concentrated and ready-to-drink cold brew and iced coffee. We offer a comprehensive approach to our customers by providing not only a breadth of high-quality products, but also value added services such as market insight, beverage planning, and equipment placement and service.
We operate production facilities in Northlake, Texas; Portland, Oregon; and Hillsboro, Oregon. We stopped production in our Houston facility and exited the facility in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. We distribute our products from our Northlake, Texas, Portland, Oregon and Hillsboro, Oregon production facilities, as well as separate distribution centers in Northlake, Illinois; Moonachie, New Jersey; and Rialto, California. We opened and started operating the distribution center in Rialto, California in the third quarter of fiscal 2021. Our products reach our customers primarily through our nationwide DSD network of 213 delivery routes and 94 branch warehouses as of June 30, 2021, or direct-shipped via common carriers or third-party distributors. DSD sales are primarily made “off-truck” to our customers at their places of business. We operate a large fleet of trucks and other vehicles to distribute and deliver our products through our DSD network, and we rely on 3PL service providers for our long-haul distribution.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted our financial position, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity as the spread of the pandemic and resulting governmental actions have decreased the demand for our products, most notably throughout our DSD network, which consist of small independent restaurants, foodservice operators, large institutional buyers, and convenience store chains, hotels, casinos, healthcare facilities, and foodservice distributors. This has had a material impact on our revenues during our fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020.
However, as local governments across the country eased COVID-19 restrictions, and vaccines are distributed and rolled out successfully, we continue to see improved average weekly sales trends. During the quarter ended June 30, 2021, our average weekly sales were down 27% compared to pre-COVID levels, which is an improvement from earlier this fiscal year when sales were down 41%, 40% and 36%, during the first, second and third quarters, respectively.
Although our Direct Ship sales channel was also affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, the impact was significantly less due to the types of customers we serve through this channel. These customers include our retail business and products sold by key grocery stores under their private labels, as well as third party e-commerce platforms, which have seen moderate increases in demand that have helped mitigate the impact of the pandemic. Compared to fiscal 2020, our Direct Ship revenues declined 12% in fiscal 2021. A portion of these declines are attributable to accounts we decided to exit during fiscal 2021 because they resulted in lower or negative profit due to the impacts from COVID-19 on their business.
In response to the pandemic's impact on our business, we instituted several initiatives in March 2020 and during the fiscal 2021 to reduce operating expenses and capital expenditures to help mitigate the significant negative impact of our revenue decline. In addition to the costs saving initiatives, we have also repaid our existing senior secured revolving credit facility, and entered into our new Credit Facilities, as described in the Liquidity section. We believe that the Credit Facilities provide us with increased flexibility to proactively manage our working capital and execute our long term strategy, maintain compliance with our debt financial covenants, lower our cost of borrowing, and preserve financial liquidity to mitigate the impact of the uncertain business environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, while continuing to execute on our strategic initiatives.
The magnitude of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the extent of the weaker demand for our products, our financial position, results of operations and liquidity, which could be material, is still uncertain due to the rapid development and fluidity of the situation. While we anticipate that our revenue will continue to recover slowly as local, state and national governments ease COVID-19 related restrictions, and vaccines are distributed throughout the country, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in returning to the pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels of revenue or profitability. Accordingly, we expect that our results of operations will be adversely affected for our fiscal year ending June 30, 2022.
For other impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, please see Liquidity and Risk Factors described in Part I, Item IA of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Summary Overview of Fiscal 2021 Results
In fiscal 2021, both our DSD and direct ship sales channels experienced sales declines compared to the prior year periods.
Our DSD network continued to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and to a lesser extent, net customer attrition. The largest DSD revenue declines were from restaurant, hotel and casino channels. While there has been significant recovery in these channels throughout fiscal 2021, sales volumes remained significantly below our pre-COVID levels. Demand from healthcare and C-store channels were impacted to a lesser extent but also remain below pre-COVID levels.
Our direct ship channel sales were also impacted by lower coffee volumes due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
During fiscal 2021, we experienced lower gross margin compared to the prior year periods primarily due to the pandemic's impact on sales volume, which had a larger impact on our higher margin customers. Although we experienced significant recovery throughout our fiscal 2021, the pandemic only impacted 4 months of results during fiscal 2020, resulting in deterioration year over year. Overall, gross margins decreased by 2.2% to 25.4% from 27.6% compared to fiscal
2020 primarily due to the unfavorable customer mix noted above. This decline in gross margin was partially offset by lower variable costs including freight, warehousing and coffee brewing equipment costs, as well as lower reserves for slow moving inventories and scrap expense.
Operating expenses decreased by $42.0 million over the prior year period driven by the absence of a non-cash impairment of goodwill and intangible assets of $42.0 million in the prior year period. The impairment was primarily associated with the results of our annual goodwill and intangible impairment test as of January 31, 2020, adjusted further by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic that had a negative impact on the fair value of our goodwill and intangible assets.
The decrease was also due to a $26.3 million decline in our selling expenses compared to fiscal 2020; however, this was mostly offset by declines in our net gains on sale of assets of $24.6 million due to the sale of several properties in the prior year.
Operating expenses benefited from cost savings actions taken due to COVID-19 pandemic, and other cost controls implemented over variable spending which have reduced payroll, freight, fleet and other variable costs due to the lower sales volumes.
Our capital expenditures for fiscal 2021 were $15.1 million as compared to $17.6 million in fiscal 2020, representing lower maintenance capital spend of $7.8 million in fiscal 2021, a 34.5% reduction compared to fiscal 2020. These spending reductions were driven by several key initiatives put in place, including a focus on refurbished coffee brewing equipment to drive cost savings, and reductions across some capital categories due to additional cost controls put in place during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Also included in the $15.1 million of capital expenditures in the current year was $7.3 million for expansion projects to execute several key strategic initiatives. During fiscal 2021, we substantially increased the production and packaging capacity at our Northlake, Texas production facility which allowed us to exit our aged Houston, Texas facility. We also invested the capital to open a new distribution center in Rialto, California which is geographically closer to many of our customers in the Western United States. Lastly, we implemented a new handheld technology for our DSD representatives, High Jump, which enhances the capability of, and includes features not available on our previous handheld technology.
As of June 30, 2021, the outstanding debt on our Revolver and Term Loan Credit Facilities were $43.5 million and $47.5 million, respectively, a decrease of $31.0 million since June 30, 2020. Our cash decreased by $49.6 million to $10.4 million as of June 30, 2021, compared to $60.0 million as of June 30, 2020. These changes resulted from the repayments on our revolver under the terms of Amendment No. 3 to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of July 23, 2020 (the "Amended Revolving Facility"), which is now fully repaid. The net reduction in our liquidity during the current year was due to our investment in inventory as our sales volumes continue to recover from the pandemic, capital expenditures to fund certain key growth initiatives noted above, and financing costs associated with our new Credit Facilities.
Financial Data Highlights (in thousands, except per share data and percentages)
________________
NM - Not Meaningful
(1) EBITDA, EBITDA Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are non-GAAP financial measures. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for a reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures to their corresponding GAAP measures.
(2) Includes all beverages other than roasted coffee, frozen liquid coffee, and iced and hot tea, including cappuccino, cocoa, granitas, and concentrated and ready-to-drink cold brew and iced coffee.
(3) Represents revenues for certain transition services related to the sale of our office coffee assets.
Factors Affecting Our Business
We have identified factors that affect our industry and business which we expect will play an important role in our future growth and profitability. Some of these factors include:
•Investment in State-of-the-Art Facility and Capacity Expansion. We are focused on leveraging our investment in the Northlake, Texas, facility to produce the highest quality coffee in response to the market shift to premium and specialty coffee, support volume rebalancing across our manufacturing network and create sustainable long-term growth. However, until we further increase the capacity at our Northlake facility, we will continue to experience higher manufacturing costs driven by downtime and inefficiencies.
•Supply Chain Efficiencies and Competition. In order to compete effectively and capitalize on growth opportunities, we must retain and continue to grow our customer base, evaluate and undertake initiatives to reduce costs and streamline our supply chain. We continue to look for ways to deploy our personnel, systems, assets and infrastructure to create or enhance stockholder value. Areas of focus include distribution network optimization, methods of procurement, logistics, inventory management, supporting technology, and real estate assets. The ability to attract and retain a skilled workforce, as well as mitigate current global supply chain challenges, will affect our future growth and profitability.
•Demographic and Channel Trends. Our success is dependent upon our ability to develop new products in response to demographic and other trends to better compete in areas such as premium coffee and tea, including expansion of our product portfolio by investing resources in what we believe to be key growth categories and different formats. We continue to focus on accelerating our Roastery Direct and e-commerce initiatives via a new digital platform. We have successfully launched three new ecommerce websites to reach the consumer directly, and plan to launch more websites and expand marketing efforts during fiscal 2022.
•Fluctuations in Green Coffee Prices. Our primary raw material is green coffee, an exchange-traded agricultural commodity that is subject to price fluctuations. Over the past five years, coffee “C” market near month price per pound ranged from approximately $0.88 to $1.74. The coffee “C” market near month price as of June 30, 2021 and 2020 was $1.60 and $1.04 per pound, respectively. The price and availability of green coffee directly impacts our results of operations. For additional details, see Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
•Hedging Strategy. We are exposed to market risk of losses due to changes in coffee commodity prices. Our business model strives to reduce the impact of green coffee price fluctuations on our financial results and to protect and stabilize our margins, principally through customer arrangements and derivative instruments, as further explained in Note 4, Derivative Instruments, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•Coffee Brewing Equipment and Service. We offer our customers a comprehensive equipment program and 24/7 nationwide equipment service which we believe differentiates us in the marketplace. We offer a full spectrum of equipment needs, which includes brewing equipment installation, water filtration systems, equipment training, and maintenance services to ensure we are able to meet our customer’s demands.
•Sustainability. With an increasing focus on sustainability across the coffee and foodservice industry, and particularly from the customers we serve, it is important for us to embrace sustainability across our operations, in the quality of our products, as well as, how we treat our coffee growers. We believe that our collective efforts in measuring our social and environmental impact, creating programs for waste, water and energy reduction, promoting partnerships in our supply chain that aim at supply chain stability and food security, and focusing on employee engagement place us in a unique position to help retailers and foodservice operators create differentiated coffee and tea programs that can include sustainable supply chains, direct trade purchasing, training and technical assistance, recycling and composting networks, and packaging material reductions.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth information regarding our consolidated results of operations for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020. Certain prior period amounts in the table below have been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation due to the adoption of new accounting standards (in thousands, except percentages):
_____________
NM - Not Meaningful
Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020
Net Sales
Net sales in fiscal 2021 decreased $103.5 million, or 20.6%, to $397.8 million from $501.3 million in fiscal 2020. The decline in net sales was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our DSD network, which had declines in volume of green coffee processed and sold, along with other beverages, culinary, spice and tea products sold. The largest DSD revenue declines were from restaurant, hotel and casino channels.
The decline was also attributable to our direct ship sales, which were negatively impacted by both lower coffee volumes due to COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by price changes to customers utilizing commodity-based pricing arrangements where the changes in the green coffee commodity costs are passed on to the customer. Our direct ship net sales in fiscal 2021 included $3.9 million in price decreases to these customers, as compared to $6.9 million in price decreases to these customers in fiscal 2020.
The following table presents the effect of changes in unit sales, unit pricing and product mix for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 (in millions):
Units Sold and Pricing
Unit sales decreased 21.6% and average unit price increased by 1.3% in fiscal 2021 as compared to the same prior year period, resulting in a net decrease in net sales of 20.2%. Average unit price slightly increased during fiscal 2021 due to a mix of products sold via DSD versus our Direct Ship network, as direct ship has a lower average unit price. Unit sales decreased due to the impact of COVID-19 on our business. There were no new product category introductions in the fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, which had a material impact on our net sales.
Gross Profit
Gross profit in fiscal 2021 decreased $37.2 million, or 26.9%, to $100.9 million from $138.1 million in fiscal 2020. Gross margin decreased to 25.4% in fiscal 2021 from 27.6% in fiscal 2020. These declines were due the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on sales volumes, which had a larger impact on our higher margin customers. Although we experienced significant recovery throughout fiscal 2021, the pandemic only impacted 4 months of results during fiscal 2020, causing the deterioration year over year. The gross margin decline was partially offset by lower variable costs including freight, warehousing and CBE costs, as well as lower reserves for slow moving inventories and scrap expense. The cost reductions across these categories helped mitigate the impact of the pandemic on our sales margin.
Operating Expenses
In fiscal 2021, operating expenses decreased $42.0 million, or 23.2%, to $139.1 million from $181.1 million, in fiscal 2020. The $42.0 million decline was driven by the non-cash impairment of goodwill and intangible assets of $42.0 million in fiscal 2020. The impairment was primarily associated with the results of our annual goodwill and intangible impairment test as of January 31, 2020, adjusted further by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic that had a negative impact on the fair value of our goodwill and intangible assets. See Note 12, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for details.
The decrease was also due to a $26.3 million decline in our selling expenses in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, which was primarily due to cost controls implemented over variable spending that have reduced payroll, freight, fleet and other variable costs due to the lower sales volume.
These declines were offset by an increase in general and administrative expenses of $0.4 million primarily due to costs associated with our supply chain optimization initiatives completed during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 that were incurred to exit our Houston, Texas facility, and the opening and full ramp-up of our new West Coast distribution facility in Rialto, California. This increase is also due to accrued employee incentive bonus in the current year compared to the prior year in which we did not pay employee incentive bonus due to the pandemic's impact on our business.
Operating expenses were also negatively impacted by the decline in net gains from sales of assets of $24.6 million in fiscal 2021. During fiscal 2021, we recorded gains of $0.6 million primarily associated with the sale of three branch properties. During fiscal 2020, we completed the sales of the Houston property, certain assets associated with our office coffee customers and nine branch properties contributing to the $25.2 million gains recorded in prior year. See Note 3, Sales of Assets, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for details.
In fiscal 2021, we also recognized a $1.2 million non-cash fixed asset impairment primarily related to the write-off of the remaining balance of our previous route handheld technology since we completed the implementation of our new High Jump handheld technology.
Total Other Income (Expense)
Total other income (expense) in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was $10.1 million of income compared to $5.7 million of income in fiscal 2020. The change in total other income (expense) in the fiscal 2021 was primarily a result of:
•higher post-retirement medical plan gains in the current year period associated with the plan termination in December 2020;
•gain on settlement of the postretirement death benefit plan in June 2021;
•net gains on coffee-related derivative instruments in fiscal 2021 compared to net losses in prior year due to increases in the coffee commodity prices.
These gains were partially offset by writing off deferred finance costs related to our debt amendment in July 2020 and subsequent termination of our Amended Revolving Facility in April 2021, as well as the postretirement medical plan curtailment gain in fiscal 2020.
In June 2021, we announced the amendment of our postretirement death benefit plan effective immediately. The announcement triggered a re-measurement, and resulted in settlement gains of $6.4 million in fiscal 2021. The pension settlement gain incurred in fiscal 2020 of $5.8 million was due to the curtailment of the post-retirement medical plan in March 2020. See Note 11, Employee Benefit Plans of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for details.
Interest expense in fiscal 2021 increased $5.5 million to $16.0 million from $10.5 million in the prior year period. The increase in interest expense in fiscal 2021 was principally due to the write-off of deferred finance costs related to our debt amendment in July 2020 and subsequent repayment of our Amended Revolving Facility in April 2021, as well as the amortization of de-designated interest rate swap costs.
In fiscal 2021, Other, net increased by $9.3 million to $19.7 million compared to $10.4 million in fiscal 2020. The increase in Other, net, was primarily a result of higher amortized gains on our terminated post-retirement medical benefit plan and mark-to-market net gains on coffee-related derivative instruments not designated as accounting hedges.
Income Taxes
In fiscal 2021, we recorded income tax expense of $13.6 million as compared to income tax benefit of $0.2 million in fiscal 2020. The tax expense is primarily due to the $13.7 million of previously deferred non-cash tax expense in accumulated other comprehensive income associated with gains on the postretirement medical plan in prior years. Upon termination of this plan on December 31, 2020, the deferred non-cash tax expense was reversed out of other comprehensive income and recorded in continuing operations net income in the second quarter of fiscal 2021. The tax benefit in fiscal year 2020 was primarily due to the previously recorded valuation allowance and change in our estimated deferred tax liability See Note 17, Income Taxes, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to net loss determined in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we use the following non-GAAP financial measures in assessing our operating performance:
“EBITDA” is defined as net (loss) income excluding the impact of:
•income taxes;
•interest expense; and
•depreciation and amortization expense.
“EBITDA Margin” is defined as EBITDA expressed as a percentage of net sales.
“Adjusted EBITDA” is defined as net (loss) income excluding the impact of:
•income taxes;
•interest expense (benefit);
•(loss) income from short-term investments;
•depreciation and amortization expense;
•ESOP and share-based compensation expense;
•non-cash impairment losses;
•non-cash pension withdrawal expense;
•restructuring and other transition expenses;
•severance costs;
•proxy contest-related expenses;
•non-recurring costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and severe winter weather;
•net gains and losses from sales of assets;
•non-cash pension settlements and postretirement benefits curtailment; and
•acquisition, integration and strategic initiative costs.
“Adjusted EBITDA Margin” is defined as Adjusted EBITDA expressed as a percentage of net sales.
For purposes of calculating EBITDA and EBITDA Margin and Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, we have excluded the impact of interest expense resulting from the adoption of ASU 2017-07, non-cash pretax pension and postretirement benefits resulting from the amendment and termination of certain Farmer Bros. pension and postretirement benefits plans and severance because these items are not reflective of our ongoing operating results.
We believe these non-GAAP financial measures provide a useful measure of the Company’s operating results, a meaningful comparison with historical results and with the results of other companies, and insight into the Company’s ongoing operating performance. Further, management utilizes these measures, in addition to GAAP measures, when evaluating and comparing the Company’s operating performance against internal financial forecasts and budgets.
We believe that EBITDA facilitates operating performance comparisons from period to period by isolating the effects of certain items that vary from period to period without any correlation to core operating performance or that vary widely among similar companies. These potential differences may be caused by variations in capital structures (affecting interest expense), tax positions (such as the impact on periods or companies of changes in effective tax rates or net operating losses) and the age and book depreciation of facilities and equipment (affecting relative depreciation expense). We also present EBITDA and EBITDA Margin because (i) we believe that these measures are frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry, (ii) we believe that investors will find these measures useful in assessing our ability to service or incur indebtedness, and (iii) we use these measures internally as benchmarks to compare our performance to that of our competitors.
EBITDA, EBITDA Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, as defined by us, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. We do not intend for non-GAAP financial measures to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for other measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Set forth below is a reconciliation of reported net (loss) income to EBITDA (unaudited):
____________
(1)Excludes interest expense related to pension plans and postretirement benefits.
Set forth below is a reconciliation of reported net (loss) income to Adjusted EBITDA (unaudited):
________
(1)Excludes interest expense related to pension plans and postretirement benefits.
(2)Includes initiatives related to the Houston facility exit and opening of the Rialto distribution center.
(3)Adjusted EBITDA for fiscal 2021 and 2020 includes $14.4 million and $7.2 million, respectively, of higher amortized gains resulting from the curtailment of the postretirement medical plan in March 2020. These higher gains continued until the plan sunset on December 31, 2020. See Note 11, Employee Benefit Plans, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Financial Condition
Credit Facility
On April 26, 2021, we repaid in full all of the outstanding loans and other amounts payable under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, using proceeds of loans received pursuant to a refinancing under a new senior secured facility composed of a Revolver Credit Facility Agreement and a Term Credit Facility Agreement as described in more detail in Note 12, Debt Obligations, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The revolver under the Credit Facilities has a commitment of up to $80.0 million and a maturity date of April 25, 2025. Availability under the revolver is calculated as the lesser of (a) $80.0 million and (b) the amount derived from pursuant to a borrowing base composed of the sum of (i) 85% of eligible accounts receivable (less a dilution reserve), plus (ii) the lesser of: (a) 80% of eligible raw material inventory, eligible in-transit inventory and eligible finished goods inventory (collectively, “Eligible Inventory”), and (b) 85% of the net orderly liquidation value (“NOLV”) of eligible inventory, minus (c) applicable reserve. The term loan under the Credit Facilities has a principal amount of $47.5 million and a maturity date of April 25, 2025.
The Credit Facilities contain customary affirmative and negative covenants and restrictions typical for a financing of this type. Non-compliance with one or more of the covenants and restrictions could result in the full or partial principal balance of the Credit Facilities becoming immediately due and payable and termination of the commitments. As of and through June 30, 2021, we were in compliance with all of the covenants under the Credit Facilities.
The Credit Facilities provide us with increased flexibility to proactively manage our liquidity and working capital, while maintaining compliance with our debt financial covenants, and preserving financial liquidity to mitigate the impact of the uncertain business environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and continue to execute on key strategic initiatives.
Effective March 27, 2019, we entered into an interest rate swap to manage our interest rate risk on our floating-rate indebtedness. See Note 4, Derivative Instruments, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for details. In connection with the Credit Facilities, we also executed an ISDA agreement to transfer our interest swap to Wells Fargo under substantially the same terms. See Note 12, Debt Obligations, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for details.
At June 30, 2021, we had outstanding borrowings of $91.0 million and utilized $4.3 million of the letters of credit sublimit under the Credit Facilities, and had $25.7 million of availability under our Credit Facilities.
Liquidity
We generally finance our operations through cash flows from operations and borrowings under our Credit Facilities. In light of our financial position, operating performance and current economic conditions, including the state of the global capital markets, there can be no assurance as to whether or when we will be able to raise capital by issuing securities. We believe that the Credit Facilities, to the extent available, in addition to our cash flows from operations, collectively, will be sufficient to fund our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the next 12 months.
At June 30, 2021, we had $10.3 million of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Liquidity
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted our liquidity as the spread of the pandemic and resulting governmental actions have decreased the demand for our products, most notably throughout our DSD network, which consist of small independent restaurants, foodservice operators, large institutional buyers, and convenience store chains, hotels, casinos, healthcare facilities, and foodservice distributors.
However, as local governments across the country eased COVID-19 restrictions, and vaccines are distributed and rolled out successfully, we continue to see improved average weekly sales trends. During the quarter ended June 30, 2021, our average weekly sales were down 27% compared to pre-COVID levels, which is an improvement from earlier this fiscal year when sales were down 41%, 40% and 36%, during the first, second and third quarters, respectively.
Although our Direct Ship sales channel was also affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, the impact was significantly less due to the types of customers we serve through this channel. These customers include our retail business and products sold by key grocery stores under their private labels, as well as third party e-commerce platforms, which have seen moderate increases in demand that have helped mitigate the impact of the pandemic. Compared to fiscal 2020, our Direct Ship revenues declined 12%. A portion of these declines are attributable to accounts we decided to exit since they were lower or negative profit due to the impacts from COVID-19.
In response to the pandemic's impact on our business, we instituted several initiatives in March 2020 and continued during fiscal 2021 to reduce operating expenses and capital expenditures to help mitigate the significant negative impact of our revenue decline. In addition to the costs saving initiatives, we have also repaid our existing senior secured revolving credit facility, and executed new credit facilities. The new credit facilities provide us with increased flexibility to proactively manage our working capital and execute our long term strategy, maintain compliance with our debt financial covenants, lower our cost of borrowing, and preserve financial liquidity to mitigate the impact of the uncertain business environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, while continuing to execute on key strategic initiatives.
The magnitude of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the extent of the weaker demand for our products, our financial position, results of operations and liquidity, which could be material, is still uncertain due to the rapid development and fluidity of the situation. While we anticipate that our revenue will continue to recover slowly as local and national governments ease COVID-19 related restrictions, and vaccines are distributed throughout the country, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in returning to the pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels of revenue or profitability. Accordingly, we expect that our results of operations will be adversely affected for our fiscal year ending June 30, 2022.
Cash Flows
The significant captions and amounts from our consolidated statements of cash flows are summarized below:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2021 decreased $2.9 million as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on revenues. Although we experienced significant recovery throughout fiscal 2021, the pandemic only impacted 4 months of results during our prior fiscal year, causing higher operating losses during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. However, some of the pandemic's impact on our operating cash flows year over year was mitigated by improving working capital management.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2021 was $10.7 million as compared to net cash provided of $21.9 million during fiscal 2020. The $32.6 million change is primarily due to the sale of assets during the prior year period resulting in net cash proceeds of $39.5 million during fiscal 2020, as well has higher expansion capital expenditures in the current year period to execute our strategic initiatives. This increase in use of cash was partially offset by lower maintenance capital expenditures and coffee brewing equipment purchases in the current year period as we focused on refurbished coffee brewing equipment to drive cost savings and other spending reductions. Also, during fiscal 2021, we generated cash proceeds of $4.4 million primarily related to the sale of three branch properties.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities during fiscal 2021 was $37.4 million as compared to net cash provided of $29.7 million during the fiscal 2020. Net cash used in financing activities in the current year included $31.0 million in net payments under our previous and current credit facilities compared to $30.0 million of net borrowings in fiscal 2020. These changes primarily resulted from the repayments on our revolver under the terms of the Amended Revolving Facility, which is now repaid. The change was also due to $6.2 million of financing costs paid associated with the Amended Revolving Facility in July 2020 and the new Credit Facilities in April 2021.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
Contractual Obligations
The following table contains information regarding total contractual obligations as of June 30, 2021:
______________
(1) See Note 5, Leases, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) See Note 11, Employee Benefit Plans, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(3) Purchase commitments include commitments under coffee purchase contracts for which all delivery terms have been finalized but the related coffee has not been received as of June 30, 2021. Amounts shown in the table above: (a) include all coffee purchase contracts that the Company considers to be from normal purchases; and (b) do not include amounts related to derivative instruments that are recorded at fair value on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. See Note 20, Commitments and Contingencies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(4) See Note 12, Debt Obligations, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Capital Expenditures
For the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, our capital expenditures paid were as follows:
In fiscal 2022, we anticipate maintenance capital expenditures will be between $11.0 million to $14.0 million. We expect to finance these expenditures through cash flows from operations and borrowings under our Revolving Facility.
Depreciation and amortization expense was $27.6 million and $29.9 million in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. We anticipate our depreciation and amortization expense will be approximately $5.5 million to $7.0 million per quarter in fiscal 2022 based on our existing fixed assets and the useful lives of our intangible assets.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report for a summary of recently adopted and recently issued accounting standards and their related effects or anticipated effects on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of June 30, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. In applying many of these accounting principles, we need to make assumptions, estimates or judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. These assumptions, estimates or judgments, however, are both subjective and subject to change, and actual results may differ from our assumptions and estimates. If actual amounts are ultimately different from our estimates, the revisions are included in our results of operations for the period in which the actual amounts become known. We believe the following critical accounting policies could potentially produce materially different results if we were to change the underlying assumptions, estimates or judgments. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of our significant accounting estimates.
Exposure to Commodity Price Fluctuations and Derivative Instruments
We are exposed to commodity price risk arising from changes in the market price of green coffee. In general, increases in the price of green coffee could cause our cost of goods sold to increase and, if not offset by product price increases, could negatively affect our financial condition and results of operations. As a result, our business model strives to reduce the impact of green coffee price fluctuations on our financial results and to protect and stabilize our margins, principally through customer arrangements and derivative instruments.
Customers generally pay for our products based either on an announced price schedule or under commodity-based pricing arrangements whereby the changes in green coffee commodity and other input costs are passed through to the customer. The pricing schedule is generally subject to adjustment, either on contractual terms or in accordance with periodic product price adjustments, typically monthly, resulting in, at the least, a 30-day lag in our ability to correlate the changes in our prices with fluctuations in the cost of raw materials and other inputs.
In addition to our customer arrangements, we utilize derivative instruments to reduce further the impact of changing green coffee commodity prices. We purchase over-the-counter coffee derivative instruments to enable us to lock in the price of green coffee commodity purchases. These derivative instruments may be entered into at the direction of the customer under commodity-based pricing arrangements to effectively lock in the purchase price of green coffee under such customer arrangements, in certain cases up to 18 months or longer in the future. Notwithstanding this customer direction, pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC“) 815, “Derivatives and Hedging,” we are considered the owner of these derivative instruments and, therefore, we are required to account for them as such. In the event the customer fails to purchase the products associated with the underlying derivative instruments for which the price has been locked-in on behalf of the customer, we expect that such derivative instruments will be assigned to, and assumed by, the customer in accordance with contractual terms or, in the absence of such terms, in accordance with standard industry custom and practice. In the event the customer fails to assume such derivative instruments, we will remain obligated on the derivative instruments at settlement. We generally settle derivative instruments to coincide with the receipt of the purchased green coffee or apply the derivative instruments to purchase orders effectively fixing the cost of in-bound green coffee purchases. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had 21.5 million and 44.8 million pounds of green coffee covered under coffee-related derivative instruments, respectively. We do not purchase any derivative instruments to hedge cost fluctuations of any commodities other than green coffee.
The fair value of derivative instruments is based upon broker quotes. We account for certain coffee-related derivative instruments as accounting hedges in order to minimize the volatility created in our quarterly results from utilizing these derivative contracts and to improve comparability between reporting periods. The change in fair value of the derivative is reported in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) (“AOCI”) on our consolidated balance sheet and subsequently reclassified into cost of goods sold in the period or periods when the hedged transaction affects earnings. At June 30, 2021, approximately 68% of our outstanding coffee-related derivative instruments, representing 14.6 million pounds of forecasted green coffee purchases, were designated as cash flow hedges. At June 30, 2020, approximately 81% of our outstanding coffee-related derivative instruments, representing 36.4 million pounds of forecasted green coffee purchases, were designated as cash flow hedges. The portion of open hedging contracts that are not designated as accounting hedges are marked to period-end market price and unrealized gains or losses based on whether the period-end market price was higher or lower than the price we locked-in are recognized in our financial results.
Additionally, we have interest swap rate derivative instruments on our debt facility. Therefore, movement in the underlying yield curves could negatively impact the amount of our interest expense, future earnings and cash flows.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Coffee, tea and culinary products, and coffee brewing equipment parts are accounted for on the FIFO basis. We regularly evaluate these inventories to determine the provision for obsolete and slow-moving inventory. Inventory reserves are based on inventory obsolescence trends, historical experience and application of specific identification.
Impairment of Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
We account for our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets in accordance with ASC 350, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other”. Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but instead are reviewed for impairment annually, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change which indicate that an asset might be impaired. We perform a qualitative assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets on our consolidated balance sheets, to determine if there is a more likely than not indication that our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are impaired as of January 31, during our fiscal third quarter. If the indicators of impairment are present, we perform a quantitative test to determine the impairment of these assets as of the measurement date. We may also elect to bypass the qualitative assessment and proceed directly to a quantitative analysis depending on the facts and circumstances. If, after assessing qualitative and quantitative factors, we believe that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we will record the amount of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment as the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value. Indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of certain acquired trademarks, trade names and brand name.
In performing a quantitative analysis, recoverability of goodwill for each reporting unit is measured using an income approach based on discounted cash flow model incorporating discount rates commensurate with the risks involved. The income approach is supported by a reconciliation of our calculated fair value for the Company to the company’s market capitalization. Use of a discounted cash flow model is common practice in assessing impairment in the absence of available transactional market evidence to determine the fair value. The key assumptions used in the discounted cash flow valuation model include discount rates, growth rates, tax rates, cash flow projections and terminal value rates. Discount rates, growth rates and cash flow projections are the most sensitive and susceptible to change as they require significant management judgment. We may engage third-party valuation consultants to assist with this process. The valuation consultants assess fair value by equally weighting a combination of two market approaches (market multiple analysis and comparable transaction analysis) and the discounted cash flow approach. Discount rates are determined by using a weighted average cost of capital ("WACC"). The WACC considers market and industry data as well as company-specific risk factors for each reporting unit in determining the appropriate discount rate to be used. The discount rate utilized for each reporting unit is indicative of the return an investor would expect to receive for investing in such a business. We consider industry and company-specific historical and projected data, to develop growth rates and cash flow projections for each reporting unit. Terminal value rate determination follows common methodology of capturing the present value of perpetual cash flow estimates beyond the last projected period assuming a constant WACC and low long-term growth rates. If the calculated fair value is less than the current carrying amount, an impairment loss is recorded in the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit's fair value. An impairment loss cannot exceed the carrying amount of goodwill assigned to a reporting unit but may indicate certain long-lived and amortizable intangible assets associated with the reporting unit may require additional impairment testing.
We test indefinite-lived intangible assets quantitatively utilizing the relief from royalty method under the income approach to determine the estimated fair value for each indefinite-lived intangible asset. The relief from royalty method estimates our theoretical royalty savings from ownership of the intangible asset. Key assumptions used in this model include discount rates, royalty rates, growth rates, tax rates, sales projections and terminal value rates. Discount rates, royalty rates, growth rates and sales projections are the assumptions most sensitive and susceptible to change as they require significant management judgment. Discount rates used are similar to the rates estimated by the WACC considering any differences in company-specific risk factors. Royalty rates are established by management and are periodically substantiated by third-party valuation consultants. We consider industry and company-specific historical and projected data, to develop growth rates and sales projections associated with each indefinite-lived intangible asset. Terminal value rate determination follows common
methodology of capturing the present value of perpetual sales projections beyond the last projected period assuming a constant WACC and low long-term growth rates.
Valuation methodologies utilized to evaluate goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment were consistent with prior periods. We periodically engage third-party valuation consultants to assist us with this process. Specific assumptions discussed above are updated at the date of each test to consider current industry and company-specific risk factors from the perspective of a market participant. The current business environment is subject to evolving market conditions and requires significant management judgment to interpret the potential impact to our assumptions. To the extent that changes in the current business environment result in adjusted management projections, impairment losses may occur in future periods.
Our annual impairment tests completed as of January 31, during our fiscal third quarter, and adjusted for the negative impact of COVID-19, indicated the fair values of our goodwill and certain indefinite-lived intangible assets were substantially below their carrying values. As a result, we recorded $36.2 million and $5.8 million, respectively, of impairments to goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles during the year ended June 30, 2020. With this adjustment, our Goodwill assets are now fully impaired as of June 30, 2021 and 2020. See Note 12, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
Other Intangible Assets
Other intangible assets consist of finite-lived intangible assets including acquired recipes, non-compete agreements, customer relationships, a trade name/brand name and certain trademarks. These assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives and are tested for impairment by grouping them with other assets at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets and liabilities. The estimated future cash flows are based upon, among other things, assumptions about expected future operating performance and may differ from actual cash flows. If the sum of the projected undiscounted cash flows (excluding interest) is less than the carrying value of the assets, the assets will be written down to the estimated fair value in the period in which the determination is made. We review the recoverability of our long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable.
Self-Insurance
We use a combination of insurance and self-insurance mechanisms to provide for the potential liability of certain risks including workers’ compensation, health care benefits, general liability, product liability, property insurance and director and officers’ liability insurance. Liabilities associated with risks retained by us are not discounted and are estimated by considering historical claims experience, demographics, exposure and severity factors and other actuarial assumptions.
Our self-insurance for workers’ compensation liability includes estimated outstanding losses of unpaid claims and allocated loss adjustment expenses (“ALAE”), case reserves, the development of known claims and incurred but not reported claims. ALAE are the direct expenses for settling specific claims. The amounts reflect per occurrence and annual aggregate limits maintained by the Company. The estimated liability analysis does not include estimating a provision for unallocated loss adjustment expenses. We believe that the amount recorded at June 30, 2021 is adequate to cover all known workers' compensation claims at June 30, 2021. If the actual costs of such claims and related expenses exceed the amount estimated, additional reserves may be required which could have a material negative effect on our operating results.
The estimated liability related to our self-insured group medical insurance is recorded on an incurred but not reported basis, within deductible limits, based on actual claims and the average lag time between the date insurance claims are filed and the date those claims are paid. The cost of general liability, product liability and commercial auto liability is accrued based on estimates of the aggregate liability claims incurred using certain actuarial assumptions and historical claims experience.
Employee Benefit Plans
We account for our defined benefit pension plans in accordance with ASC No. 715-20, “Compensation-Defined Benefit Plans-General” (“ASC 715-20”). The funded status is the difference between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit obligation. The adjustment to accumulated other comprehensive Income (loss) represents the net unrecognized
actuarial gains or losses and unrecognized prior service costs. Future actuarial gains or losses that are not recognized as net periodic benefits cost in the same periods will be recognized as a component of other comprehensive income.
We maintain several defined benefit plans that cover certain employees. We record the expenses associated with these plans based on calculations which include various actuarial assumptions such as discount rates and expected long-term rates of return on plan assets. Material changes in pension costs may occur in the future due to changes in these assumptions. Future annual amounts could be impacted by changes in the discount rate, changes in the expected long-term rate of return, changes in the level of contributions to the plans and other factors.
We utilize a yield curve analysis to determine the discount rates for our defined benefit plans’ obligations. The yield curve considers pricing and yield information for high quality bonds with maturities matched to estimated payouts of future pension benefits. The expected return on plan assets is based on our expectation of the long-term rates of return on each asset class based on the current asset mix of the funds, considering the historical returns earned on the type of assets in the funds. We review our actuarial assumptions on an annual basis and make modifications to the assumptions based on current rates and trends when appropriate. The effects of the modifications to the actuarial assumptions which impact the projected benefit obligation are amortized over future periods.
In connection with certain collective bargaining agreements to which we are a party, we are required to make contributions on behalf of certain union employees to multiemployer pension plans. The future contributions and liabilities associated with these plans could be material to our results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
See Note 11, Employee Benefit Plans, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussions of our various pension plans.
Share-based Compensation
We measure all share-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the fair values of the awards that are ultimately expected to vest, and recognize that cost on a straight line basis in our consolidated statements of operations over the requisite service period. Fair value of restricted stock and performance-based restricted stock units is the closing price of the Company's common stock on the date of grant. We estimate the fair value of stock option awards on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model which requires that we make certain assumptions regarding: (i) the expected volatility in the market price of our common stock; (ii) dividend yield; (iii) risk-free interest rate; and (iv) the period of time employees are expected to hold the award prior to exercise (referred to as the expected term).
We estimate the expected impact of forfeited awards and recognize share-based compensation cost only for those awards ultimately expected to vest. If actual forfeiture rates differ materially from our estimates, share-based compensation expense could differ significantly from the amounts we have recorded in the current period. We will periodically review actual forfeiture experience and revise our estimates, as necessary. We will recognize as compensation cost the cumulative effect of the change in estimated forfeiture rates on current and prior periods in earnings of the period of revision. As a result, if we revise our assumptions and estimates, our share-based compensation expense could change materially in the future. In fiscal 2021 and 2020, we used an estimated annual forfeiture rate of 4.8% to calculate share-based compensation expense based on actual forfeiture experience.
The Company's outstanding share-based awards include performance-based non-qualified stock options ("PNQs"), performance-based restricted stock units ("PBRSUs") and Performance Cash Awards ("PCAs") that have performance-based vesting conditions in addition to time-based vesting. Awards with performance-based vesting conditions require the achievement of certain financial and other performance criteria as a condition to the vesting. The Company recognizes the estimated fair value of performance-based awards, net of estimated forfeitures, as share-based compensation expense over the service period based upon the Company’s determination of whether it is probable that the performance targets will be achieved. At each reporting period, the Company reassesses the probability of achieving the performance criteria and the performance period required to meet those targets. Determining whether the performance criteria will be achieved involves judgment, and the estimate of share-based compensation expense may be revised periodically based on changes in the probability of achieving the performance criteria. Revisions are reflected in the period in which the estimate is changed. If performance goals are not met, no share-based compensation expense is recognized for the cancelled PNQs, PBRSUs or PCAs, and, to the extent share-based compensation expense was previously recognized for those cancelled PNQs, PBRSUs or PCAs, such share-based compensation expense is reversed. If performance goals are exceeded and the payout is more
than 100% of the target shares, additional compensation expense is recorded in the period when that determination is certified by the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors.
Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes are determined based on the temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which differences are expected to reverse. Estimating the Company’s tax liabilities involves judgments related to uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations. The Company makes certain estimates and judgments to determine tax expense for financial statement purposes as it evaluates the effect of tax credits, tax benefits and deductions, some of which result from differences in the timing of recognition of revenue or expense for tax and financial statement purposes. Changes to these estimates may result in significant changes to the Company’s tax provision in future periods. Each fiscal quarter the Company re-evaluates its tax provision and reconsiders its estimates and assumptions related to specific tax assets and liabilities, making adjustments as circumstances change.