ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Results of Operations
Operating Segments
Risk Management
Credit Risk
Market Risk
Liquidity Risk
Operational Risk
Capital
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Critical Accounting Estimates
The following is Management's Discussion and Analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of Flagstar Bancorp, Inc. for the year ended December 31, 2020. This should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes filed with this report in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
We have omitted discussion of 2018 results where it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in Part II, Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated:
(1) For further information, see Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures.
The following table summarizes certain selected ratios and statistics for the periods indicated:
(1)Interest rate spread is the difference between the yield earned on average interest-earning assets for the period and the rate of interest paid on average interest-bearing liabilities.
(2) See Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures for further information.
The year 2020 was an unprecedented year in our history. In March 2020, the COVID-19 outbreak in the United States was declared a national emergency. In response to COVID-19, government programs were enacted to delay contractual payments and provide monetary assistance. At the same time, the Federal Reserve reduced the Federal Funds Rate to zero percent and provided liquidity to the market through rapidly executed quantitative easing. These actions drove mortgage rates to historic lows which resulted in the overall mortgage market expanding to $4.0 trillion for the year ended December 31, 2020, an estimated 76 percent increase compared to the prior year. As a result, industry capacity was constrained versus demand which caused margins to rise and our financial results to significantly improve. Additionally, some of our consumer borrowers were experiencing economic hardship and some of our commercial borrowers had their business activities severely curtailed. To alleviate pressure on our borrowers, we granted payment deferrals or loan forbearance when requested reaching peak levels of [X] that were previously disclosed in [X]. Furthermore, in response to the health crisis, our workforce shifted to work from home. These overarching conditions significantly impacted our business and the explanations throughout the MD&A.
The year ended December 31, 2020 resulted in net income of $538 million, or $9.52 per diluted share. These results compare to 2019 net income of $218 million, or $3.80 per diluted share, and adjusted net income of $199 million, or $3.46 per diluted share, when excluding the $25 million DOJ Liability fair value adjustment in the second quarter of 2019. All three of our operating segments reported an improvement in net income in 2020.
On an adjusted basis, 2020 annual net income grew 171 percent due largely to increased mortgage revenues as compared to the prior year. Net gain on sales increased $636 million as a result of a $19.6 billion increase in FOAL along with an 81 percent increase in margin which was supported by our continued focus on price discipline, combined with efforts to optimize profitability.
We grew our net interest income $123 million, or 22 percent compared to the prior year driven by growth in average interest-earning assets of $6.0 billion, or 32 percent, despite margin compression caused by interest rate cuts, which occurred in late 2019 and in March 2020. Asset growth was led by our warehouse lending portfolio, which increased $2.6 billion, or 122 percent, and growth in our loans held-for-sale portfolio of $1.6 billion, or 40 percent. This loan growth was benefited from the robust mortgage market during 2020 and was supported by a $3.8 billion increase in average total deposits, driven by higher custodial deposits and growth in retail deposits as customer balances grew due to changes in customer behavior brought on by COVID-19.
We subserviced 1.1 million accounts as of December 31, 2020, flat to prior year, despite the high levels of refinance activity. The servicing business continues to generate custodial deposits which are used as a low-cost funding source to support loan growth. Custodial deposits increased $2.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 driven by higher loan prepayment activity.
Our provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $166 million, compared to $48 million in the same period of 2019. We adopted CECL on January 1, 2020. We increased our ACL in 2020 due to changes in the economic forecast as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, especially as it relates to commercial real estate loans and commercial and industrial loans most impacted by the pandemic.
Net Interest Income
The following table presents details on our net interest margin and net interest income on a consolidated basis:
(1)Includes nonaccrual loans, for further information relating to nonaccrual loans, see Note 1 - Description of Business, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
(2)Includes noninterest-bearing custodial deposits that arise due to the servicing of loans for others.
(3)Interest rate spread is the difference between rates of interest earned on interest earning assets and rates of interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities.
(4)Net interest margin is net interest income divided by average interest earning assets.
The following table presents the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for the components of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The table distinguishes between the changes related to average outstanding balances (changes in volume while holding the initial rate constant) and the changes related to average interest rates (changes in average rates while holding the initial balance constant). The rate/volume variances are allocated to rate.
•Net interest income increased $123 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of 32 percent was driven by growth in average interest-earning assets led by the warehouse and LHFS portfolios. Volume growth was partially offset by a 25 basis point decline in net interest margin to 2.80 percent for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 3.05 percent for the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Net interest margin was 2.80 percent for the year ended December 31, 2020, a 25 basis point decrease compared to the prior year. Excluding the 10 basis point decrease attributable to the impact from the $0.8 billion increase in LGG loans that we have the right to repurchase which do not bear interest, net interest margin decreased only 15 basis points. This remaining decrease was largely driven by the impact from the interest rate cuts executed by the Federal Reserve in the fourth quarter of 2019 and March 2020. The impact of rate cuts on interest earnings asset yields were partially offset by a mix shift to higher yielding warehouse loans, active management of retail deposit costs lower and the successful migration of maturing higher cost CDs to lower cost DDA and savings accounts.
•Average interest-earning assets increased $6.0 billion due primarily to growth in the warehouse portfolio, driven by increased volume from growing market share and the favorable mortgage environment, and the LHFS portfolio which benefited from higher volumes from the favorable mortgage environment driven by the low interest rate environment. Average LGG for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $1.0 billion, as discussed above. Average CRE portfolio increased $0.5 billion driven by broad-based growth prior to the pandemic.
•Average deposits, including non-interest bearing deposits, increased $3.8 billion primarily driven by $2.9 billion higher average custodial deposits which resulted from subservicing growth and higher refinance activity. Total average retail deposits, including non-interest bearing retail deposits, increased $0.6 billion as average customer balances grew due to the impact of COVID-19 on customer behavior and spending patterns. The overall cost of deposits, including
non-interest bearing deposits, was 0.44 percent, a decline of 0.50 percent from the prior year. This was primarily due to a greater mix of non-interest bearing deposits. Additionally, as overall interest rates declined, we reduced the rates we offered on substantially all deposit products. Further, as CD balances matured, there was a customer preference to re-deposit into lower-cost DDA and savings accounts, which also contributed to the decrease in the cost of total deposits.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses was $149 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a provision of $18 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We adopted CECL on January 1, 2020. The $131 million increase is reflective of changes in the economic forecast used in the ACL models and judgment we applied related to those forecasts as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
For further information, see MD&A - Credit Risk.
Noninterest Income
The following tables provide information on our noninterest income and other mortgage metrics:
(1)Rounded to the nearest hundred million.
(2)Fallout-adjusted refers to mortgage rate lock commitments which are adjusted by estimates of the percentage of mortgage loans in the pipeline that are not expected to close based on our historical experience and the impact of changes in interest rates.
(3)Gain on sale margin is based on net gain on loan sales (excludes net gain on loan sales of $3 million and $2 million from loans transferred from LHFI during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively) to fallout-adjusted mortgage rate lock commitments.
Total noninterest income increased $715 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the following:
•Net gain on loan sales increased $636 million, driven by $19.6 billion higher FOAL and an 83 basis point improvement in our gain on sale margin. This was driven by favorable market conditions, which allowed us to grow our direct retail channel and optimize profitability.
•Loan fees and charges increased $65 million, primarily due to an approximately $45 million increase in fees driven by $15.6 billion, or 48 percent, higher mortgage closings and $19 million higher subservicing ancillary fees due to higher loss mitigation and forbearance fee income on subserviced loans.
•Loan administration income increased $54 million, primarily due to a decline in rate credits given to sub-servicing customers on custodial deposits which are LIBOR-based. Subservicing fees also increased driven by an increase in the number of loans in forbearance which are charged a higher servicing rate and an increase in the average number of loans being subserviced.
•Net return on MSRs, including the impact of hedges, increased $4 million, driven by favorable hedge performance and an increase in servicing fees due to an increase in the average number of loans being serviced, partially offset by higher prepayments.
•Other noninterest income decreased $38 million, primarily due to the $25 million DOJ Liability fair value adjustment in 2019 which did not reoccur (see Note 19 - Legal Proceedings, Contingencies and Commitments for additional information) and $7 million of AFS investment security gains recorded in 2019 that did not reoccur in 2020 along with lower FHLB stock dividend income.
•Deposit fees and charges decreased $6 million, primarily driven by a decrease in non-sufficient funds fee income due to higher average customer balances.
Noninterest Expense
The following table sets forth the components of our noninterest expense:
Total noninterest expense increased $269 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the following:
•Commission expense increased $121 million primarily driven by a $7.6 billion, or 112 percent, increase in mortgage retail closings consistent with the growth in expense.
•Compensation and benefits expense increased $89 million, primarily driven by a 17 percent increase in FTE, which was impacted by adding mortgage closing capacity in response to the robust mortgage performance, bringing default servicing in-house in late 2019, along with an increase in incentive compensation and the impact of stock-based compensation performance shares, both of which were driven by stronger financial results.
•Loan processing expense increased $18 million primarily driven $15.6 billion, or 48 percent, higher mortgage closings. This was partially offset by lower default servicing third party costs which was an in-house function throughout the full year 2020, which also resulted in an increase in compensation and benefits expense.
•Occupancy and equipment increased $15 million, primarily due to increases in system and software development, to support business growth.
•Other noninterest expense increased $20 million, primarily driven by higher mortgage-related expenses including performance-related earn out adjustment related to our Opes Advisors acquisition which was finalized in the first quarter, a $7 million loss recognized on the early redemption of senior notes and $4 million higher FDIC Assessment due to a higher assessment base from higher average assets.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $166 million, compared to a provision of $48 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company's effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 23.6 percent, compared to an effective tax rate of 18.1 percent for the year ended December 31, 2019. The higher rate was the result of increased earnings in 2020 taxed at the statutory rate, a change in our state deferred tax asset valuation allowance, and an increase in FDIC premiums.
For further information, see Note 17 - Income Taxes.
Fourth Quarter Results
The following table sets forth selected quarterly data:
Fourth Quarter 2020 compared to Third Quarter 2020
Net income for the three months ended December 31, 2020 was $154 million, or $2.83 per diluted share, as compared to $222 million, or $3.88 per diluted share, for the three months ended September 30, 2020. The $68 million decrease in net income was primarily due to the following:
•Net interest income rose $9 million, or 5 percent, reflecting a 5 percent increase in average earning assets, driven by warehouse loan growth and the continued impact of lower rates on deposits, which was partially offset by lower yields on interest earning assets. The net interest margin in the fourth quarter was 2.78 percent, flat to prior quarter. Increases in the net interest margin from higher yielding warehouse loans and lower rates on deposits were offset primarily by the 20 basis point impact of LGG loans that have not been repurchased and do not accrue interest. Retail banking deposit rates decreased 18 basis points driven by the expiration of promotional rates on some of our savings deposits and the maturity of higher cost time deposits. This improvement more than offset the impact of declining interest rates in certain other categories of LHFI.
•The provision for credit losses decreased $30 million to $2 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, as compared to $32 million for the third quarter of 2020. While our forecast improved, our ACL remained flat as compared to the balance as of September 30, 2020, due to continued economic uncertainty caused by COVID-19. We continue to believe the economic recovery will be challenged by the COVID-19 pandemic for an extended period of time and significant uncertainty remains related to distribution of the vaccines and government stimulus, especially as those items may affect consumer loan forbearance and the CRE sector.
•Noninterest income decreased $115 million, or 25 percent, to $337 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, as compared to $452 million for the third quarter of 2020, primarily due to lower net gain on loan sales and a decrease in the net return on mortgage servicing rights. The net gain on loan sale margin decreased 38 basis points to 1.93 percent for the fourth quarter 2020, as compared to 2.31 percent for the third quarter 2020 as we slowed volumes to match internal capacity and as the industry as a whole continued to add more capacity. FOAL decreased 20 percent to $12.0 billion,
reflecting seasonal factors which were partially offset by the continued strength of the mortgage environment due to lower rates.
•Lower mortgage rates continued to drive refinance activity causing prepayment speeds to be elevated, resulting in a $12 million decrease in the net return on mortgage servicing rights in the fourth quarter of 2020, compared to a $12 million net return for the third quarter of 2020. This decrease was partially offset by an $8 million increase in loan fees and charges, primarily due to higher loss mitigation and forbearance fee income on subserviced loans despite a 9 percent decrease in mortgage closings.
•Noninterest expense increased $14 million to $319 million for the fourth quarter of 2020, as compared to $305 million for the third quarter 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $7 million loss recognized on the early redemption of senior notes that were scheduled to mature on July 15, 2021 which settled in January 2021, $3 million additional expense due to hiring in the mortgage and servicing businesses to expand capacity, and an additional $2 million contribution to the Flagstar Foundation during the quarter to further support the community in light of the pandemic and ongoing economic conditions.
Fourth Quarter 2020 compared to Fourth Quarter 2019
Net income for the three months ended December 31, 2020 was $154 million, or $2.83 per diluted share, as compared to net income of $58 million, or $1.00 per diluted share, for the three months ended December 31, 2019. The $96 million increase in net income was primarily due to the following:
•Net interest income rose $37 million, or 24 percent, for the fourth quarter of 2020, compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, which was largely driven by growth in the warehouse loan portfolio due to the favorable mortgage environment and concerted efforts to expand market share. The net interest margin decreased 13 basis points to 2.78 percent for the fourth quarter of 2020, compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. This was primarily attributable to the impact from the interest rate cuts executed by the Federal Reserve in the fourth quarter of 2019 and March 2020 along with the $1.8 billion increase in LGG that we have the right to repurchase, which do not accrue interest.
•Noninterest income increased $175 million, primarily due to $131 million higher net gain on loan sales driven by a $3.8 billion increase in FOAL in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the same quarter in 2019, and gain on sale margin expansion of 70 basis points for the same comparable time period. The increase in FOAL and expansion of gain on sale margin was largely supported by the favorable mortgage environment which allowed us to grow our direct retail channel and optimize profitability. The favorable mortgage market also drove a $22 million increase in loan fees and charges as mortgage closings increased $3.8 billion, or 41 percent, in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the same quarter in 2019. In addition, we had $16 million higher loan administration income primarily due to a decline in LIBOR-based fees paid to sub-servicing customers on custodial deposits and higher subservice fees due to past due status of loans.
•Noninterest expense increased $74 million. $67 million of this increase was volume and performance related due to an increase of $35 million in commissions, $23 million in compensation and benefits and $9 million in loan processing expense. The remainder was the result of a $7 million loss recognized on the early redemption of senior notes. Commission and loan processing expense increased primarily as a result of the $3.8 billion increase in loans closed. Compensation and benefit expense increased due to higher FTEs resulting from efforts to expand capacity in the mortgage and servicing businesses along with an increase in incentive compensation attributed to stronger financial results.
Operating Segments
Our operations are conducted through three operating segments: Community Banking, Mortgage Originations, and Mortgage Servicing. The Other segment includes the remaining reported activities. The operating segments have been determined based on the products and services offered and reflect the manner in which financial information is currently evaluated by Management. Each of the operating segments is complementary to each other and because of the interrelationships of the segments, the information presented is not indicative of how the segments would perform if they operated as independent entities.
As a result of Management's evaluation of our segments, effective January 1, 2020, certain departments were re-aligned between the Community Banking and Mortgage Originations segments. Specifically, a majority of the residential
mortgage HFI portfolio is now part of the Mortgage Originations segment. The income and expenses relating to these changes are reflected in our financial statements and all prior period segment financial information has been recast to conform to the current presentation.
Before the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, we charged the lines of business for the net charge-offs that occurred during the period. The difference between total net charge-offs and the consolidated provision for credit losses was assigned to the “Other” segment. This amount assigned to the “Other” segment was then allocated back to the lines of business through other noninterest expense.
This year, with the adoption of CECL, we have continued to charge the lines of business for the net charge-offs that occur. In addition to this amount, we charge them for the change in loan balances during the period, applied at the budgeted credit loss factor. The difference between the consolidated provision for credit losses and the sum of total net charge-offs and the change in loan balances is still assigned to the “Other” segment, although now that amount includes the changes related to the economic forecasts, model changes, qualitative adjustments and credit downgrades. As in the prior methodology, the amount assigned to the “Other” segment continues to be allocated back to the lines of business through other noninterest expense.
For detail on each segment's objectives, strategies, and priorities, please read this section in conjunction with Note 21 - Segment Information.
Community Banking
Our Community Banking segment serves commercial, governmental and consumer customers in our banking footprint which spans throughout Michigan, Indiana, California, Wisconsin, Ohio and contiguous states. We also serve home builders, correspondents, and commercial customers on a national basis. The Community Banking segment originates and purchases loans, while also providing deposit and fee-based services to consumer, business and mortgage lending customers.
Our commercial customers operate in a diversified range of industries including financial, insurance, service, manufacturing and distribution. We offer financial products to these customers for use in their normal business operations, as well as provide financing of working capital, capital investments and equipment. Additionally, our commercial real estate business supports income producing real estate and home builders. The Community Banking segment also offers warehouse lines of credit to non-bank mortgage lenders.
Our Community Banking segment has seen continued growth driven by our warehouse portfolio which has benefited from the robust mortgage market during 2020. Our relationship-based approach and speed of execution also enabled us to add new customers as well as increase lines for existing customers during the year while gaining market share. In addition, we continue to maintain our disciplined underwriting in this business. Our commercial loan portfolio has grown 49 percent in the last twelve months, to $9.4 billion, at December 31, 2020, while our consumer loan portfolio has remained flat at $4.6 billion. Average deposits for the year ended December 31, 2020 have increased 7 percent to $11.0 billion, compared to $10.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven primarily by higher customer balances.
The Community Banking segment reported net income of $160 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $95 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $65 million increase was primarily driven by the following:
•Net interest income increased $160 million driven by higher average loan and deposit balances, led by our warehouse business, partially offset by lower margins due to Federal Reserve interest rate cuts that occurred in late 2019 and March 2020.
•The provision for credit losses was $17 million lower primarily due to lower net charge-offs as 2019 included the $29 million charge-off of the Live Well commercial loan.
•Compensation and benefits expense increased $5 million due to an increase in incentive compensation primarily driven by strong performance in our warehouse business.
•Other noninterest expense increased $106 million primarily driven by higher intersegment expense allocations primarily related to the provision for credit losses increases from the impact of the degradation in the economic forecasts used in our ACL models and credit downgrades related to those loans most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Mortgage Originations
We are a leading national originator of residential first mortgages. Our Mortgage Originations segment utilizes multiple distribution channels to originate or acquire one-to-four family residential mortgage loans on a national scale, primarily to sell. We originate and retain certain mortgage loans in our LHFI portfolio which generate interest income in the Mortgage Originations segment.
(1)Fallout-adjusted refers to mortgage rate lock commitments which are adjusted by a percentage of mortgage loans in the pipeline that are not expected to close based on previous historical experience and the level of interest rates.
(2)Rounded to the nearest hundred million.
The Mortgage Originations segment reported net income of $481 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $130 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $351 million increase was primarily driven by the following:
•Net gain on loan sales increased $620 million to $969 million, as compared to $349 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. FOAL increased $19.6 billion, or 61 percent, to $52.0 billion, primarily driven by the low interest rate environment that fueled a strong overall mortgage market. The net gain on loan sale margin increased 83 basis points to 1.86 percent for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 1.03 percent for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting our management of volume level within our channels and products to fit our fulfillment capacity, made possible by demand due to favorable market conditions. This has led to a higher mix of retail closings (30 percent in 2020 compared to 21 percent in 2019).
•Net interest income increased $46 million primarily due to $1.6 billion higher average LHFS balances resulting from increased mortgage production.
•Loan fees and charges, commissions and loan processing expense all increased due to $15.6 billion higher closings and a volume mix increase in the higher-margin retail channel.
•Other noninterest expense increased $46 million driven by a $33 million increase in the intersegment expense allocations. This primarily related to the provision for credit losses increases from the impact of the degradation of economic forecasts used in our ACL models and credit downgrades related to those loans most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the final performance-related expense related to our Opes Advisors acquisition was $11 million higher than in the prior year.
Mortgage origination distribution channels
Correspondent. In the correspondent channels, an unaffiliated bank or mortgage company completes the loan paperwork in their name and funds the loan at closing. After the bank or mortgage company has funded the transaction, we purchase the loan at an agreed upon price. Correspondents apply to the Bank and may be approved for delegated underwriting
authority. Delegated correspondents assume the risks associated with the underwriting of the loan and earn more on loans sold compared to non-delegated correspondents. Non-delegated correspondents earn commissions and administrative fees for closing and funding loans which are then underwritten by the Bank. Loans originated through the correspondent lending channel typically result in a lower gain on sale margin but also have lower costs. When purchasing correspondent loans individually or in bulk, we perform a full review of each loan to ensure we only purchase loans originated in accordance with our underwriting guidelines. At December 31, 2020, we had active relationships with more than 520 delegated correspondents and over 530 non-delegated correspondents serving borrowers in all 50 states.
Broker. In a broker transaction, an unaffiliated mortgage broker completes several steps of the loan origination process including the loan paperwork, but the loans are underwritten by us on a loan-level basis to our underwriting standards and we fund and close the loan in the Bank's name, thereby becoming the lender of record. At December 31, 2020, we had active broker relationships with nearly 1,400 mortgage brokers servicing borrowers in all 50 states.
Retail. In our distributed retail channel, loans are originated through our nationwide network of stand-alone home loan centers. At December 31, 2020, we maintained 141 retail locations in 28 states. In a direct-to-consumer lending transaction, loans are originated through our direct-to-consumer team or from one of our two national call centers, both of which may leverage our existing customer relationships. Most aspects of the retail lending process are completed internally, including the origination documentation (inclusive of customer disclosures), and we fund the loan at closing. Loans in the retail channel typically have higher internal costs but also higher gain on sale margins.
The following tables disclose residential first mortgage loan closings by channel, type and mix (rounded to the nearest hundred million):
Mortgage Servicing
The Mortgage Servicing segment services loans when we hold the MSR asset and subservices mortgage loans for others through a scalable servicing platform on a fee for service basis. The loans we service generate custodial deposits which provide a stable funding source supporting interest-earning asset generation in the Community Banking and Mortgage Originations segments. We earn income from other segments for the use of non-interest bearing escrows. Revenue for serviced and subserviced loans is earned on a contractual fee basis, with the fees varying based on our responsibilities and the delinquency or payment status of the underlying loans. Along with these contractual fees, we may also collect ancillary fees related to these loans. The Mortgage Servicing segment also services residential mortgages for our LHFI portfolio in the Community Banking segment and our own MSR portfolio in the Mortgage Originations segment for which it earns intersegment revenue on a fee per loan basis. Our continued growth in our subservicing business and the strength of our platform has made us the 6th largest subservicer in the nation.
The Mortgage Servicing segment reported net income of $43 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $25 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $18 million increase in net income was driven by a $61 million increase in noninterest income. The increase was due to the decline in LIBOR-based fees paid to sub-servicing customers on custodial deposits and higher ancillary income driven by increases in forbearance and loss mitigation activities. In addition, subservicing fee income increased due to an increase in the number of loans in payment deferral which carry a higher servicing charge. This was partially offset by an $18 million increase in compensation and benefits expense primarily due to business growth and bringing default servicing in-house in late 2019. Other noninterest expense increased $20 million driven by an increase in software costs, corporate allocations and a $7 million increase related to a specific project that is nearly complete.
The following table presents residential loans serviced and the number of accounts associated with those loans.
(1)UPB, net of write downs, does not include premiums or discounts.
(2)Loans subserviced for a fee for non-Flagstar owned loans or MSRs. Includes temporary short-term subservicing performed as a result of sales of servicing-released MSRs.
(3)Loans for which Flagstar owns the MSR.
(4)Includes LHFI (residential first mortgage and home equity), LHFS (residential first mortgage), LGG (residential first mortgage), and repossessed assets.
At December 31, 2020, the number of residential loans serviced and the UPB of those loans remained relatively flat to December 31, 2019, despite high levels of refinance activity. We retained subservicing on 85.0 percent of the $12.2 billion UPB of MSRs sold during 2020.
Loans Serviced for Others
The following table presents the characteristics of the mortgage loans serviced for others.
(1)The HPI LTV is updated from the original LTV based on Metropolitan Statistical Area-level FHFA data as of December 31, 2020.
(2)Includes loans in forbearance that continue to be aged for payment status purposes.
Loans Subserviced for Others
The following table presents the UPB based on payment status of the mortgage loans subserviced for others.
(1)Includes loans in forbearance that continue to be aged for payment status purposes.
Other
The Other segment includes the treasury functions, which include the impact of interest rate risk management, balance sheet funding activities and the investment securities portfolios, as well as other expenses of a corporate nature, including corporate staff, risk management, and legal expenses, which are charged to the line of business segments. The Other segment charges each operating segment a daily funds transfer pricing rate on their average assets which resets more rapidly than the underlying borrowing costs resulting in an asset sensitive position. In addition, the Other segment includes revenue and expenses not directly assigned or allocated to the Community Banking, Mortgage Originations or Mortgage Servicing segments.
The Other segment reported a net loss of $146 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net loss of $32 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $114 million increase in loss was primarily due to a $85 million decrease in net interest income as a result of our overall asset sensitive position and the lower average rates during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The year ended December 31, 2019 also included a $25 million benefit from the DOJ Liability fair value adjustment. The provision for credit losses increased $149 million primarily due to changes in the forecasts of economic conditions and impacts of COVID-19. With the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, the difference between the consolidated provision for credit losses and the sum of total net charge-offs and the change in loan balances continue to be assigned to the Other segment. However, this amount now includes changes related to the economic forecasts, model changes, qualitative adjustments and credit downgrades. The provision for credit losses is then directly allocated to the other applicable segments through other noninterest expense. The majority of all other activity within the Other segment largely offsets and is allocated back to the operating segments, recorded as contra other noninterest expense.
RISK MANAGEMENT
Certain risks are inherent in our business and include, but are not limited to, operational, strategic, credit, regulatory compliance, legal, reputational, liquidity, market and cybersecurity. We continuously invest in our risk management activities which are focused on ensuring we properly identify, measure and manage such risks across the entire enterprise to maintain safety and soundness and maximize profitability. We hold capital to protect us from unexpected loss arising from these risks.
A comprehensive discussion of risks affecting us can be found in the Risk Factors section included in Item 1A. of this Form 10-K.
Credit Risk
Credit risk is the risk of loss to us arising from an obligor’s inability or failure to meet contractual payment or performance terms. We provide loans, extend credit, and enter into financial derivative contracts, all of which have related credit risk. We manage credit risk using a thorough process designed to ensure we make prudent and consistent credit decisions. The process was developed with a focus on utilizing risk-based limits and credit concentrations while emphasizing diversification on a geographic, industry and customer level. The process utilizes documented underwriting guidelines, comprehensive documentation standards, and ongoing portfolio monitoring including the timely review and resolution of credits experiencing deterioration. These activities, along with the management of credit policies and credit officers’ delegated authority, are centrally managed by our credit risk team.
We maintain credit limits, in compliance with regulatory requirements. Under HOLA, the Bank may not make a loan or extend credit to a single or related group of borrowers in excess of 15 percent of Tier 1 plus Tier 2 capital and any portion of
the ACL not included in the Tier 2 capital. This limit was $396 million as of December 31, 2020. We maintain a more conservative maximum internal Bank credit limit than required by HOLA, of $100 million to any one borrower/obligor relationship, with the exception of warehouse borrower/obligor relationships which have a higher internal Bank limit of $150 million. During 2020, the Board approved the extension of short-term “overlines” to certain warehouse borrowers as all advances are fully collateralized by residential mortgage loans and this asset class has had very low levels of historical loss, resulting in a temporary increase of the warehouse borrower limit to $175 million. We have a tracking and reporting process to monitor lending concentration levels, and all credit exposures to a single or related borrower that exceed $50 million must be approved by the Board of Directors.
Our commercial loan portfolio has been built on our relationship-based lending strategy. We provide financing and banking products to our commercial customers in our core banking footprint and will follow those established customer relationships to meet their financing needs in areas outside of our footprint. We have also formed relationship lending on a national scale through our home builder finance and warehouse lending businesses. At December 31, 2020, we had $12.1 billion in our commercial loan portfolio with our warehouse lending and home builder finance businesses accounting for 70 percent of the total. Of the remaining commercial loans in our portfolio, the majority of CRE and C&I loans were with customers who have established relationships within our core banking footprint.
Credit risk within the commercial loan portfolio is managed using concentration limits based on line of business, industry, geography and product type. This is managed through the use of strict underwriting guidelines detailed in credit policies, ongoing loan level reviews, monitoring of the concentration limits and continuous portfolio risk management reporting. The commercial credit policy outlines the risks and underwriting requirements and provides a framework for all credit and lending activities. Our commercial loan credit policies consider maturity and amortization terms, maximum LTVs, minimum debt service coverage ratios, construction loan monitoring procedures, appraisal requirements, pro-forma analysis requirements and thresholds for product specific advance rates.
We typically originate loans on a recourse basis with full or partial guarantees. On a limited basis, we may approve loans without recourse if sufficient consideration is provided in the loan structure. Non-recourse loans primarily have low LTVs, strong cash flow coverage or other mitigating factors supporting the lack of a guaranty. These guidelines also require an appraisal of pledged collateral prior to closing and on an as-needed basis when market conditions justify. We contract with a variety of independent licensed professional firms to conduct appraisals that are in compliance with our internal commercial credit and appraisal policies and regulatory requirements.
Our commercial loan portfolio includes leveraged lending. The Bank defines a transaction as leveraged when two or more of the following conditions exist: 1) proceeds from the loan are used for buyouts, acquisitions, recapitalization or capital distributions, 2) the borrower's total funded debt to EBITDA ratio is greater than four or Senior Funded Debt to EBITDA ratio is greater than three, 3) the borrower has a high debt to net worth ratio within its industry or sector as defined by internal limits, and 4) debt leverage significantly exceeds industry norms or historical levels for leverage as defined by internal limits. Leveraged lending transactions typically result in leverage ratios that are significantly above industry norms or historical levels. Our leveraged lending portfolio and other loan portfolios with above-average default probabilities tend to behave similarly during a downturn in the general economy or a downturn within a specific sector. Consequently, we take steps to avoid undue concentrations by setting limits consistent with our appetite for risk and our financial capacity. In addition, there are specific underwriting conditions set for our leveraged loan portfolio and there is additional emphasis on certain items beyond the standard underwriting process including synergies, collateral shortfall and projections.
Our commercial loan portfolio also includes loans that are part of the SNC Program. A SNC is defined as any loan or loan commitment totaling at least $100 million that is shared by three or more federally regulated institutions. On an annual basis, a joint regulatory task force performs a risk assessment of all SNCs. When completed, these risk ratings are shared and our risk rating must be no better than the risk rating listed in the SNC assessment. Exposure and credit quality for SNCs are carefully monitored and reported internally.
For our commercial real estate portfolio, including owner and nonowner-occupied properties and home builder finance lending, we obtain independent appraisals as part of our underwriting and monitoring process. These appraisals are reviewed by an internal appraisal group that is independent from our sales and credit teams.
The home builder finance group is a national relationship-based lending platform that focuses on markets with strong housing fundamentals and higher population growth potential. The team primarily originates construction and development loans. We generally lend in metropolitan areas or counties where verifiable market statistics and data are readily available to support underwriting and ongoing monitoring. We also evaluate the jurisdictions and laws, demographic trends (age, population
and income), housing characteristics and economic indicators (unemployment, economic growth, household income trends) for the geographies where our borrowers primarily operate. We engage independent licensed professionals to supply market studies and feasibility reports, environmental assessments and project site inspections to complement the procedures we perform internally. Further, we perform ongoing monitoring of the projects including periodic inspections of collateral and annual portfolio and individual credit reviews.
The consumer loan portfolio has been built on strong underwriting criteria and within concentration limits intended to diversify our risk profile. We have built our consumer loan portfolio by adding high quality first mortgage loans to our balance sheet making up 55 percent of our total consumer loan portfolio at December 31, 2020.
Loans held-for-investment
The following table summarizes the amortized cost of our loans held-for-investment by category:
(1)Includes second mortgages, HELOCs, and HELOANs.
Prior to March 2020 we had continued to strengthen our Community Banking segment by growing our consumer and commercial real estate LHFI. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, subsequent to March 2020 we have focused on managing credit in our CRE and C&I portfolios while growing our lower-risk, higher return warehouse lending portfolio. This drove growth in our commercial portfolio of $4.9 billion, or 68 percent, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Our consumer loan portfolio decreased $781 million, or 16 percent, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, as a $275 million increase in other consumer loans was more than offset by a $888 million decrease in residential first mortgage loans due to higher refinance activity and lower new closings to the HFI portfolio.
The following table provides a comparison of activity in our LHFI portfolio:
Residential first mortgage loans. We originate or purchase various types of conforming and non-conforming fixed and adjustable rate loans underwritten using Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac guidelines for the purpose of purchasing or refinancing owner occupied and second home properties. We typically hold certain mortgage loans in LHFI that do not qualify for sale to the Agencies and that have an acceptable yield and risk profile. The LTV requirements on our residential first mortgage loans vary depending on occupancy, property type, loan amount and FICO scores. Loans with LTVs exceeding 80 percent are required to obtain mortgage insurance. As of December 31, 2020, loans in this portfolio had an average current FICO score of 739 and an average LTV of 60 percent.
The following table presents amortized cost our total residential first mortgage LHFI by major category:
(1)LTVs reflect loan balance at the date reported, as a percentage of property values as appraised at loan closing.
(2)FICO scores are updated at least on a quarterly basis or more frequently, if available.
The following table presents amortized cost our total residential first mortgage LHFI as of December 31, 2020, by year of closing:
Home equity. Our home equity portfolio includes HELOANs, second mortgage loans, and HELOCs. These loans require full documentation and are underwritten and priced in an effort to ensure credit quality and loan profitability. Our debt-to-income ratio on HELOANs and HELOCs is capped at 43 percent and 45 percent, respectively. We currently limit the maximum CLTV to 89.99 percent and FICO scores to a minimum of 700. Second mortgage loans and HELOANs are fixed rate loans and are available with terms up to 20 years. HELOC loans are variable-rate loans that contain a 10-year interest only draw period followed by a 20-year amortizing period. At December 31, 2020, HELOCs and HELOANs in a first lien position totaled $192 million. As of December 31, 2020, loans in this portfolio had an average current FICO score of 745 and an average CLTV of 71 percent.
Other consumer loans. Our other consumer loan portfolio consists of secured and unsecured loans originated through our indirect lending business, third-party closings and our Community Banking segment.
The following table presents amortized cost of our other consumer loan portfolio by purchase type:
At December 31, 2020, other consumer loans increased to $1.0 billion compared to $0.7 billion at December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily due to growth in our non-auto, boat and recreational vehicle indirect lending business of which 67 percent is secured by boats and 33 percent secured by recreational vehicles and our point of sale portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, loans in our indirect portfolio had an average current FICO score of 748. Point of sale loans consist of unsecured consumer installment loans originated for home improvement purposes through a third-party financial technology company who also provides us a level of credit loss protection.
Commercial real estate loans. The commercial real estate portfolio contains loans collateralized by diversified property types which are primarily income producing in the normal course of business. The majority of our retail exposure is to neighborhood centers and single tenant locations, which include pharmacies and hardware stores. Generally, the maximum LTV is 80 percent, or 90 percent for owner-occupied real estate, and the minimum debt service coverage of 1.20. Our CRE loans primarily earn interest at a variable rate.
Our national home builder finance program within our commercial portfolio contained $2.0 billion in commitments with $784 million in outstanding loans as of December 31, 2020. Certain of these loans are collateralized and included in our CRE portfolio while the remaining loans are unsecured and included in our C&I portfolio.
As of December 31, 2020, our CRE portfolio included $210 million of SNCs and one leveraged lending loan of $4 million. The SNC portfolio had fifteen borrowers with an average amortized cost of $14 million and an average commitment of $20 million. There were no nonperforming SNC or leveraged loans as of December 31, 2020, and no SNC or leveraged loans outstanding were rated as special mention or substandard.
The following table presents amortized cost of our total CRE LHFI by collateral location and collateral type:
(1)Includes multipurpose retail space, neighborhood centers, shopping centers and single-use retail space.
(2)Loans secured by land. Land residential includes development and unimproved vacant land.
(3)Loans secured by 1-4 single family residence properties.
(4)All other primarily includes: mini-storage facilities, data centers, movie theaters, etc.
Commercial and industrial loans. Commercial and industrial LHFI facilities typically include lines of credit and term loans and leases to businesses for use in normal business operations to finance working capital, equipment and capital purchases, acquisitions and expansion projects. We lend to customers with a history of profitability and a long-term business model. Generally, leverage conforms to industry standards and the minimum debt service coverage is 1.20 times. The majority of our C&I loans earn interest at a variable rate.
As of December 31, 2020, our C&I portfolio included $665 million of SNCs. We are the lead bank on 22 percent of the SNCs. The services sector and the financial and insurance sector comprised the majority of the portfolio's amortized cost with 22 and 43 percent of the balance, respectively. The SNC portfolio had forty-six borrowers with an average amortized cost of $15 million and an average commitment of $27 million. There were no NPLs or loans rated as special mention as of December 31, 2020, and loans totaling $26 million of amortized cost were rated as substandard.
As of December 31, 2020, our C&I portfolio included $344 million of leveraged lending, of which $223 million were SNCs. The manufacturing sector comprised 48 percent of the leveraged lending portfolio, and the financial and insurance sector comprised 25 percent. As of December 31, 2020, there were two NPLs totaling $15 million, one special mention loan totaling $9 million and four substandard loans totaling $30 million. Included in the financial and insurance sector within our C&I portfolio are $132 million in loans outstanding to 4 borrowers that are collateralized by MSR assets. Our amounts outstanding to those borrowers range from $6 million to $74 million and the ratio of the loan outstanding to the fair market value of the collateral ranges from 9 percent to 45 percent.
The following table presents amortized cost of our total C&I LHFI by borrower's geographic location and industry type as defined by North American Industry Classification System:
Warehouse lending. We have a national platform with relationship managers across the country. We offer warehouse lines of credit to other mortgage lenders which allow the lender to fund the closing of residential mortgage loans. Each extension, advance, or draw-down on the line is fully collateralized by residential mortgage loans and is paid off when the lender sells the loan to an outside investor or, in some instances, to the Bank. In response to COVID-19, we have increased credit requirements for government loans and lowered the advance rate for loans that we believe have higher risk, as well as not accepting jumbo or non-qualified mortgage loans as collateral.
Underlying mortgage loans are predominantly originated using the Agencies' underwriting standards. The guideline for debt to tangible net worth is 15 to 1. The aggregate committed amount of adjustable-rate warehouse lines of credit granted to other mortgage lenders at December 31, 2020 was $10.5 billion, of which $7.7 billion was outstanding, compared to $4.8 billion at December 31, 2019, of which $2.8 billion was outstanding.
Loan Principal Payments
The following tables set forth the expected repayment of our LHFI, both as fixed rate and adjustable-rate loans:
(1)UPB, net of write downs, does not include premiums or discounts.
Credit Quality
Our focus on effectively managing credit risk through our careful underwriting standards and processes has resulted in strong trends in certain credit quality characteristics in our loan portfolios. The credit quality of our loan portfolios is demonstrated by low delinquency levels, minimal charge-offs and low levels of NPLs.
For all loan categories within the consumer and commercial loan portfolio, loans are placed on nonaccrual status when any portion of principal or interest is 90 days past due (or nonperforming), or earlier when we become aware of information indicating that collection of principal and interest is in doubt. While it is the goal of Management to collect on loans, we attempt to work out a satisfactory repayment schedule or modification with past due borrowers and will undertake foreclosure proceedings if the delinquency is not satisfactorily resolved. Our practices regarding past due loans are designed to both assist borrowers in meeting their contractual obligations and minimize losses incurred by the Bank. When a loan is placed on nonaccrual status, the accrued interest income is reversed. Loans return to accrual status when principal and interest become current and are anticipated to be fully collectible.
Nonperforming assets
The following table sets forth our nonperforming assets:
(1)Includes less than 90 day past due performing loans placed on nonaccrual. Interest is not being accrued on these loans.
(2)Ratio excludes LHFS, which are recorded at fair value.
At December 31, 2020, we had $73 million of nonperforming assets compared to $41 million of nonperforming assets at December 31, 2019.
The following table sets forth activity related to our total nonperforming LHFI and TDRs:
(1)Includes less than 90 day past due performing loans which are deemed nonaccrual. Interest is not being accrued on these loans.
Delinquencies
The following table sets forth loans 30-89 days past due in our LHFI portfolio:
Loans 30 to 89 days past due were $37 million and $14 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
For further information see Note 4 - Loans Held-for-Investment.
Payment Deferrals
Beginning in March 2020, as a response to COVID-19, we offered our consumer borrowers principal and interest payment deferrals, forbearance and/or extensions. Consumer borrowers were not required to provide proof of hardship to be granted forbearance or payment deferral. Typically, payment history is the primary tool used to identify consumer borrowers who are experiencing financial difficulty. Forbearance or payment deferrals make this determination more challenging. In addition, consumer borrowers who have requested forbearance or payment deferrals are not being aged and remain in the aging category they were in prior to forbearance or payment deferral.
The table below summarizes borrowers in our consumer loan portfolios that are in forbearance or were granted a payment deferral:
As of December 31, 2020, commercial borrowers requested and were granted $22 million of payment deferrals, and, of that amount, $14 million are deferrals of both principal and interest payments and $8 million are deferrals of principal only. Commercial borrowers who have requested payment deferrals are not being aged and remain in the aging category they were in prior to payment deferral.
The table below summarizes borrowers in our commercial loan portfolios that have requested and received payment deferral:
(1)Percent shown excludes warehouse loans.
The table below summarizes the percent of our residential loan servicing portfolio in forbearance as of December 31, 2020:
(1)UPB, net of write downs, does not include premiums or discounts.
(2)Loans subserviced for a fee for non-Flagstar owned loans or MSRs. Includes temporary short-term subservicing performed as a result of sales of servicing-released MSRs.
(3)Loans for which Flagstar owns the MSR.
(4)Of the $1.9 billion of GNMA repurchase options on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2020, $1.8 billion relates to loans in forbearance and are included in remaining borrowers.
(5)Includes LHFI (residential first mortgage, home equity and other consumer), LHFS (residential first mortgage), and LGG (residential first mortgage).
The table below summarizes the percent of our residential loan servicing portfolio in forbearance as of September 30, 2020:
(1) UPB, net of write downs, does not include premiums or discounts.
(2) Loans subserviced for a fee for non-Flagstar owned loans or MSRs. Includes temporary short-term subservicing performed as a result of sales of servicing-released MSRs.
(3) Loans for which Flagstar owns the MSR.
(4) Of the $1.8 billion of GNMA repurchase options on the balance sheet as of September 30, 2020, $1.7 billion relates to loans in forbearance and are included in remaining borrowers.
(5) Includes LHFI (residential first mortgage, home equity and other consumer), LHFS (residential first mortgage), LGG (residential first mortgage), and repossessed assets.
As the MSR owner for loans serviced for others, the Agencies require us to advance payments on past due loans as follows:
We believe that we have ample liquidity to handle servicing advances related to these loans. We initially provide advances on a short-term basis for loans we subservice and are reimbursed by the MSR owner. Our advance receivable for our subserviced loans is therefore insignificant.
Troubled debt restructurings (held-for-investment)
TDRs are modified loans in which a borrower demonstrates financial difficulties and for which a concession has been granted as a result. Nonperforming TDRs are included in nonaccrual loans. TDRs remain in nonperforming status until a borrower has made payments and is current for at least six consecutive months. Performing TDRs are not considered to be nonaccrual so long as we believe that all contractual principal and interest due under the restructured terms will be collected.
Beginning in March 2020, as a response to COVID-19, we offered our consumer and commercial customers principal and interest payment deferrals and extensions. We considered these programs in the context of whether or not the short-term modifications of these loans would constitute a TDR. We considered the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act"), interagency guidance and related guidance from the FASB, which provided that short-term modifications made on a good faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were current prior to any relief are not required to be accounted for as TDRs. As a result, we have determined that these loans are not TDRs. We believe our application of the referenced guidance and accounting for these programs is appropriate.
The following table sets forth a summary of TDRs by performing status:
At December 31, 2020, our total TDR loans decreased to $46 million compared to $48 million at December 31, 2019, primarily due to principal payments and payoffs out-pacing new additions. Of our total TDR loans, 77 percent were in performing status at December 31, 2020. For further information, see Note 4 - Loans Held-for-Investment.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The ACL represents Management's estimate of lifetime losses in our LHFI portfolio but which have not yet been realized. For further information, see Note 1 - Description of Business, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Standards and Note 4 - Loans Held-for-Investment.
The following tables present the changes in the ACL balance for the year ended December 31, 2020:
(1) Excludes loans carried under the fair value option.
(2) Includes changes in the lifetime loss rate based on current economic forecasts as compared to forecasts used in the prior quarter.
(3) Includes changes in the probability of default and severity of default based on current borrower and guarantor characteristics, as well as individually evaluated reserves.
(4) Includes $7 million of unallocated reserve attributed to various portfolios for presentation purposes.
The ACL was $280 million at December 31, 2020 and $110 million at December 31, 2019. We adopted CECL on January 1, 2020. The increase in the allowance during 2020 is primarily reflective of changes in our economic forecast and judgment we applied related to those forecasts and underlying borrower credit as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We utilized the Moody’s December scenarios in our forecast: a growth forecast, weighted at 30 percent; a baseline forecast, weighted at 40 percent; and an adverse forecast, weighted at 30 percent. Within our composite forecast, unemployment increases slightly in 2021 and begins recovering in 2022. GDP recovers slightly by the end of the year from current levels and does not return to near pre-COVID level until 2024. Median existing home prices decrease 1 percent in 2021 from their year-end highs as of December 31, 2020. We judgmentally increased the qualitative reserves by $74 million, guided by the model output from Moody's adverse scenario, our judgment relating to industries and borrowers we believe could be more exposed to the stressful conditions in our forecast, uncertainty related to loans in forbearance and our judgment regarding economic uncertainty including the impact additional government stimulus.
The ACL as a percentage of LHFI was 1.7 percent as of December 31, 2020 compared to 0.9 percent as of December 31, 2019. Excluding warehouse, the allowance as a percentage of LHFI was 3.2 percent at December 31, 2020 compared to 1.1 percent at December 31, 2019. The increase in the allowance, as a percentage of LHFI is reflective of the additional increases to the allowance to reflect the change in economic and credit forecast used during that period. At December 31, 2020, we had a 2.8 percent and 1.4 percent allowance coverage on our consumer loan portfolio and our commercial loan portfolio, respectively.
The following tables set forth certain information regarding the allocation of our allowance to each loan category, including the allowance amount as a percentage of amortized cost and average loan life:
(1) Excludes loans carried under the fair value option.
(2) Includes allowance for loan losses and reserve for unfunded commitments.
(1) Excludes loans carried under the fair value option.
(2) Includes allowance for loan losses and reserve for unfunded commitments.
The following tables set forth certain information regarding nonaccrual loans, including the allowance amount as a percentage of nonaccruals:
(1) Loan portfolio excludes loans carried under the fair value option.
(2) Allowance includes allowance for loan losses and reserve for unfunded commitments.
(3) The delinquency status for loans in forbearance are frozen for loans at inception of the forbearance period and will resume when the borrower's forbearance period ends.
Nonaccrual loans as a percentage of LHFI was 0.3 percent as of December 31, 2020 compared to 0.2 percent as of December 31, 2019. The increase in nonaccrual loan percentage is consistent with the increase in nonaccrual loans related to worsening economic conditions, offset by growth in the LHFI portfolio.
The following tables set forth certain information regarding net charge-offs and net charge-offs as a percentage of amortized cost:
Net charge-offs as a percentage of LHFI was 0.1 percent as of December 31, 2020, compared to 0.4 percent as of December 31, 2019. The decrease in net charge-offs is primarily the result of the Live Well commercial loan charge-off in the second quarter of 2019 along with growth in the average LHFI portfolio.
Market Risk
Market risk is the risk of reduced earnings and/or declines in the net market value of the balance sheet due to changes in market rates. Our primary market risk is interest rate risk which impacts our net interest income, fee income related to interest sensitive activities such as mortgage closing and servicing income, and loan and deposit demand.
We are subject to interest rate risk due to:
•The maturity or repricing of assets and liabilities at different times or for different amounts
•Differences in short-term and long-term market interest rate changes
•The remaining maturity of various assets or liabilities may shorten or lengthen as interest rates change
Our ALCO, which is composed of our executive officers and certain members of other management, monitors interest rate risk on an ongoing basis in accordance with policies approved by our Board of Directors. The ALCO reviews interest rate positions and considers the impact projected interest rate scenarios have on earnings, capital, liquidity, business strategies, and other factors. However, Management has the latitude to change interest rate positions within certain limits if, in Management's judgment, the change will enhance profitability or minimize risk.
To assess and manage interest rate risk, sensitivity analysis is used to determine the impact on earnings and the net market value of the balance sheet across various interest rate scenarios, balance sheet trends, and strategies.
Net interest income sensitivity
Management uses a simulation model to analyze the sensitivity of net interest income to changes in interest rates across various interest rate scenarios which demonstrates the level of interest rate risk inherent in the existing balance sheet. The analysis holds the current balance sheet values constant and does not take into account management intervention. In addition, we assume certain correlation rates, often referred to as a “deposit beta”, for interest-bearing deposits, wherein the rates paid to customers change relative to changes in benchmark interest rates. The effect on net interest income over a 12-month time horizon due to hypothetical changes in market interest rates is presented in the table below. In this interest rate shock simulation, as of the periods presented, interest rates have been adjusted by instantaneous parallel changes rather than in a ramp simulation which applies interest rate changes over time. All rates, short-term and long-term, are changed by the same amount (e.g. plus or minus 100 basis points) resulting in the shape of the yield curve remaining unchanged.
In the net interest income simulations, our balance sheet exhibits asset sensitivity. When interest rates rise our net interest income increases. Conversely, when interest rates fall our net interest income decreases. At December 31, 2020, the $138 million increase in net interest income in the constant scenario as compared to that at December 31, 2019, was primarily driven by the growth in our interest earning assets partially offset by lower short-term market rates.
The net interest income sensitivity analysis has certain limitations and makes various assumptions. Key elements of this interest rate risk exposure assessment include maintaining a static balance sheet and parallel rate shocks. Future interest rates not moving in a parallel manner across the yield curve, how the balance sheet will respond and shift based on a change in future interest rates and how the Company will respond are not included in this analysis and limit the predictive value of these scenarios.
Economic value of equity
Management also utilizes EVE, a point in time analysis of the economic value of our current balance sheet position, which measures interest rate risk over a longer term. The EVE calculation represents a hypothetical valuation of equity, and is defined as the market value of assets, less the market value of liabilities, adjusted for the market value of off-balance sheet instruments. The assessment of both the short-term earnings (Net Interest Income Sensitivity) and long-term valuation (EVE) approaches, rather than Net Interest Income Sensitivity alone provides a more comprehensive analysis of interest rate risk exposure.
There are assumptions and inherent limitations in any methodology used to estimate the exposure to changes in market interest rates and as such, sensitivity calculations used in this analysis are hypothetical and should not be considered to be predictive of future results. This analysis evaluates risks to the current balance sheet only and does not incorporate future growth assumptions. Additionally, the analysis assumes interest rate changes are instantaneous and the new rate environment is constant but does not include actions Management may undertake to manage risk in response to interest rate changes. Each rate scenario reflects unique prepayment and repricing assumptions. Management derives these assumptions by considering published market prepayment expectations, repricing characteristics, our historical experience, and our asset and liability management strategy. This analysis assumes that changes in interest rates may not affect or could partially affect certain instruments based on their characteristics.
The following table is a summary of the changes in our EVE that are projected to result from hypothetical changes in market interest rates as well as our internal policy limits for changes in our EVE based on the different scenarios. The interest rates, as of the dates presented, are adjusted by instantaneous parallel rate increases and decreases as indicated in the scenarios shown in the table below.
Our balance sheet exhibits asset sensitivity in various interest rate scenarios. The increase in EVE as rates raise is the result of the amount of assets that would be expected to reprice exceeding the amount of liabilities repriced. This increased as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 due to the addition of pay fixed interest rate swaps. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, for each scenario shown, the percentage change in our EVE is within our Board policy limits.
Derivative financial instruments
As a part of our risk management strategy, we use derivative financial instruments to minimize fluctuation in earnings caused by market risk. We use forward sales commitments to hedge our unclosed mortgage closing pipeline and funded mortgage LHFS. All of our derivatives and mortgage loan production originated for sale are accounted for at fair market value. Changes to our unclosed mortgage closing pipeline are based on changes in fair value of the underlying loan, which is impacted most significantly by changes in interest rates and changes in the probability that the loan will not fund within the terms of the commitment, referred to as a fallout factor or, inversely, a pull-through rate. Market risk on interest rate lock commitments and mortgage LHFS is managed using corresponding forward sale commitments. The adequacy of these hedging strategies, and the ability to fully or partially hedge market risk, rely on various assumptions or projections, including a fallout factor, which is based on a statistical analysis of our actual rate lock fallout history. For further information, see Note 11 - Derivative Financial Instruments and Note 20 - Fair Value Measurements.
Mortgage Servicing Rights (MSRs)
Our MSRs are sensitive to interest rate volatility and are highly susceptible to prepayment risk, basis risk, market volatility and changes in the shape of the yield curve. We utilize derivatives, including interest rate swaps and swaptions, as part of our overall hedging strategy to manage the impact of changes in the fair value of the MSRs, however these risk management strategies do not completely eliminate repricing risk. Our hedging strategies rely on assumptions and projections regarding assets and general market factors, many of which are outside of our control. For further information, see Note 10 - Mortgage Servicing Rights and Note 11 - Derivative Financial Instruments.
(1)Servicing fees are recorded on an accrual basis. Ancillary income and late fees are recorded on a cash basis.
(2)Changes in the derivatives utilized as economic hedges to offset changes in fair value of the MSRs.
Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that we will not have sufficient funds, at a reasonable cost, to meet current and future cash flow needs as they become due. The liquidity of a financial institution reflects the ability to, at a reasonable cost, meet loan demand, to accommodate possible outflows in deposits and to take advantage of interest rate and market opportunities. The ability of a financial institution to meet current financial obligations is a function of the balance sheet structure, the ability to liquidate assets, and access to various sources of funds.
Parent Company Liquidity
The Company currently obtains its liquidity primarily from dividends from the Bank. The primary uses of the Company's liquidity are debt service, operating expenses and the payment of cash dividends to shareholders, which were increased to $0.06 per share in the first quarter 2021. The Company held $250 million of senior notes at December 31, 2020 for which we provided notice that we would be redeeming these outstanding notes on December 23, 2020 and settled on January 22, 2021. The Company holds $150 million of subordinated debt which is scheduled to mature on November 1, 2030. At December 31, 2020, the Company held $305 million of cash on deposit at the Bank, for approximately 1.4 years of future cash outflows for an amount sufficient to service the senior notes, repay the senior notes at maturity, pay dividends and cover the operating expenses of the Company.
The OCC and the FRB regulate all capital distributions made by the Bank, directly or indirectly, to the holding company, including dividend payments. Whether an application or notice is required is based on a number of factors including whether the institution qualifies for expedited treatment under the OCC rules and regulations or if the total amount of all capital distributions (including each proposed capital distribution) for the applicable calendar year exceeds net income for that year to date plus the retained net income for the preceding two years, or the Bank would not be at least adequately capitalized following the dividend. Additional restrictions on dividends apply if the Bank fails the QTL test. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank is in compliance with the QTL test. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank is able to pay dividends to the holding company of approximately $387 million without submitting an application to the OCC and remain well capitalized.
Bank Liquidity
Our primary sources of funding are deposits from retail and government customers, custodial deposits related to loans we service and FHLB borrowings. We use the FHLB of Indianapolis as a significant source for funding our residential mortgage origination business due to the flexibility in terms which allows us to borrow or repay borrowings as daily cash needs require. The amount we can borrow, or the value we receive for the assets pledged to our liquidity providers, varies based on the amount and type of pledged collateral, as well as the perceived market value of the assets and the "haircut" of the market
value of the assets. That value is sensitive to the pricing and policies of our liquidity providers and can change with little or no notice.
Further, other sources of liquidity include our LHFS portfolio and unencumbered investment securities. We primarily originate agency-eligible LHFS and therefore the majority of new residential first mortgage loan closings are readily convertible to cash, either by selling them as part of our monthly agency sales, RMBS, private party whole loan sales, or by pledging them to the FHLB and borrowing against them. In addition, we have the ability to sell unencumbered investment securities or use them as collateral. At December 31, 2020, we had $2.2 billion available in unencumbered investment securities.
Our primary measure of liquidity is a ratio of ready liquidity to volatile funding, the volatile funds coverage ratio (“VFCR”). The VFCR is a liquidity coverage ratio that is customized to our business and ensures we have adequate coverage to meet our liquidity needs during times of liquidity stress. Volatile funds are the portion of the Bank’s funding identified as being at a higher risk of runoff in times of stress. Ready liquidity consists of cash on reserve at the Federal Reserve and unused borrowing capacity provided by the loan and investments portfolios. The VFCR is calculated, reported, and forecasted daily as part of our liquidity management framework and was within internal policy compliance at 90 percent as of December 31, 2020.
Our liquidity position is continuously monitored and adjustments are made to the balance between sources and uses of funds as deemed appropriate. We balance the liquidity of our loan assets to our available funding sources. Our LHFI portfolio is funded with stable core deposits whereas our warehouse loans and LHFS may be funded with FHLB borrowings and custodial deposits. Warehouse loans are typically more liquid than other loan assets, as loans are paid within a short amount of time, when the lender sells the loan to an outside investor or, in some instances, to the Bank. As not all asset categories require the same level of liquidity, our loan-to-deposit ratio shows how we manage our liquidity position, how much liquidity we have and the agility of our balance sheet. The Company's average HFI loan-to-deposit ratio was 74.5 percent for the three months ended December 31, 2020. Excluding warehouse loans, which have draws that typically pay off within a few weeks, and custodial deposits, which represent mortgage escrow accounts on deposit with the Bank, the average HFI loan-to-deposit ratio was 69.8 percent for the three months ended December 31, 2020.
As governed and defined by our policy, we maintain adequate excess liquidity levels appropriate to cover unanticipated liquidity needs. In addition to this liquidity, we also maintain targeted minimum levels of unused borrowing capacity as another cushion against unexpected liquidity needs. Each business day, we forecast 90 days of daily cash needs. This allows us to determine our projected near-term daily cash fluctuations and also to plan and adjust, if necessary, future activities. As a result, in an adverse environment, we believe we would be able to make adjustments to operations as required to meet the liquidity needs of our business, including adjusting deposit rates to increase deposits, planning for additional FHLB borrowings, accelerating sales of LHFS (agencies and/or private), selling LHFI or investment securities, borrowing through the use of repurchase agreements, reducing closings, making changes to warehouse funding facilities, or borrowing from the discount window.
The following table presents primary sources of funding as of the dates indicated:
The following table presents certain liquidity sources and borrowing capacity as of the dates indicated:
(1) These are not currently pledged to the FHLB but are eligible to be pledged, at our discretion.
Deposits
The following table presents the composition of our deposits:
(1)The aggregate amount of certificates of deposit with a minimum denomination of $100,000 was approximately $1.3 billion, $1.7 billion, and $1.9 billion at December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019, and December 31, 2018 respectively.
(2)Contains deposits from commercial and business banking customers.
(3)Represents investor custodial accounts and escrows controlled by us in connection with loans serviced or subserviced for others and that have been placed on deposit with the Bank.
(4)Total exposure related to uninsured deposits over $250,000 was approximately $5.9 billion and $2.8 billion at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Total deposits increased $4.8 billion, or 32 percent, at December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019, primarily driven by growth in our servicing business which resulted in a $3.1 billion increase in custodial deposits.
We utilize local governmental agencies and other public units as an additional source for deposit funding. At December 31, 2020, we were required to hold collateral for certain Michigan, California, Indiana, Wisconsin and Ohio government deposits based on a variety of factors including, but not limited to, the size of individual deposits, FDIC limits and external bank ratings. At December 31, 2020, required collateral held on government deposits was $0.1 billion. At December 31, 2020, government deposit accounts included $0.5 billion of certificates of deposit with maturities typically less than one year and $1.3 billion of checking and savings accounts.
Custodial deposits arise due to our servicing or subservicing of loans for others and represent the portion of the investor custodial accounts on deposit with the Bank. For certain subservice agreements, these deposits require us to credit the MSR owner interest against subservicing income. This cost is a component of net loan administration income.
We participate in the CDARS program, through which certain customer CDs are exchanged for CDs of similar amounts from other participating banks and customers may receive FDIC insurance up to $50 million. This program helps the Bank secure larger deposits and attract and retain customers. At December 31, 2020, we had $124 million of total CDs enrolled in the CDARS program, a decrease of $9 million from December 31, 2019.
FHLB Advances
The FHLB provides loans, also referred to as advances, on a fully collateralized basis, to savings banks and other member financial institutions. We are required to maintain a minimum amount of qualifying collateral securing FHLB advances. In the event of default, the FHLB advance is similar to a secured borrowing, whereby the FHLB has the right to sell the pledged collateral to settle the fair value of the outstanding advances.
We rely upon advances from the FHLB as a source of funding for the closing or purchase of loans for sale in the secondary market and for providing duration specific short-term and long-term financing. The outstanding balance of FHLB advances fluctuates from time to time depending on our current inventory of mortgage LHFS and the availability of lower cost funding sources. Our portfolio includes short-term fixed rate advances and long-term fixed rate advances.
We are currently authorized through a resolution of our Board of Directors to apply for advances from the FHLB using approved loan types as collateral, which includes residential first mortgage loans, home equity lines of credit, and commercial real estate loans. As of December 31, 2020, our Board of Directors authorized and approved a line of credit with the FHLB of up to $10.0 billion, which is further limited based on our total assets and qualified collateral, as determined by the FHLB. At December 31, 2020, we had $4.6 billion of advances outstanding and an additional $2.4 billion of collateralized borrowing capacity available at the FHLB.
Federal Reserve Discount Window
We have arrangements with the FRB of Chicago to borrow from its discount window. The discount window is a borrowing facility that we may utilize for short-term liquidity needs arising from special or unusual circumstances. The amount we are allowed to borrow is based on the lendable value of the collateral that we provide. To collateralize the line, we pledge investment securities and loans that are eligible based on FRB of Chicago guidelines.
At December 31, 2020, we pledged collateral, which included commercial loans, municipal bonds, and agency bonds, to the FRB of Chicago amounting to $1.9 billion with a lendable value of $1.4 billion. At December 31, 2019, we pledged collateral to the FRB of Chicago amounting to $788 million with a lendable value of $758 million. We do not typically utilize this available funding source, and at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had no borrowings outstanding against this line of credit.
Other Unsecured Borrowings
We have access to overnight federal funds purchased lines with other Federal Reserve member institutions. We utilize this source of funding for short-term liquidity needs, depending on the availability and cost of our other funding sources. At December 31, 2020, we had $485 million of borrowings outstanding under this source of funding. Additional borrowing capacity under this and other sources of funding can vary depending on market conditions.
Debt
As part of our overall capital strategy, we previously raised capital through the issuance of junior subordinated notes to our special purpose trusts formed for the offerings, which issued Tier 1 qualifying preferred stock ("trust preferred securities"). The trust preferred securities are callable by us at any time. Interest is payable on a quarterly basis; however, we may defer interest payments for up to 20 quarters without default or penalty. At December 31, 2020, we are current on all interest payments. Additionally, we have $246 million of senior debt outstanding at December 31, 2020 (“Senior Notes”) for which we provided notice of redemption on December 23, 2020 and settled on January 22, 2021, and $150 million of subordinated debt (the "Notes"), which matures on November 1, 2030.
For further information, see Note 13 - Borrowings.
Contractual Obligations
We have various financial obligations, some of which are contractual obligations, which require future cash payments. For further information on each item, see Note 1 - Description of Business, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Standards, Note 9 - Premises and Equipment, Note 12 - Deposit Accounts and Note 13 - Borrowings.
The following table summarizes contractual obligations at December 31, 2020, and the future periods in which the obligations are expected to be settled in cash:
(1) Includes contracts with vendors and commitments to various limited partnerships that invest in housing projects qualifying for the low income housing tax credit.
(2) We provided notice that we would be redeeming the senior notes in December 2020 and settled the senior notes in January 2021.
Operational Risk
Operational risk is the risk to current or projected financial condition and resilience arising from inadequate or failed internal processes or systems, human errors or misconduct, or adverse external events which may include vendor failures, fraudulent activities, disasters, and security risks. We continuously strive to adapt our system of internal controls to ensure compliance with laws, rules, and regulations, and to improve the oversight of our operational risk.
We evaluate internal systems, processes and controls to mitigate loss from cyber-attacks and, to date, have not experienced any material losses. The goal of this framework is to implement effective operational risk techniques and strategies, minimize operational and fraud losses, and enhance our overall performance.
Loans with Government Guarantees
Substantially all of our LGG continue to be insured or guaranteed by the FHA or the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs ("VA"). In the event of a government guaranteed loan borrower default, the Bank has a unilateral option to repurchase loans sold to GNMA that are 90 days past due and recover losses through a claims process from the insurer. Nonperforming repurchased loans in this portfolio earn interest at a rate based upon the 10-year U.S. Treasury note rate from the time the underlying loan becomes delinquent, which is not paid by the FHA until claimed. Additionally, if the Bank cures the loan, it can be re-sold to GNMA. If not, the Bank can begin the process of collecting the government guarantee by filing a claim in accordance with established guidelines. Certain loans within our portfolio may be subject to indemnifications and insurance limits which expose us to limited credit risk.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had less than $2.8 million in net charge-offs related to LGG and have reserved for the remaining risks within other assets and as a component of our allowance for loan losses on residential first mortgages. These additional expenses or charges arise due to insurance limits on VA insured loans and FHA property foreclosure and preservation requirements that may result in a loss in excess of all, or part of, the guarantee.
Our LGG portfolio totaled $2.5 billion at December 31, 2020, as compared to $0.7 billion at December 31, 2019. GNMA has granted borrowers with an option to seek forbearances on their mortgage repayments. $2.5 billion of GNMA loans are in forbearance as of December 31, 2020. When a GNMA loan is due, but unpaid, for three consecutive months (typically referred to as 90 days past due) the loan is required to be re-recognized on the balance sheet by the MSR owner. These loans are recorded in loans with government guarantees, and the liability to repurchase the loans is recorded in loans with government guarantees repurchase options on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition. This resulted in $1.9 billion of repurchase options as of December 31, 2020, a $1.8 billion increase from December 31, 2019. We have elected not to exercise these repurchase options as of December 31, 2020 because loans are not able to be modified and re-sold during the forbearance period. Our right to repurchase these loans continues as long as they remain unpaid for three consecutive months. At the
prudent time, we intend to repurchase the loans which we believe will be accretive to net income by modifying and re-selling the loans or utilizing the partial claims process.
For further information, see Note 5 - Loans with Government Guarantees and the Credit Risk - Payment Deferrals section of the MD&A.
Regulatory Risks
Department of Justice Settlement Agreement
On February 24, 2012, the Bank entered into a Settlement Agreement with the DOJ under which we made an initial payment of $15 million and agreed to make future payments totaling $118 million in annual increments of up to $25 million upon meeting all of the following conditions which are evaluated quarterly and include: (a) the reversal of the DTA valuation allowance, which occurred at the end of 2013; (b) the repayment of the Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series C (the "TARP Preferred"), which occurred in July 2016; and (c) the Bank having a Tier 1 Leverage Capital Ratio of 11 percent or greater as filed in the Call Report with the OCC. At December 31, 2020, the Company had a Tier 1 Leverage Capital Ratio of 8.12 percent and the fair value of this liability was $35 million.
No payment would be required until six months after the Bank files its Call Report first reporting that its Tier 1 Leverage Capital Ratio was 11 percent or greater. If all other conditions were then satisfied, an initial annual payment of $25 million would be due at that time. The next annual payment is only made if all conditions continue to be satisfied, otherwise payments are delayed until all such conditions are again met. Further, making such a payment must not violate any material banking regulatory requirement, and the OCC must not object in writing.
The combination of (a) future dividends from the Bank to Bancorp and (b) continued growth in earning assets at the Bank are expected to continue to limit the growth rate of the Bank’s Tier 1 Leverage Capital Ratio, which could have an impact on the timing of expected cash flows under the Settlement Agreement.
Consistent with most mid-size banks, we expect our Tier 1 Leverage Capital Ratio to be impacted by (a) future dividends from the Bank to Bancorp and (b) continued growth in earning assets at the Bank which could have an impact on the timing of expected cash flows under the Settlement Agreement.
Consistent with our business and regulatory requirements, Flagstar shall seek in good faith to fulfill the conditions, and will not undertake any conduct or fail to take any action the purpose of which is to frustrate or delay our ability to fulfill any of the conditions.
Additionally, if the Bank or Bancorp become party to a business combination in which the Bank and Bancorp represent less than 33.3 percent of the resulting company’s assets, annual payments would commence twelve months after the date of that business combination.
The Settlement Agreement meets the definition of a financial instrument for which we elected the fair value option. We consider the assumptions a market participant would make to transfer the liability and evaluate the potential ways we might satisfy the Settlement Agreement and our estimates of the likelihood of these outcomes, which may change over time. The fair value of the liability is subject to significant uncertainty and is impacted by forecasted estimates of the timing of potential payments, which are impacted by estimates of equity, earnings, timing and amount of dividends and growth of the balance sheet and their related impacts on forecasted Tier 1 Leverage Capital Ratio, the likelihood of the Bank or Bancorp being a party to a business combination resulting in terms which would require payments to commence, or any other means by which a payment could be made. While the Settlement Agreement remains outstanding we are exposed to the risk of further litigation, reputational risk and operational risk related to our ongoing business relationships and discussions from time to time to resolve the Settlement Agreement. For further information on the fair value to the liability, see Note 20 - Fair Value Measurements.
Representation and Warranty Reserve
When we sell mortgage loans, we make customary representations and warranties to the purchasers, including sponsored securitization trusts and their insurers (primarily Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac). An estimate of the fair value of the guarantee associated with the mortgage loans is recorded in other liabilities in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition, which was $7 million and $5 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Capital
Management actively reviews and manages our capital position and strategy. We conduct quarterly capital stress tests and capital adequacy assessments which utilize internally defined scenarios. These analyses are designed to help Management and the Board better understand the integrated sensitivity of various risk exposures through quantifying the potential financial and capital impacts of hypothetical stressful events and scenarios. We make adjustments to our balance sheet composition taking into consideration potential business risks, regulatory requirements and the flexibility to support future growth. We prudently manage our capital position and work with our regulators to ensure that our capital levels are appropriate considering our risk profile.
The capital standards we are subject to include requirements contemplated by the Dodd-Frank Act as well as guidelines reached by Basel III. These risk-based capital adequacy guidelines are intended to measure capital adequacy with regard to a banking organization’s balance sheet, including off-balance sheet exposures such as unused portions of loan commitments, letters of credit, and recourse arrangements. Our capital ratios are maintained at levels in excess of those considered to be "well-capitalized" by regulators. Tier 1 leverage was 7.71 percent at December 31, 2020, providing a 271 basis point stress buffer above the minimum level needed to be considered “well-capitalized.” Additionally, total risk-based capital to RWA was 11.89 percent at December 31, 2020, providing a 189 basis point buffer above the minimum level needed to be considered "well-capitalized".
Dodd-Frank Act Section 171, commonly known as the Collins Amendment, established minimum Tier 1 leverage and risk-based capital requirements for insured depository institutions, depository institution holding companies, and non-bank financial companies that are supervised under the Federal Reserve. Under the amendment, certain hybrid securities, such as trust preferred securities, may be included in Tier 1 capital for bank holding companies that had total assets below $15 billion as of December 31, 2009. As we were below $15 billion in assets as of December 31, 2009, the trust preferred securities classified as long-term debt on our balance sheet will be included as Tier 1 capital, unless we complete an acquisition of a depository institution holding company or a depository institution and we report total assets greater than $15 billion in the quarter in which the acquisition occurs. Should that event occur, our trust preferred securities would be included in Tier 2 capital.
Regulatory Capital
The Bank and Flagstar are subject to the Basel III-based U.S. rules, including capital simplification in 2020.
On March 27, 2020, in response to COVID-19, U.S. banking regulators issued an interim final rule that allows banking organizations the option to delay the initial adoption impact of CECL on regulatory capital for two years followed by a three-year transition period. During the two-year delay we will add back to CET1 capital 100 percent of the initial adoption impact of CECL plus 25 percent of the cumulative quarterly changes in the ACL (i.e., quarterly transitional amounts). After two years, starting on January 1, 2022, the quarterly transitional amounts along with the initial adoption impact of CECL will be phased out of CET1 capital over the three-year period.
For the period presented, the following table sets forth our capital ratios, as well as our excess capital over well-capitalized minimums.
As presented in the table above, our constraining capital ratio is our total capital to risk weighted assets at 11.89 percent. It would take a $419 million after-tax loss, with the balance sheet remaining constant, for our total risk-based capital ratio to fall below the level considered to be "well-capitalized".
As of December 31, 2020, we had $329 million in MSRs, $92 million in DTAs arising from temporary differences and no material investments in unconsolidated financial institutions or minority interest which drive differences between our current capital ratios. For additional information on our capital requirements, see Note 18 - Regulatory Capital.
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to results presented in accordance with GAAP, this report includes certain non-GAAP financial measures. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures provide additional information that is useful to investors in helping to understand the underlying performance and trends of the Company.
Non-GAAP financial measures have inherent limitations, which are not required to be uniformly applied and are not audited. Readers should be aware of these limitations and should be cautious with respect to the use of such measures. To mitigate these limitations, we have practices in place to ensure that these measures are calculated using the appropriate GAAP or regulatory components in their entirety and to ensure that our performance is properly reflected to facilitate consistent period-to-period comparisons. Our method of calculating these non-GAAP measures may differ from methods used by other companies. Although we believe the non-GAAP financial measures disclosed in this report enhance investors' understanding of our business and performance, these non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for those financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Where non-GAAP financial measures are used, the most directly comparable GAAP or regulatory financial measure, as well as the reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP or regulatory financial measure, can be found in this report.
Tangible book value per share, adjusted net income, adjusted diluted earnings per share, adjusted net interest income, adjusted net interest margin, adjusted average interest-bearing liability, adjusted interest rate spread, adjusted noninterest expense, adjusted return on average assets, and adjusted return on average tangible common equity. The Company believes that these non-GAAP financial measures provide a meaningful representation of its operating performance on an ongoing basis for investors, securities analysts, and others. Management uses these measures to assess performance of the Company against its peers and evaluate overall performance.
The following tables provide a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures.
Accounting and Reporting Developments
Adoption of New Accounting Standards - Credit Losses
For further information of recently issued accounting pronouncements and their expected impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements, see Note 1 - Description of Business, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Standards.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Various elements of our accounting policies, by their nature, are subject to estimation techniques, valuation assumptions and other subjective assessments. Certain accounting policies that, due to the judgment, estimates and assumptions are critical to an understanding of our Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes, are described in Item 1. These policies relate to: (a) the determination of our ACL and (b) fair value measurements. We believe the judgment, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes are appropriate given the factual circumstances at the time. However, given the sensitivity of our Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to these critical accounting policies, the use of other judgments, estimates and assumptions could result in material differences in our results of operations and/or financial condition.
Allowance for Credit Losses
On January 1, 2020, we adopted ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), which required financial assets to be presented at the net amount expected to be collected (i.e. net of expected lifetime credit losses). In addition, the standard requires a reserve to be recorded for expected lifetime credit losses on our unfunded commitments. Therefore, we record ALLL on relevant financial assets and a reserve for unfunded commitments on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition, collectively referred to as the ACL.
The ACL is impacted by changes in asset quality of the portfolio, including but not limited to increases in risk rating changes in our commercial portfolio, borrower delinquencies, changes in FICO scores or changes in LTVs in our consumer portfolio. In addition, while we have incorporated our forecasted impact of COVID-19 into our ACL, the ultimate impact of
COVID-19 is still uncertain, including how long economic activity will be impacted and what effect the unprecedented levels of government fiscal and monetary actions will have on the economy and our credit losses.
Specifically identified component
The specifically identified component of the ACL related to performing TDR loans is generally measured as the difference between the recorded investment in the specific loan and the present value of the cash flows expected to be collected, discounted at the loan’s original effective interest rate. Estimating the timing and amounts of future cash flow projections is highly judgmental and based upon assumptions including default rates, prepayment probability and loss severities. All of these estimates and assumptions require significant management judgment and certain assumptions are highly subjective.
Specifically identified collateral dependent NPL loans are generally measured as the difference between the recorded investment in the impaired loan and the underlying collateral value less estimated costs to sell. These estimates are dependent on third-party property valuations which may be influenced by factors such as the current and future level of home prices, the duration of current overall economic conditions, and other macroeconomic and portfolio-specific factors.
Model-based component
The model-based component of the ACL (the "General Allowance") is calculated on our non-impaired consumer and commercial LHFI portfolio by segmenting the portfolio based upon common risk characteristics. The general allowance is determined using dual risk rating models which use probability of default, loss given default and exposure at default. These models incorporate macroeconomic forecast scenarios applied over a reasonable and supportable forecast period. After this forecast period, we revert on a straight-line basis over a 1-year period to historical averages which are utilized for the remaining contractual life, adjusted for expected prepayments and borrower controlled extension options. The macroeconomic scenarios include variables that, based on historical analysis, have been key drivers of increases and decreases in credit losses. These variables include, but are not limited to, unemployment rates, real estate prices, and gross domestic product levels. The scenarios that are chosen each quarter and the amount of weighting given to each scenario may be adjusted based on our judgment when considering a variety of factors including the stability of the current economy and recent economic events.
Qualitative adjustments
The specifically identified component analysis and the output of the model provide a reasonable starting point for our analysis, but do not, by themselves, form a sufficient basis to determine the appropriate level for the ACL. We therefore consider the qualitative factors that are likely to cause the ACL associated with our existing portfolio to differ from the output of the model. The most significant qualitative factors considered include changes in economic and business conditions, changes in nature and volume of portfolio and changes in the volume and severity of past due loans. The application of different inputs into the model calculation and the assumptions used by Management to adjust the model calculation are subject to significant management judgment and may result in actual credit losses that differ from the originally estimated amounts.
As described above, the process to determine the ACL requires numerous estimates and assumptions, some of which require a high degree of judgment and are often interrelated. Changes in the estimates and assumptions can result in significant changes in the ACL. Our process for determining the ACL is further discussed in the Credit Risk section of the MD&A and Note 4 - Loans Held for Investment.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Fair value is based on quoted market prices in an active market, or if market prices are not available, is estimated using models employing techniques such as matrix pricing or discounting expected cash flows.
The significant assumptions used in the models are independently verified against observable market data where possible. Where observable market data is not available, the estimate of fair value becomes more subjective and involves a high degree of judgment. In this circumstance, fair value is estimated based on our judgment regarding the value that market participants would assign to the asset or liability. Therefore, the results cannot be determined with precision and may not be realized in an actual sale or immediate settlement of the asset or liability. Additionally, there are inherent limitations to any valuation technique, and changes in the underlying assumptions used, including discount rates and estimates of future cash flows, could significantly affect the results of current or future values.
A portion of our assets and liabilities are carried at fair value on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition. The majority of these assets and liabilities are measured at fair value on a recurring basis, however, certain assets are measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis based on the fair value of the underlying collateral.
For further information regarding the valuation of our financial instruments, including those that utilize unobservable inputs, see the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.