Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Introduction
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is a supplement to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and provides additional information on our business, recent developments, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources, cash flows and results of operations. MD&A is organized as follows:
•
Overview: This section provides a general description of our business and a discussion of management’s general outlook regarding market demand, our competitive position and product innovation, as well as recent developments we believe are important to understanding our results of operations and financial condition or in understanding anticipated future trends.
•
Basis of Presentation: This section provides a discussion of the basis on which our consolidated financial statements were prepared.
•
Results of Operations: This section provides an analysis of our results of operations for the two years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For a discussion of our 2018 results, please refer to Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis” of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on February 26, 2020.
•
Liquidity and Capital Resources: This section provides a discussion of our financial condition and an analysis of our cash flows for each of the two years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. This section also provides a discussion of our contractual obligations, other purchase commitments and customer credit risk that existed at December 31, 2020, as well as a discussion of our ability to fund our future commitments and ongoing operating activities through internal and external sources of capital.
•
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates: This section identifies and summarizes those accounting policies that significantly impact our reported results of operations and financial condition and require significant judgment or estimates on the part of management in their application.
Overview
The Company is a leader in home and security products focused on the design, manufacture and sale of market-leading branded products in the following categories: plumbing and accessories, entry door and storm door systems, security products, outdoor performance materials used in decking and railing products, and kitchen and bath cabinetry.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net sales based on country of destination were:
We believe the Company has certain competitive advantages including market-leading brands, a diversified mix of customer channels, lean and flexible supply chains, a decentralized business model and a strong capital structure, as well as a tradition of strong innovation and customer service. We are focused on outperforming our markets in growth, profitability and returns in order to drive increased stockholder value. We believe the Company’s track record reflects the long-term attractiveness and potential of our categories and our leading brands. As consumer demand and the housing market continue to grow, we expect the benefits of operating leverage and strategic spending to support increased manufacturing capacity and long-term growth initiatives will help us to continue to achieve profitable organic growth.
We continue to believe our most attractive opportunities are to invest in profitable organic growth initiatives, pursue accretive strategic acquisitions, non-controlling equity investments, and joint ventures, and return cash to stockholders through a combination of dividends and repurchases of shares of our common stock under our share repurchase program as explained in further detail under “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
The U.S. market for our home products consists of spending on both new home construction and repair and remodel activities within existing homes, with the substantial majority of the markets we serve consisting of repair and remodel spending. Continued growth in the U.S. market for our home products will largely depend on consumer confidence, employment, wage growth, home prices, stable mortgage rates and credit availability.
We may be impacted by fluctuations in raw materials, tariffs, transportation costs, foreign exchange rates, inflation and promotional activity among our competitors. We strive to offset the potential unfavorable impact of these items with productivity improvements and price increases.
During the two years ended December 31, 2020, our net sales grew at a compounded annual rate of 5.4% as we benefited from a growing U.S. home products market, acquisitions, and growth in international markets. Operating income grew at a compounded annual rate of 16.0% with consolidated operating margins between 11% and 13% from 2018 to 2020. Growth in operating income was primarily due to higher sales volume, changes to our portfolio of businesses, control over our operating expenses and the benefits of productivity programs.
During the first half of 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a number of countries and U.S. states issued orders requiring nonessential businesses to close (“closure orders”) and persons who were not engaged in essential businesses to stay at home. Generally, states and jurisdictions designated our products, our retail channel partners and residential construction as essential business activities.
While our financial results were negatively impacted during the second quarter of 2020 by these closure orders, sales volumes increased as these restrictions were relaxed benefiting our third and fourth quarter results. Our first priority with regard to COVID-19 continues to be to ensure the safety, health and hygiene of our employees, customers, suppliers and others with whom we partner in our business activities. Because of our comprehensive use of appropriate risk mitigation and safety practices, we have largely been able to continue our business operations in this unprecedented business environment which could differentiate us from some of our competition. We believe that the disruption caused by the pandemic created increased consumer interest in investing in their homes and accelerated trends that we were experiencing prior to the pandemic, such as the shift towards value-priced cabinetry products and a focus on outdoor living. We expect the trend toward focusing on the home to continue. We have also taken proactive steps in our manufacturing supply chain and other areas to drive efficiencies which we expect to allow us to be more competitive both during and after the pandemic. However, due to the continued inherent uncertainty surrounding COVID-19, including governmental directives, public health challenges and market reactions, our results in future periods may be negatively impacted.
During 2020, the U.S. home products market grew due to increases in repair and remodel and new home construction activity. We believe spending for home repair and remodeling increased approximately 6% and new housing construction experienced approximately 4% growth in 2020 compared to 2019. In 2020, net sales grew 5.7% due to higher volume and price increases to help mitigate the cumulative impact from tariff related costs. These factors were partially offset by unfavorable mix, higher rebate costs and unfavorable foreign exchange of $4 million. In 2020, operating income increased 14.7% over 2019 primarily due to price increases to help mitigate the impact of higher tariffs, higher sales volume, the benefits from productivity improvements and restructuring actions and lower asset impairment charges. These factors were partially offset by the impact of unfavorable mix, higher employee related costs, higher tariffs, higher transportation costs, higher advertising and marketing costs and higher restructuring and other charges.
In December 2020, we acquired 100% of the outstanding equity of Larson, a leading brand of storm, screen and security doors, for a total purchase price of approximately $715.2 million, net of cash acquired and closing date working capital adjustments. The acquisition cost is further subject to the final post-closing working capital adjustment. We financed the transaction with borrowings under our existing credit facilities. This acquisition is expected to strengthen our overall product offering.
Following the acquisition of Larson, our Doors & Security segment was renamed “Outdoors & Security” to better align with the segment’s strategic focus on the fast-growing outdoor living space and to better represent the brands within the segment, including the newly acquired Larson. The Outdoors & Security segment name change is to the name only and had no impact on the Company’s historical financial position, results of operations, cash flow or segment level results previously reported.
During June 2020, we repaid all amounts outstanding on the 3.000% Senior Notes issued in June 2015 at their maturity date using borrowings under our 2019 Revolving Credit Agreement (as defined below). In September 2019, the Company issued $700 million of 3.25% Senior Notes due 2029 (“2019 Notes”) in a registered public offering. The Company used the proceeds from the 2019 Notes offering to repay in full a $350 million term loan and to pay down outstanding balances under our 2019 Revolving Credit Agreement.
In April 2020, the Company entered into a 364-day supplemental, $400 million revolving credit facility (the “2020 Revolving Credit Agreement”), and borrowings thereunder will be used for general corporate purposes.
In 2018 our Plumbing segment entered into a strategic partnership with, and acquired non-controlling equity interests in, Flo Technologies, Inc. (“Flo”), a U.S. manufacturer of comprehensive water monitoring and shut-off systems with leak detection technologies. In January 2020, we entered into an agreement to acquire 100% of the outstanding shares of Flo in a multi-phase transaction, which will be completed in 2022.
Basis of Presentation
The consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been derived from the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. The Company’s consolidated financial statements are based on a fiscal year
ending December 31. Certain of the Company’s subsidiaries operate on a 52 or 53 week fiscal year ending during the month of December.
In December 2020, the Company acquired 100% of the outstanding equity of Larson for a total purchase price of approximately $715.2 million, net of cash acquired and closing date working capital adjustments. The acquisition cost is further subject to the final post-closing working capital adjustment. We financed the transaction with borrowings under our existing credit facilities. The financial results of Larson were included in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. Larson's net sales, operating income and cash flows from the date of acquisition to December 31, 2020 were not material to the Company. The results of operations are included in the Outdoors & Security segment.
Results of Operations
The following discussion of both consolidated results of operations and segment results of operations refers to the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The discussion of consolidated results of operations should be read in conjunction with the discussion of segment results of operations and our financial statements and notes thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless otherwise noted, all discussion of results of operations are for continuing operations.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Certain items had a significant impact on our results in 2020 and 2019. These included restructuring and other charges, asset impairment charges and the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
In 2020, financial results included:
•
restructuring and other charges of $25.1 million before tax ($17.5 million after tax), largely related to headcount actions associated with COVID-19 across all segments and costs associated with changes in our manufacturing processes within our Plumbing segment,
•
asset impairment charges of $22.5 related to the impairment of indefinite-lived tradenames within our Plumbing and Cabinets segments, which were primarily the result of forecasted sales declines resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic,
•
actuarial losses within our defined benefit plans of $3.4 million primarily related to decreases in discount rates and differences between expected and actual returns on plan assets and
•
the impact of foreign exchange primarily due to movement in the Canadian dollar, British pound, Mexican peso and Chinese yuan, which had an unfavorable impact compared to 2019, of approximately $4 million on net sales and a favorable impact compared to 2019, of approximately $1 million both on operating income and net income.
In 2019, financial results included:
•
asset impairment charges of $41.5 related to impairment of two indefinite-lived tradenames within our Cabinets segment, which were primarily the result of a continuing shift in consumer demand from custom and semi-custom cabinetry products to value-priced cabinetry products, which led to reductions in future growth rates related to these tradenames,
•
actuarial losses within our defined benefit plans of $34.7 million primarily related to decreases in discount rates and differences between expected and actual returns on plan assets,
•
restructuring and other charges of $22.2 million before tax ($16.8 million after tax), primarily related to severance costs within all of our segments and costs associated with closing facilities within our Plumbing and Outdoors & Security segments and
•
the impact of foreign exchange primarily due to movement in the Canadian dollar, British pound, Mexican peso and Chinese yuan, which had an unfavorable impact compared to 2018, of approximately $29 million on net sales, approximately $10 million on operating income and approximately $8 million on net income.
Total Fortune Brands
Net sales
Net sales increased by $325.7 million, or 5.7%, on higher volume and price increases to help mitigate the cumulative impact from tariff related costs. These factors were partially offset by unfavorable mix, higher rebate costs and unfavorable foreign exchange of $4 million.
Cost of products sold
Cost of products sold increased by $213.7 million, or 5.8%, due to higher net sales, unfavorable mix and the impact of higher tariffs, partially offset by the benefit from productivity improvements.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $26.3 million, or 2.1%, due to higher employee related costs, higher advertising and marketing cost and higher transportation costs. These increases were partially offset by the benefits from organizational restructuring initiatives.
Amortization of intangible assets
Amortization of intangible assets are consistent with the prior year.
Asset impairment charges
Asset impairment charges of $22.5 million in 2020 related to indefinite-lived tradenames within our Plumbing and Cabinets segments. Asset impairment charges of $41.5 million in 2019 related to two indefinite-lived tradenames within our Cabinets segment.
Restructuring charges
Restructuring charges of $15.9 million in 2020 largely related to headcount actions associated with COVID-19 across all segments and costs associated with changes in our manufacturing processes within our Plumbing segment. Restructuring charges of $14.7 million in 2019 primarily related to severance costs within our Plumbing and Cabinets segments and costs associated with closing facilities within our Plumbing and Outdoors & Security segments.
Operating income
Operating income increased by $102.9 million, or 14.7%, primarily due to price increases to help mitigate the impact of higher tariffs, higher sales volume, the benefits from productivity improvements and restructuring actions and lower asset impairment charges. These factors were partially offset by unfavorable mix, higher employee related costs, higher tariffs, higher transportation costs, higher advertising and marketing costs and higher restructuring and other charges.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased $10.3 million to $83.9 million, due to lower average borrowings and lower average interest rates.
Other (income) expense, net
Other (income) expense, net, was income of $13.3 million in 2020, compared to expense of $29.0 million in 2019. The increase of $42.3 million of income is primarily due to higher defined benefit income in 2020 ($33.2 million increase) and gains of $11.0 million related to our investment in Flo, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency losses.
Income taxes
The effective income tax rates for 2020 and 2019 were 23.1% and 25.0%, respectively. The 2020 effective income tax rate was unfavorably impacted by state and local taxes ($22.3 million) and foreign taxes ($6.2 million), and was favorably impacted by a benefit related to share-based compensation ($11.5 million).
The 2019 effective income tax rate was unfavorably impacted by state and local taxes ($18.0 million), foreign taxes ($1.8 million), a valuation allowance increase ($3.4 million), and increases in uncertain tax positions (7.5 million). The 2019 effective income tax rate was favorably impacted by a tax benefit related to share-based compensation ($3.7 million).
Net income from continuing operations
Net income from continuing operations was $554.4 million in 2020 compared to $431.3 million in 2019. The increase of $123.1 million was due to higher operating income, higher other (income) expense, net and lower interest expense, partly offset by higher income taxes and equity in losses of affiliate.
Results By Segment
Plumbing
Net sales increased by $174.9 million, or 8.6%, due to higher sales volume from retail and e-commerce customers in the U.S. who benefited from strong consumer demand from higher home investments, higher sales volume in China despite temporary closures for COVID-19 and price increases to help mitigate the cumulative impact of tariffs. These factors were partly offset by higher rebate costs and lower sales from showroom customers whose locations closed or operated at limited capacity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as unfavorable foreign exchange of approximately $1 million.
Operating income increased by $40.3 million, or 9.4%, due to higher sales volume and the benefit from productivity improvements. These benefits were partly offset by unfavorable channel mix, higher advertising and marketing costs, asset impairment charges ($13.0 million in 2020), higher employee related costs and the impact of higher tariffs as well as unfavorable foreign exchange of approximately $2 million.
Outdoors & Security
Net sales increased by $70.3 million, or 5.2%, due to higher volume for decking and doors products due to strong consumer demand benefiting from higher home investments, price increases to help mitigate tariffs and the benefit from new customers in decking products. These factors were partially offset by lower volume primarily due to COVID-19 related weakness in the commercial and international security markets, the discontinuance of a doors product line, higher rebate costs and unfavorable mix. Foreign exchange was unfavorable by approximately $2 million.
Operating income increased by $29.0 million, or 16.8%, due to higher sales volume, the benefit from productivity improvements, the absence in 2020 of expenses related to Fiberon’s inventory fair value adjustment ($1.8 million in 2019) and a fair value adjustment associated with an idle manufacturing facility ($1.7 million in 2019). Foreign exchange was favorable by approximately $3 million. These factors were partially offset by unfavorable mix, higher employee related costs, the impact of higher tariffs and higher restructuring costs.
Cabinets
Net sales increased by $80.5 million, or 3.4%, due to higher volume and price increases to help mitigate the cumulative impact of tariffs. These factors were partly offset by a continued shift to value-priced products from make-to-order products and higher transportation costs, as well as unfavorable foreign exchange of approximately $1 million.
Operating income increased by $57.4 million, or 32.2%, due to higher net sales, lower asset impairment charges ($32.0 million decrease) and the benefit from productivity improvements. These factors were partly offset by a continued shift to value-priced products from make-to-order products and higher transportation costs.
Corporate
Corporate expenses increased by $23.8 million, or 29.9%, due to higher employee related costs, $4.5 million of transaction costs associated with the Larson acquisition and the impairment of a long-lived asset ($3.6 million).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash on hand, cash flows from operating activities, cash borrowed under our credit facility and cash from debt issuances in the capital markets. Our operating income is generated by our subsidiaries. We believe our operating cash flows, including funds available under the credit facility and access to capital markets, provide sufficient liquidity to support the Company’s working capital requirements, capital expenditures and service of indebtedness, as well as to finance acquisitions, repurchase shares of our common stock and pay dividends to stockholders, as the Board of Directors deems appropriate.
Our cash flows from operations, borrowing availability and overall liquidity are subject to certain risks and uncertainties, including those described in the section entitled “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” In addition, we cannot predict whether or when we may enter into acquisitions, joint ventures or dispositions, make any purchases of shares of our common stock under our share repurchase programs, or pay dividends, or what impact any such transactions could have on our results of operations, cash flows or financial condition, whether as a result of the issuance of debt or equity securities, or otherwise.
Unsecured Senior Notes
At December 31, 2020, the Company had aggregate outstanding notes in the principal amount of $1.8 billion, with varying maturities (the “Notes”). The Notes are unsecured senior obligations of the Company. The following table provides a summary of the Company’s outstanding Notes, including the carrying value of the Notes, net of underwriting commissions, price discounts and debt issuance costs as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
During June 2020, we repaid all outstanding 3.000% Senior Notes issued in June 2015 at their maturity date using borrowings under our 2019 Revolving Credit Agreement (as defined below). In September 2019, we issued $700 million of the 3.25% Senior Notes due 2029 in a registered public offering. The Company used the proceeds from the 2019 Notes offering to repay in full the Company’s $350 million term loan and to pay down outstanding balances under our revolving credit facility.
Notes payments due during the next five years as of December 31, 2020 are zero in 2021 through 2022, $600 million in 2023, zero in 2024 and $500 million in 2025.
Credit Facilities
In April 2020, the Company entered into a supplemental 364-day, $400 million revolving credit facility (the “2020 Revolving Credit Agreement”), and borrowings thereunder will be used for general corporate purposes.
In September 2019, the Company entered into a second amended and restated $1.25 billion revolving credit facility (the “2019 Revolving Credit Agreement”), and borrowings thereunder will be used for general corporate purposes. The terms and conditions of the 2019 Revolving Credit Agreement, including the total commitment amount, essentially remained the same as the previous revolving credit facility, except that the maturity date was extended to September 2024. Interest rates under the 2019 Revolving Credit Agreement are variable based on LIBOR at the time of the borrowing and the Company’s long-term credit rating and can range from LIBOR + 0.91% to LIBOR + 1.4%. Borrowings amounting to $165.0 million were rolled over from the prior revolving credit facility into the 2019 Revolving Credit Agreement. The amendment also includes a covenant under which the Company is required to maintain a minimum ratio of consolidated EBITDA to consolidated interest expense of 3.0 to 1.0. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as consolidated net income before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, losses from asset impairments, and certain other one-time adjustments. In addition, the amendment includes a covenant under which the Company’s ratio of consolidated debt minus certain cash and cash equivalents to consolidated EBITDA generally may not exceed 3.5 to 1.0. This amendment and restatement of the credit agreement was a non-cash transaction for the Company. On December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our outstanding borrowings under this credit facility were $785.0 million and zero, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants under this credit facility.
We currently have uncommitted bank lines of credit in China, which provide for unsecured borrowings for working capital of up to $17.5 million in aggregate as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, of which there were no outstanding balances as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The weighted-average interest rates on these borrowings were zero in 2020 and 2019.
The components of external long-term debt were as follows:
In our debt agreements, there are normal and customary events of default which would permit the lenders to accelerate the debt if not cured within applicable grace periods, such as failure to pay principal or interest when due or a change in control of the Company. There were no events of default as of December 31, 2020.
Cash and Seasonality
In 2020, we invested approximately $97.8 million in incremental capacity to support long-term growth potential and new products inclusive of cost reduction and productivity initiatives. We expect capital spending in 2021 to be in the range of $210 to $250 million. On December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $419.1 million, of which $342.9 million was held at non-U.S. subsidiaries. We manage our global cash requirements considering (i) available funds among the subsidiaries through which we conduct business, (ii) the geographic location of our liquidity needs, and (iii) the cost to access international cash balances. The repatriation of non-U.S. cash balances from certain subsidiaries could have adverse tax consequences as we may be required to pay and record tax expense on those funds that are repatriated.
Our operating cash flows are significantly impacted by the seasonality of our business. We typically generate most of our operating cash flow in the third and fourth quarters of each year. We use operating cash in the first quarter of the year.
Share Repurchases
In 2020, we repurchased 2.9 million shares of our outstanding common stock under the Company’s share repurchase program for $187.6 million. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s total remaining share repurchase authorization under the remaining program was approximately $462.4 million. The share repurchase program does not obligate the Company to repurchase any specific dollar amount or number of shares and may be suspended or discontinued at any time.
Dividends
In 2020, we paid dividends in the amount of $133.3 million to the Company’s stockholders. Our Board of Directors will continue to evaluate dividend payment opportunities on a quarterly basis. There can be no assurance as to when and if future dividends will be paid, and at what level, because the payment of dividends is dependent on our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, capital requirements and other factors deemed relevant by our Board of Directors. There are no restrictions on the ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends or make other distributions to Fortune Brands.
Acquisitions
We periodically review our portfolio of brands and evaluate potential strategic transactions and other capital initiatives to increase stockholder value. In December 2020, we acquired 100% of the outstanding equity of Larson, the North American market leading brand of storm, screen and security doors, for a total purchase price of approximately $715.2 million, net of cash acquired and closing date working capital adjustments. The acquisition cost is further subject to the final post-closing working capital adjustment. Larson also sells related outdoor living products including retractable screens and porch windows. In September 2018, we acquired 100% of the membership interests of Fiberon, a leading U.S. manufacturer of outdoor performance materials used in decking and railing products, for a total purchase price of approximately $470 million, subject to certain post-closing adjustments. The acquisition of Fiberon provided category expansion and product extension opportunities into the outdoor living space for our Outdoors & Security segment. We financed the transactions using cash on hand and borrowings under our revolving credit and term loan facilities. The results of both acquisitions are included in the Outdoors & Security segment from the date of acquisition.
Cash Flows
Below is a summary of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $825.7 million in 2020 compared to $637.2 million in 2019. The $188.5 million increase in cash provided from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to higher net income, lower increases in working capital and increases in accrued taxes.
Net cash used in investing activities was $923.5 million in 2020 compared to $127.6 million in 2019. The increase in cash used of $795.9 million from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to the acquisition of Larson and additional shares of Flo Technologies during 2020 and increased capital expenditures.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $111.6 million in 2020 compared to cash used in financing activities of $389.7 million in 2019. The increase in net cash provided of $501.3 million from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to lower net borrowings in 2020 compared to 2019 ($535.7 million), higher proceeds from the exercise of stock options and the absence of deferred
acquisition payments made during 2019 ($19.0 million), partly offset by higher share repurchases in 2020 compared to 2019 and higher dividends to stockholders.
Pension Plans
Subsidiaries of Fortune Brands sponsor their respective defined benefit pension plans that are funded by a portfolio of investments maintained within our benefit plan trust. In 2020 and 2019, we contributed $47.7 million and $10.0 million, respectively, to our qualified pension plans. In 2021, we expect to make pension contributions of approximately $10.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of our total pension plan assets was $784.9 million, representing funding of 84% of the accumulated benefit obligation liability. For the foreseeable future, we believe that we have sufficient liquidity to meet the minimum funding that may be required by the Pension Protection Act of 2006.
Foreign Exchange
We have operations in various foreign countries, principally Canada, China, Mexico, the United Kingdom, France, Australia and Japan. Therefore, changes in the value of the related currencies affect our financial statements when translated into U.S. dollars.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments
The following table describes other obligations and commitments to make future payments under contracts, such as debt and lease agreements, and under contingent commitments, such as debt guarantees, as of December 31, 2020.
(a)
Interest payments on long-term debt were calculated using the borrowing rate in effect on December 31, 2020.
(b)
Purchase obligations include contracts for raw material and finished goods purchases; selling and administrative services; and capital expenditures.
(c)
Pension and postretirement contributions cannot be determined beyond 2021.
Due to the uncertainty of the timing of settlement with taxing authorities, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement of unrecognized tax benefits. Therefore, $96.1 million of unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2020 have been excluded from the Contractual Obligations table above.
In addition to the contractual obligations and commitments listed and described above, we also had other commercial commitments for which we are contingently liable as of December 31, 2020. Other corporate commercial commitments include standby letters of credit of $34.6 million, in the aggregate, all of which expire in less than one year, and surety bonds of $15.1 million, of which $15.0 million matures in less than one year and $0.1 million matures in 1-3 years. These contingent commitments are not expected to have a significant impact on our liquidity.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are material or reasonably likely to be material to our financial condition or results of operations.
Foreign Currency Risk
Certain anticipated transactions, assets and liabilities are exposed to foreign currency risk. Principal currencies hedged include the Canadian dollar, the British pound, the Mexican peso and the Chinese yuan. We regularly monitor our foreign currency exposures in order to maximize the overall effectiveness of our foreign currency hedge positions. For additional information on this risk, see