Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis is intended to assist readers in understanding our results of operations and changes in financial position for the past three years. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes beginning on page 78 of this report and the supplemental financial data contained in Tables 1 through 21 beginning on page 60 of this report. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ significantly from those anticipated in forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. The following discussion is intended to assist in understanding the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
Overview - 2020 Compared to 2019
We reported net income per diluted common share of $2.81 in 2020, a 9.4% decrease compared to 2019. Our outstanding loan balances increased by 6.2% and our total deposits increased 27.2%.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded net income of $81.5 million, or $2.81 per diluted common share compared to $92.0 million, or $3.10 per diluted common share, for 2019. Earnings for 2020 were impacted by a higher provision for loan losses related to estimated losses arising from the economic impact of COVID-19. The impact of the higher provisions for loan losses were partially offset by higher noninterest income realized in 2020.
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $218.1 million, a 0.9% increase from the $216.2 million recorded in 2019. The increase in net interest income in 2020 was primarily due to growth in average interest-earning assets, which increased by approximately 13.1% during the year as a result of funds received from our high deposit growth, and which offset a lower net interest margin. Also, see the section entitled "Net Interest Income" for additional information.
Our net interest margin (a non-GAAP measure calculated by dividing tax-equivalent net interest income by average earning assets) was 3.56% compared to 4.00% for 2019. The lower 2020 margin was primarily due to the impact of lower interest rates and the lower incremental reinvestment rates realized from the funds received from our high deposit growth.
We recorded a provision for loan losses of $35.0 million compared to $2.3 million for 2019. The increase in 2020 was primarily related to estimated probable losses arising from the economic impact of COVID-19.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, total noninterest income was $81.3 million and $59.5 million, respectively. The increase primarily related to 1) increased fees from presold mortgages due to higher mortgage origination activity, 2) gains on sales of securities, and 3) higher SBA consulting fees associated with the Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") loan program. See the section entitled "Noninterest Income" for additional information.
Noninterest expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, amounted to $161.3 million and $157.2 million, respectively, an increase of 2.6% in 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher mortgage commission expense resulting from increases in mortgage loan volume in 2020. See the section entitled "Noninterest Expense" for additional information.
Total assets at December 31, 2020 amounted to $7.3 billion, a 18.7% increase from a year earlier. The growth was driven by an increase in deposits of $1.3 billion, or 27.2% during 2020. In addition to deposits arising from PPP loans, we believe this high deposit growth was due to a combination of stimulus funds, changes in customer behaviors during the pandemic, and a flight to quality to FDIC-insured banks, as well as our ongoing deposit growth initiatives. Loan growth for 2020 was $278 million, or 6.2%, which included $241 million in PPP loans. Loan growth in 2020 was negatively impacted by a number of large commercial loan payoffs, as well as high levels of refinanced mortgage loans.
With the excess liquidity resulting from the high deposit growth, during 2020 we paid down our borrowings by $239 million, or 79.4%, and reduced our level of brokered deposits by $66 million, or 76.5%. We also purchased investment securities, with total investment securities amounting to $1.6 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $731 million, or 82.1%, compared to a year earlier.
During 2020, we repurchased 1,117,208 shares of the Company's common stock at an average stock price of $28.53, which totaled $31.9 million.
Overview - 2019 Compared to 2018
We reported net income per diluted common share of $3.10 in 2019, a 3.0% increase compared to 2018. Our outstanding loan balances increased by 4.8% and total deposits increased 5.8%.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded net income of $92.0 million, or $3.10 per diluted common share, an increase of 3% in earnings per share from the $89.3 million, or $3.01 per diluted common share, for 2018. The higher earnings in 2019 were primarily related to higher net interest income associated with our growth.
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019 amounted to $216.2 million, a 4.2% increase from the $207.4 million recorded in 2018. The increase in net interest income was primarily due to growth in interest-earning assets. Also, see the section entitled “Net Interest Income” for additional information.
Our net interest margin (tax-equivalent net interest income divided by average earning assets) was 4.00% for 2019 compared to 4.09% for 2018. The decrease in the net interest margin realized in 2019 was primarily due to a combination of lower loan discount accretion and funding costs that rose by more than asset yields.
We recorded a provision for loan losses of $2.3 million in 2019 compared to negative provision for loan losses of $3.6 million (reduction of the allowance for loan losses) in 2018. The negative provision for 2018 was due primarily to several large loan recoveries realized in the first quarter of 2018 totaling $3.7 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, noninterest income amounted to $59.5 million compared to $58.9 million for 2018, an increase of 1.0%. Increases were experienced in i) service charges on deposit accounts due to strong deposit growth, ii) interchange income due to increased credit and debit card usage, and iii) in fees from presold mortgages due to higher mortgage origination activity. Those increases were substantially offset by lower SBA loan sale gains and lower SBA consulting fees. See the section entitled “Noninterest Income” for additional information.
Noninterest expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 amounted to $157.2 million compared to $156.5 million in 2018, an increase of 0.5%. A 5.4% increase in salaries expense associated with wage increases and the growth of the Company was substantially offset by lower merger and acquisition expenses and lower intangibles amortization expense. See the section entitled “Noninterest Expense” for additional information.
Total assets at December 31, 2019 amounted to $6.1 billion, a 4.8% increase from a year earlier. Loan growth for the year ended December 31, 2019 amounted to $204.4 million, or 4.8%, and deposit growth amounted to $272.0 million, or 5.8%. Within deposits, our retail deposits (excludes brokered deposits and internet time deposits) grew 9.7% during 2019, with 14.8% growth in noninterest-bearing checking accounts. As a result of the strong retail deposit growth, we reduced our level of brokered deposits by $153.7 million, or 64.1%, from $239.9 million at December 31, 2018 to $86.1 million at December 31, 2019. Internet time deposits decreased from $3.4 million at December 31, 2018 to $0.7 million at December 31, 2019. Additionally, we paid down borrowings by $106 million, or 26.0%, during 2019.
During 2019, we repurchased 281,593 shares of the Company's common stock at an average price of $35.51, which totaled $10 million.
Recent Developments Related to COVID-19
Overview. Our business has been, and continues to be, impacted by COVID-19. In March 2020, COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and a national emergency by the President of the United States. Efforts to limit the spread of COVID-19 have included shelter-in-place orders, the closure of non-essential businesses, travel restrictions, supply chain disruptions and prohibitions on public gatherings, among other things, throughout many parts of the United States and, in particular, the markets in which we operate. As the current pandemic is ongoing and dynamic in nature, there are many uncertainties related to COVID-19 including, among other things, its severity; the duration of the outbreak; the impact to our customers, employees and vendors; the impact to the financial services and banking industry; and the impact to the economy as a whole as well as the effect of actions taken, or that may yet be taken, or inaction by governmental authorities to contain the outbreak or to mitigate its impact (both economic and health-related). COVID-19 has negatively affected, and is expected to continue to negatively affect, our business, financial position and operating results. In light of the uncertainties and continuing developments discussed herein, the ultimate adverse impact of COVID-19 cannot be reliably estimated at this time, but could be increasingly material.
Impact on our Operations. In the State of North Carolina, many jurisdictions declared health emergencies. The resulting closures and/or limited operations of non-essential businesses and related economic disruption have impacted our operations as well as the operations of our customers. Financial services have been identified as a Critical Infrastructure Sector by the Department of Homeland Security. Accordingly, our business remains open. To address the issues arising as a result of COVID-19, and in order to facilitate the continued delivery of essential
services while maintaining a high level of safety for our customers as well as our employees, we have implemented our Business Continuity Plans. Among other things, significant actions taken under these plans include:
•Implemented our communications plans to ensure our employees, customers and critical vendors are kept abreast of developments affecting our operations.
•After temporarily closing all of our financial center lobbies and other corporate facilities to non-employees, except for certain limited cases by appointment only, we reopened our financial center lobbies in late May 2020. Those facilities remain open, with limited exceptions.
•Expanded remote-access availability so that a significant portion of our workforce has the capability to work from home or other remote locations. All activities are performed in accordance with our compliance and information security policies designed to ensure customer data and other information is properly safeguarded.
•Instituted mandatory social distancing policies and mask protocols for those employees not working remotely. Members of certain operations teams have been split into two teams that rotate their work location between work and home.
Notwithstanding the foregoing actions, the COVID-19 outbreak could still, among other things, greatly affect our routine and essential operations due to staff absenteeism, particularly among key personnel; further limit access to or result in further closures of our branch facilities and other physical offices; exacerbate operational, technical or security-related risks arising from a remote workforce; and result in adverse government or regulatory agency orders. The business and operations of our third-party service providers, many of whom perform critical services for our business, could also be significantly impacted, which in turn could impact us. As a result, we are currently unable to fully assess or predict the extent of the effects of COVID-19 on our operations as the ultimate impact will depend on factors that are currently unknown and/or beyond our control.
Impact on our Financial Position and Results of Operations. Our financial position and results of operations are particularly susceptible to the ability of our loan customers to meet loan obligations, the availability of our workforce, the availability of our vendors and the decline in the value of assets held by us. While its effects continue to materialize, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in a decrease in commercial activity throughout our market area, as well as nationally. This decrease in commercial activity has increased the risk that certain customers (including businesses and individuals), vendors and counterparties will be unable to meet existing payment or other obligations to us. The national public health crisis arising from the COVID-19 pandemic (and public expectations about it), could further destabilize the financial markets and geographies in which we operate. Due to the expectation of higher borrower defaults, we recorded an elevated provision for loan losses in 2020. See further information related to the risk exposure of our loan portfolio under the sections captioned "Provision for Loan Losses," “Loans,” and “Allowance for Loan Losses” elsewhere in this discussion.
In addition, the economic pressures and uncertainties arising from the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted in and may continue to result in specific changes in consumer and business spending and borrowing and saving habits, affecting the demand for loans and other products and services we offer. Consumers affected by COVID-19 may continue to demonstrate changed behavior even after the crisis is over. For example, consumers may decrease discretionary spending on a permanent or long-term basis and certain industries may take longer to recover (particularly those that rely on travel or large gatherings) as consumers may be hesitant to return to full social interaction. We lend to customers operating in such industries including retail/strip centers, hotels/lodging, restaurants, entertainment and commercial real estate, among others, that have been significantly impacted by COVID-19 and we are continuing to monitor these customers closely. To help mitigate the adverse effects of COVID-19, loan customers may apply for a deferral of payments, or portions thereof, for up to 90 days. After 90 days, customers may apply for an additional deferral. Additionally, the temporary closures of bank branches and the safety precautions implemented at re-opened branches could result in consumers becoming more comfortable with technology and devaluing face-to-face interaction. Our business is relationship driven and such changes could necessitate changes to our business practices to accommodate changing consumer behaviors. The potential changes in behaviors driven by COVID-19 also present heightened liquidity risks, for example, arising from increased demand for our products and services (such as unusually high draws on credit facilities) or decreased demand for our products and services.
Legislative and Regulatory Developments. Recent actions taken by the federal government and the Federal Reserve and other bank regulatory agencies to mitigate the economic effects of COVID-19 will also have an impact on our financial position and results of operations. These actions are further discussed below.
In an emergency measure aimed at blunting the economic impact of COVID-19, the Federal Reserve lowered the target for the federal funds rate to a range of between zero to 0.25% effective in March 2020. Our earnings and cash flows are largely dependent upon our net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between interest income earned on interest-earning assets such as loans and securities and interest expense paid on interest-bearing liabilities such as deposits and borrowed funds. Our earnings can be adversely affected by decreases in market interest rates if the interest rates received on loans and other investments fall more quickly and to a larger degree than the interest rates paid on deposits and other borrowings. The decline in interest rates has already led to new all-time low yields across the US Treasury maturity curve. In September 2020, the Federal Reserve indicated that it expects to maintain the targeted federal funds rate at current levels until such time that labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Federal Open Market Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2% and is on track to moderately exceed 2% for some time, with the majority of the members of the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee expecting short-term interest rates to be near zero through 2023.
Other actions taken by the Federal Reserve in an effort to provide monetary stimulus to counteract the economic disruption caused by COVID-19 include:
•Expanded reverse repo operations, adding liquidity to the banking system.
•Restarted quantitative easing.
•Lowered the interest rate on the discount window by 1.50% to 0.25%.
•Reduced reserve requirement ratios to zero percent.
•Encouraged banks to use their capital and liquidity buffers to lend.
•Introduced and expanded several new programs that will operate on a temporary basis to help preserve market liquidity.
The U.S. government has also enacted certain fiscal stimulus measures in several phases to counteract the economic disruption caused by the COVID-19. The Phase 1 legislation, the Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act ("CARES Act"), was enacted on March 6, 2020 and, among other things, authorized funding for research and development of vaccines and allocated money to state and local governments to aid containment and response measures. The Phase 2 legislation, the Families First Coronavirus Response Act, was enacted on March 18, 2020 and provides for paid sick/medical leave, establishes no-cost coverage for coronavirus testing, expands unemployment benefits, expands food assistance, and provides additional funding to states for the ongoing economic consequences of the pandemic, among other provisions. Phase 3 legislation of the CARES Act was enacted on March 27, 2020. Among other provisions, the CARES Act (i) authorized the Secretary of the Treasury to make loans, loan guarantees and other investments, up to $500 billion, for assistance to eligible businesses, states and municipalities with limited, targeted relief for passenger air carriers, cargo air carriers, and businesses critical to maintaining national security, (ii) created a $349 billion loan program called the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) for loans to small businesses for, among other things, payroll, group health care benefit costs and qualifying mortgage, rent and utility payments, (iii) provided certain credits against the 2020 personal income tax for eligible individuals and their dependents, (iv) expanded eligibility for unemployment insurance and provides eligible recipients with an additional $600 per week on top of the unemployment amount determined by each State and (v) expanded tele-health services in Medicare. The Phase 3.5 legislation, the Paycheck Protection Program and Healthcare Enhancement Act of 2020 (the “PPPHE Act”), was enacted on April 24, 2020. Among other things, the PPPHE Act provided an additional $310 billion of funding for the PPP of which, $30 billion is specifically allocated for use by banks and other insured depository institutions that have assets between $10 billion and $50 billion.
The Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020” (“PPPF Act”) was enacted in June 2020 and modified the PPP as follows: (i) established a minimum maturity of five years for all loans made after the enactment of the PPPF Act and permits an extension of the maturity of existing loans to five years if the borrower and lender agree; (ii) extended the “covered period” of the CARES Act from June 30, 2020, to December 31, 2020; (iii) extended the eight-week “covered period” for expenditures that qualify for forgiveness to the earlier of 24 weeks following loan origination or December 31, 2020; (iv) extended the deferral period for payment of principal, interest and fees to the date on which the forgiveness amount is remitted to the lender by the SBA; (v) changed requirements such that the borrower must use at least 60% (down from 75%) of the proceeds of the loan for payroll costs, and up to 40% (up from 25%), for other permitted purposes, as a condition to obtaining forgiveness of the loan; (vi) delayed from June 30, 2020 to December 31, 2020 the date by which employees must be rehired to avoid a reduction in the amount of forgiveness of a loan, and creates a “rehiring safe harbor” that allows businesses to remain eligible for loan forgiveness if they make a good faith attempt to rehire employees or hire similarly qualified employees, but are
unable to do so, or are able to document an inability to return to pre-COVID-19 levels of business activity due to compliance with social distancing measures; and (vii) allows borrowers to receive both loan forgiveness under the PPP and the payroll tax deferral permitted under the CARES Act, rather than having to choose which of the two would be more advantageous.
In July 2020, the CARES Act was amended to extend, through August 8, 2020, the SBA’s authority to make commitments under the PPP. The SBA’s existing authority had previously expired on June 30, 2020. In August 2020, President Trump signed four executive actions to provide additional COVID-19 relief. The first action authorized the Lost Wages Assistance Program (“LWAP”), which provides for a $400-per-week payment to those currently receiving more than $100 a week in unemployment benefits due to disruptions caused by COVID-19. The LWAP per-week payment was retroactive to the week ending August 1, 2020. The second executive action extended the moratorium on payments and interest accrual on student loans held by the government until the end of 2020. The moratorium was previously set to expire September 30, 2020. The third action instructed the Department of the Treasury and the Department of Housing and Urban Development to help provide temporary assistance to renters and homeowners and promote their ability to avoid eviction or foreclosure, including forbearance of monthly mortgage payments for up to 180 days. The fourth executive action allows employers to defer, for the period from September 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020, the employee portion of Social Security payroll taxes for certain individuals earning less than approximately $104 thousand per year.
In December 2020, the Bipartisan-Bicameral Omnibus COVID Relief Deal, included as a component of appropriations legislation, and the Economic Aid Act were enacted to provide economic stimulus to individuals and businesses in further response to the economic distress caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Among other things, the legislation includes (i) payments of $600 for individuals making up to $75,000 per year, (ii) extension of the Federal Pandemic Unemployment Compensation program to include a $300 weekly enhancement in unemployment benefits beginning after December 26, 2020 up to March 14, 2021, (iii) a temporary and targeted rental assistance program, and extends the eviction moratorium through January 31, 2021, (iv) targeted funding related to transportation, education, agriculture, nutrition and other public health measures and (v) approximately $325 billion for small business relief, including approximately $284 billion for a second round of PPP loans and a new simplified forgiveness procedure for PPP loans of $150,000 or less. We are continuing to monitor the potential development of additional legislation and further actions taken by the U.S. government.
The Federal Reserve created various additional lending facilities and expanded existing facilities to help provide financing in response to the financial disruptions caused by COVID-19. The programs include, among others, the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (“PPP Facility”), which is intended to extend loans to banks making PPP loans. The Federal Reserve announced extensions through March 31, 2021 for several of its lending facilities, including the PPP Facility, that were generally scheduled to expire on or around December 31, 2020. As more fully discussed in the section captioned “Loans” elsewhere in this document, we are currently participating in the PPP as a lender. We have not participated in the PPP Facility.
Banks and bank holding companies have been particularly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic as a result of disruption and volatility in the global capital markets. This disruption has impacted our cost of capital and may adversely affect our ability to access the capital markets if we need or desire to do so and, although the ultimate impact cannot be reliably estimated at this time in light of the uncertainties and ongoing developments noted herein, such impacts could be material. Furthermore, bank regulatory agencies have been (and are expected to continue to be) proactive in responding to both market and supervisory concerns arising from the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the potential impact on customers, especially borrowers. As shown during and following the financial crisis of 2007-2008, periods of economic and financial disruption and stress have, in the past, resulted in increased scrutiny of banking organizations. We are closely monitoring the potential for new laws and regulations impacting lending and funding practices as well as capital and liquidity standards. Such changes could require us to maintain significantly more capital, with common equity as a more predominant component, or manage the composition of our assets and liabilities to comply with formulaic liquidity requirements.
Outlook for 2021
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, our outlook for 2021 is uncertain. We believe our local economies and business conditions will continue to be negatively impacted by the pandemic. While the U.S. Government continues to implement measures to help offset the negative financial impact of the pandemic, we expect the negative impact to continue through at least the first half of 2021. If the COVID-19 vaccination is effective and becomes more widely available and pandemic conditions improve, we expect our customer behaviors will return to more normal conditions
and commercial activity to improve. Under that scenario, we expect an increase in traditional loan demand (non-PPP) and that deposits will decline as customer cash balances return to more normal levels. We expect that the growth from traditional loan demand will be substantially offset in our aggregate loan portfolio by forgiveness of the $241 million in PPP loans that were outstanding at December 31, 2020. We expect that interest rates will remain very low and that our net interest margin will be pressured down as a result of the maturity of securities and loans that were originated in periods of higher interest rates. Our ability to further reduce funding costs is limited by their already low levels.
Critical Accounting Policies
The accounting principles we follow and our methods of applying these principles conform with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and with general practices followed by the banking industry. Certain of these principles involve a significant amount of judgment and may involve the use of estimates based on our best assumptions at the time of the estimation. The allowance for loan losses, intangible assets, and the fair value and discount accretion of acquired loans are three policies we have identified as being more sensitive in terms of judgments and estimates, taking into account their overall potential impact to our consolidated financial statements.
Allowance for Loan Losses
Due to the estimation process and the potential materiality of the amounts involved, we have identified the accounting for the allowance for loan losses and the related provision for loan losses as an accounting policy critical to our consolidated financial statements. The provision for loan losses charged to operations is an amount sufficient to bring the allowance for loan losses to an estimated balance considered adequate to absorb losses inherent in the portfolio.
Our determination of the adequacy of the allowance is based primarily on a mathematical model that estimates the appropriate allowance for loan losses. This model has two components. The first component involves the estimation of losses on individually evaluated “impaired loans.” A loan is considered to be impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the original loan agreement. A loan is specifically evaluated for an appropriate valuation allowance if the loan balance is above a prescribed evaluation threshold (which varies based on credit quality, accruing status, troubled debt restructured status, purchased credit impaired status, and type of collateral) and the loan is determined to be impaired. The estimated valuation allowance is the difference, if any, between the loan balance outstanding and the value of the impaired loan as determined by either 1) an estimate of the cash flows that we expect to receive from the borrower discounted at the loan’s effective rate, or 2) in the case of a collateral-dependent loan, the fair value of the collateral.
The second component of the allowance model is an estimate of losses for all loans not considered to be impaired loans (“general reserve loans”). General reserve loans are segregated into pools by loan type and risk grade and estimated loss percentages are assigned to each loan pool based on historical losses. The historical loss percentages are then adjusted for any environmental factors used to reflect changes in the collectability of the portfolio not captured by historical data such. In 2020, we have included environmental factors related to the COVID-19 pandemic. See additional discussion the "Summary of Loan Loss Experience."
The reserves estimated for individually evaluated impaired loans are then added to the reserve estimated for general reserve loans. This becomes our “allocated allowance.” The allocated allowance is compared to the actual allowance for loan losses recorded on our books and any adjustment necessary for the recorded allowance to absorb losses inherent in the portfolio is recorded as a provision for loan losses. The provision for loan losses is a direct charge to earnings in the period recorded. Any remaining difference between the allocated allowance and the actual allowance for loan losses recorded on our books is our “unallocated allowance.”
Purchased loans are recorded at fair value at the acquisition date. Therefore, amounts deemed uncollectible at the acquisition date represent a discount to the loan value and become a part of the fair value calculation. Subsequent decreases in the amount expected to be collected result in a provision for loan losses with a corresponding increase in the allowance for loan losses. Subsequent increases in the amount expected to be collected are accreted into income over the life of the loan and this accretion is referred to as “loan discount accretion.”
Within the purchased loan portfolio, loans are deemed purchased credit impaired at acquisition if the bank believes it will not be able to collect all contractual cash flows. Performing loans with an unamortized discount or premium
that are not deemed purchased credit impaired are considered to be purchased performing loans. Purchased credit impaired loans are individually evaluated as impaired loans, as described above, while purchased performing loans are evaluated as general reserve loans. For purchased performing loan pools, any computed allowance that is in excess of remaining net discounts is a component of the allocated allowance.
Although we use the best information available to make evaluations, future material adjustments may be necessary if economic, operational, or other conditions change. In addition, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review our allowance for loan losses. Such agencies may require us to recognize additions to the allowance based on the examiners’ judgment about information available to them at the time of their examinations.
For further discussion, see “Nonperforming Assets” and “Allowance for Loan Losses and Provision for Loan Losses” below.
We had originally expected to adopt CECL on January 1, 2020. However, congressional legislation passed in March 2020 and December 2020 resulted in the option to delay CECL until as late as January 1, 2022. We expect to adopt CECL on January 1, 2021. See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of this matter.
Intangible Assets
Due to the estimation process and the potential materiality of the amounts involved, we have also identified the accounting for intangible assets as an accounting policy critical to our consolidated financial statements.
When we complete an acquisition transaction, the excess of the purchase price over the amount by which the fair market value of assets acquired exceeds the fair market value of liabilities assumed represents an intangible asset. We must then determine the identifiable portions of the intangible asset, with any remaining amount classified as goodwill. Identifiable intangible assets associated with these acquisitions are generally amortized over the estimated life of the related asset, whereas goodwill is tested annually for impairment, but not systematically amortized. Assuming no goodwill impairment, it is beneficial to our future earnings to have a lower amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets and higher amount of goodwill as opposed to having a higher amount considered to be identifiable intangible assets and a lower amount classified as goodwill.
The primary identifiable intangible asset we typically record in connection with a whole bank or bank branch acquisition is the value of the core deposit intangible, whereas when we acquire an insurance agency or a consulting firm, as we did in 2016 and 2017, the primary identifiable intangible asset is the value of the acquired customer list. Determining the amount of identifiable intangible assets and their average lives involves multiple assumptions and estimates and is typically determined by performing a discounted cash flow analysis, which involves a combination of any or all of the following assumptions: customer attrition/runoff, alternative funding costs, deposit servicing costs, and discount rates. We typically engage a third party consultant to assist in each analysis. For the whole bank and bank branch transactions recorded to date, the core deposit intangibles have generally been estimated to have a life ranging from seven to ten years, with an accelerated rate of amortization. For insurance agency acquisitions, the identifiable intangible assets related to the customer lists were determined to have a life of ten to fifteen years, with amortization occurring on a straight-line basis. For SBA Complete, the consulting firm we acquired in 2016, the identifiable intangible asset related to the customer list was determined to have a life of approximately seven years, with amortization occurring on a straight-line basis.
At December 31, 2020, we had three reporting units - 1) First Bank with $227.6 million in goodwill, 2) First Bank Insurance with $7.4 million in goodwill, and 3) SBA activities, including SBA Complete and our SBA Lending Division, with $4.3 million in goodwill. If the carrying value of a reporting unit were ever to exceed its fair value, we would determine whether the implied fair value of the goodwill, using a discounted cash flow analysis, exceeded the carrying value of the goodwill. If the carrying value of the goodwill exceeded the implied fair value of the goodwill, an impairment loss would be recorded in an amount equal to that excess. Performing such a discounted cash flow analysis would involve the significant use of estimates and assumptions.
Subsequent to the initial recording of the identifiable intangible assets and goodwill, we amortize the identifiable intangible assets over their estimated average lives, as discussed above. In addition, we test goodwill for impairment annually on October 31 or on an interim basis if an event triggering impairment may have occurred, by comparing the fair value of our reporting units to their related carrying value, including goodwill. The economic turmoil and market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 crisis resulted in a substantial decrease in the Company's
stock price and market capitalization. We believed such decreases were a triggering indicator requiring an interim goodwill impairment quantitative analysis. Accordingly, during each quarter of 2020, we reviewed our goodwill for impairment. For the first and third quarters of 2020, we performed an interim step-one goodwill impairment quantitative analysis. In performing the quantitative goodwill impairment analysis, we used a combination of market and income approaches for First Bank, the market approach for First Bank Insurance and the income approach for SBA activities. All inputs used in these approaches were evaluated by management at the evaluation date. For the second quarter of 2020 and the annual fourth quarter 2020 review, management reviewed its goodwill for impairment primarily qualitatively by reviewing the factors and assumptions used in the analysis for the preceding quarter. The conclusion of each review was that none of our goodwill was impaired.
We review identifiable intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Our policy is that an impairment loss is recognized, equal to the difference between the asset’s carrying amount and its fair value, if the sum of the expected undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the asset. Estimating future cash flows involves the use of multiple estimates and assumptions, such as those listed above.
Fair Value and Discount Accretion of Acquired Loans
We consider the determination of the initial fair value of acquired loans and the subsequent discount accretion of the purchased loans to involve a high degree of judgment and complexity.
We determine fair value accounting estimates of newly assumed assets and liabilities in accordance with relevant accounting guidance. However, the amount that we realize on these assets could differ materially from the carrying value reflected in our financial statements, based upon the timing of collections on the acquired loans in future periods. Because of inherent credit losses and interest rate marks associated with acquired loans, the amount that we record as the fair values for the loans is generally less than the contractual unpaid principal balance due from the borrowers, with the difference being referred to as the “discount” on the acquired loans. For non-impaired purchased loans, we accrete the discount over the lives of the loans in a manner consistent with the guidance for accounting for loan origination fees and costs.
For purchased credit-impaired (“PCI”) loans, the excess of the cash flows initially expected to be collected over the fair value of the loans at the acquisition date (i.e., the accretable yield) is accreted into interest income over the estimated remaining life of the loans using the effective yield method, provided that the timing and the amount of future cash flows is reasonably estimable. Accordingly, such loans are not classified as nonaccrual and they are considered to be accruing because their interest income relates to the accretable yield recognized under accounting for PCI loans and not to contractual interest payments. The difference between the contractually required payments and the cash flows expected to be collected at acquisition, considering the impact of prepayments, is referred to as the nonaccretable difference.
Subsequent to an acquisition, estimates of cash flows expected to be collected are updated periodically based on updated assumptions regarding default rates, loss severities, and other factors that are reflective of current market conditions. If there is a decrease in cash flows expected to be collected, the provision for loan losses is charged, resulting in an increase to the allowance for loan losses. If the Company has a probable increase in cash flows expected to be collected, we will first reverse any previously established allowance for loan losses and then increase interest income as a prospective yield adjustment over the remaining life of the loan. The impact of changes in variable interest rates is recognized prospectively as adjustments to interest income.
Merger and Acquisition Activity
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
ANALYSIS OF RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net interest income, the “spread” between earnings on interest-earning assets and the interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities, constitutes the largest source of our earnings. Other factors that significantly affect operating results are the provision for loan losses, noninterest income such as service fees and noninterest expenses such as salaries, occupancy expense, equipment expense and other overhead costs, as well as the effects of income taxes.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income on a reported basis amounted to $218.1 million in 2020, $216.2 million in 2019, and $207.4 million in 2018. For internal purposes and in the discussion that follows, we evaluate our net interest income on a tax-equivalent basis by adding the tax benefit realized from tax-exempt loans and securities to reported interest income. Net interest income on a tax-equivalent basis amounted to $219.6 million in 2020, $217.8 million in 2019, and $209.0 million in 2018. Management believes that analysis of net interest income on a tax-equivalent basis is useful and appropriate because it allows a comparison of net interest amounts in different periods without taking into account the different mix of taxable versus non-taxable loans and investments that may have existed during those periods. The following is a reconciliation of reported net interest income to tax-equivalent net interest income.
Table 2 analyzes our net interest income. Our net interest income on a tax-equivalent basis increased by 0.8% in 2020 and 4.2% in 2019. There are two primary factors that cause changes in the amount of net interest income we record - 1) changes in our loans and deposits balances and 2) our net interest margin. “Net interest margin” is a ratio we use to measure the spread between the yield on our earning assets and the cost of our funding and is calculated by dividing tax-equivalent net interest income by average earning assets.
The increase in net interest income in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the incremental earnings associated with the growth in our levels of interest-earning assets. For 2020, average interest-earning assets increased $711.7 million, or 13.1%, including growth of $356.4 million in average loans and $250.4 million in average securities. The growth in interest-earning assets was driven by funds provided from growth in deposits.
The impact on earnings of the interest-earning asset growth was substantially offset by a decrease in our net interest margin, which declined from 4.00% in 2019 to 3.56% in 2020. The lower net interest margin was a result of excess liquidity, as well as the impact of lower interest rates. During 2020, our level of average securities and other short-term investments increased by $705.7 million, or 93.9%. The investment yields realized with the new funds in those asset classes was low, generally less than 1.50%, and thus negatively impacted the net interest margin. Additionally, from August 2019 to March 2020, the Federal Reserve cut interest rates by 225 basis points, which resulted in our loan yields declining by more than our cost of funds. In 2020, loan yields decreased by 55 basis points, from 5.08% in 2019 to 4.53% in 2020, while average funding costs decreased by only 32 basis points in 2020, from 0.66% in 2019 to 0.34% in 2020.
During 2020, our average balance of PPP loans was $167.3 million. Those loans carry a 1% coupon rate and we also amortize fees that we received from the SBA when we originated the loans. That amortization amounted to $4.1 million in 2020 and when combined with the 1% note rate resulted in a 3.56% yield for those loans, and thus did not significantly impact overall loan yields. At December 31, 2020, we had $6.0 million in remaining deferred PPP origination fees that will be recognized over the lives of the loans, with accelerated amortization expected to result from the loan forgiveness process, substantially all of which we expect will occur over the first half of 2021. Also see the section "Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) Loans" below for additional discussion.
The increase in net interest income in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to growth in our interest-earning assets. For 2019, average interest-earning assets increased $336.0 million, or 6.6%, including growth of $184.5 million in average loans and $281.3 million in average securities. The growth in interest-earning assets was driven by funds provided from growth in deposits. Our net interest margin decreased from 4.09% in 2018 to 4.00% in 2019, which partially offset the positive impact on net interest income of the growth of our interest-earning assets. The lower net interest margin was a result of our funding costs increasing by more than our asset yields, largely as
a result of competitive pressures in deposit pricing. In 2019, asset yields increased by seven basis points, from 4.52% in 2018 to 4.59% in 2019, primarily as a result of Federal Reserve interest rate increases during the second half of 2018, while average funding costs increased by 18 basis points in 2019, from 0.48% in 2018 to 0.66% in 2019.
The net interest margin for all periods benefited, by varying amounts, from the net accretion income, primarily associated with purchase accounting premiums/discounts associated with acquisitions. As can be seen in the table below, we recorded $6.2 million in 2020, $6.0 million in 2019, and $7.1 million in 2018 in net accretion that increased net interest income.
The biggest component of the purchase accounting adjustments in each year was loan discount accretion on purchased loans, which amounted to $3.8 million in 2020, $4.6 million in 2019, and $6.1 million in 2018. Most of this loan discount accretion relates to our 2017 acquisitions of Carolina Bank and Asheville Savings Bank, with the declines in accretion being due to the natural paydowns in those acquired loan portfolios, which is expected to continue. In addition to the loan discount accretion recorded on acquired loans, we recorded loan discount accretion of $2.5 million, $1.4 million, and $0.9 million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, on the discounts associated with the retained unguaranteed portions of SBA loans sold in the secondary market. We entered that line of business in late 2016 and the higher discount accretion on those loans is associated with the continued growth in that business.
At December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, unaccreted loan discount on purchased loans amounted to $8.9 million, $12.7 million, and $17.3 million, respectively. At December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, unaccreted loan discount on SBA loans amounted to $7.3 million, $7.1 million, and $5.7 million, respectively.
Table 3 presents additional detail regarding the estimated impact that changes in loan and deposit volumes and changes in the interest rates we earned/paid had on our net interest income in 2019 and 2020. For 2020, higher loan volume positively impacted interest income by $17.1 million, and lower interest rates on loans negatively impacted interest income by $24.8 million, which resulted in a decline in loan interest income of $7.7 million. Higher volumes of total securities balances resulted in $6.1 million in additional interest income in 2020, which was almost completely offset by the impact of lower interest rates earned on those securities. Lower interest rates on short-term investments (primarily overnight funds) in 2020 resulted in $6.7 million in lower interest income, which was partially offset by higher volume. Lower interest rates paid on deposits drove a $8.7 million decrease in deposit interest expense in 2020. Lower levels of borrowings and lower interest rates paid on borrowings resulted in a decrease in borrowings interest expense of $5.6 million in 2020. Overall, as Table 3 indicates, net interest income grew $1.9 million in 2020, with higher earning asset volumes and lower borrowings volumes driving a $27.9 million increase in interest income, which was partially offset by a net $26.0 million negative impact associated with lower interest rates.
For 2019, Table 3 shows the higher amounts of loans and deposits outstanding drove a net increase of $14.3 million in net interest income, while the impact of higher deposit costs resulted in a $5.6 million decrease in total net interest income.
If our nonaccrual and restructured loans as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 had been current in accordance with their original terms and had been outstanding throughout the period (or since origination if held for part of the period), gross interest income in the amounts of approximately $3,038,000 $1,763,000, and $1,616,000, for nonaccrual loans and $645,000, $662,000, and $974,000, for restructured loans would have been recorded for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Interest income on such loans that was actually collected and included in net income in 2020, 2019 and 2018 amounted to approximately $652,000, $759,000, and $765,000, for nonaccrual
loans (prior to their being placed on nonaccrual status), and $483,000, $528,000, and $763,000, for restructured loans, respectively. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no commitments to lend additional funds to debtors whose loans were nonperforming.
See additional information regarding net interest income in the section entitled “Interest Rate Risk.”
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses charged to operations is an amount sufficient to bring the allowance for loan losses to an estimated balance considered appropriate to absorb probable losses inherent in our loan portfolio. Management’s determination of the adequacy of the allowance is based on our level of loan growth, an evaluation of the loan portfolio, current economic conditions, historical loan loss experience and other risk factors.
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we recorded a provision for loan losses of $35.0 million, $2.3 million, and a negative provision for loan losses of $3.6 million, respectively. The increase in 2020 was primarily related to estimated probable losses arising from the economic impact of COVID-19, as discussed below.
In March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic began to impact our nation. The subsequent closures of, or restrictions on, many businesses and job losses continue to result in widespread negative economic impacts. The U.S. Government took various steps to lessen the negative impacts, including stimulus payments and the SBA's relief program. Under the SBA program, the SBA made six months of principal and interest payments on most of our SBA loans. SBA loans that were greater than 30 days delinquent were not eligible for these payments. This payment program was renewed by December 2020 legislation for an additional three months or eight months, depending on the industry, beginning in February 2021. Additionally, as previously discussed, we implemented a loan deferral program that began in late March 2020 in which borrowers could apply for a deferral of the loan payments for up to 90 days and after that 90 day period, borrowers could re-apply for an additional 90 days of payment deferrals. We are uncertain as to the extent that these programs have reduced probable loan losses, and due to that uncertainty and the temporary nature of the programs, we have not relied on these programs as significant positive factors in the risk grading of loans in our portfolio.
In determining the appropriate level of allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020, we reviewed the industry types that we believed have significantly heightened risk as a result of the pandemic, which included, among others, hospitality, retail stores, and restaurants. Based on that analysis, we assigned elevated loan loss reserve percentages for those loan types that brought the total reserve percentages to a level consistent with what we believe are the probable loss rates incurred in a stressed economic scenario. The higher loss rates were generally determined based on our historical high one year loss rates for those loan types. As a result of the analysis, approximately $24.8 million of COVID-19 related qualitative reserves are included in the Company's December 31, 2020 allowance for loan loss amount of $52.3 million at December 31, 2020.
Additionally, as a result of elevated net-charge offs and nonaccrual loans in our SBA portfolio, we assigned higher allowance reserves to our SBA portfolio in 2020, which also impacted the provision for loan losses in 2020. See the sections "Nonperforming Assets" and "Allowance for Loan Losses" for additional discussion.
As noted above, beginning late in the first quarter of 2020, we offered a loan payment deferral program to borrowers negatively impacted by COVID-19. At June 30, 2020, we had a total of $774 million in loans that were in this deferral program. Most of these borrowers resumed payments in the second half of 2020, with total deferrals amounting to $186 million at September 30, 2020, while only $16.6 million remained in deferral status at December 31, 2020.
In 2019, our provision for loan losses was higher than previous years primarily due to higher net charge-offs. The negative provision for 2018 was due primarily to several large loan recoveries realized in the first quarter of 2018 totaling $3.7 million. Although our provision for loan losses was higher in 2019, it continued a trend in recent years until 2020 of being low compared to historical levels. The low levels of provision for loan losses recorded in those years were primarily the result of a sustained period of stable and generally improving loan quality trends, which resulted in lower amounts of provision needed to adjust our allowance for loan losses to the appropriate amount. This is driven by our allowance for loan loss model, which utilizes the net charge-offs experienced in the most recent years as a significant component of estimating the current allowance for loan losses that is necessary. Thus, older years (and parts thereof) systematically age out and are excluded from the analysis as time goes on. In recent years, the new periods being added into our model had generally lower levels of net charge-offs than the older periods rolling out of the model, and thus mostly offset provisions for loan losses that would normally be
required to reflect new loan growth and the net charge-offs experienced. Thus, the low level of net charge-offs (or net recoveries) experienced in recent years has been the primary reason for the low (or negative) provisions for loan losses recorded in among the years presented until 2020.
As shown in Table 14, total net charge-offs (recoveries) for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, were $4.0 million, $1.9 million, and ($1.3 million), respectively. In 2020, the higher net charge-offs were driven by $3.2 million of net charge-offs in our SBA portfolio, and was concentrated in the "commercial, financial, and agricultural" category.
The higher net charge-offs in 2019 resulted from lower loan recoveries in comparison to 2018.
In 2018, we completed a loan sale of approximately $5.2 million in smaller balance nonperforming loans that resulted in loan charge-offs of $2.2 million. However, this was more than offset by full payoffs on four loans received in the first quarter of 2018 that resulted in recoveries to the allowance for loan losses of $3.3 million.
See “Nonperforming Assets” below for further discussion of our asset quality, which impacts our provisions for loan losses.
The allowance is monitored and analyzed regularly in conjunction with our loan analysis and grading program, and adjustments are made to maintain an adequate allowance for loan losses. See the section entitled “Allowance for Loan Losses and Loan Loss Experience” below for a more detailed discussion of the allowance for loan losses, including discussion of a change in the way that we expect to reserve for credit losses beginning in 2021 that may increase the levels and volatility of our provision for loan losses.
Noninterest Income
Our noninterest income amounted to $81.3 million in 2020, $59.5 million in 2019, and $58.9 million in 2018.
See Table 4 and the following discussion for an understanding of the components of noninterest income.
Management evaluates noninterest income on a non-GAAP basis that excludes items such as securities gains and losses and other miscellaneous gains and losses because management believes excluding those items results in a more meaningful reflection of noninterest income from recurring sources. We refer to this as "adjusted noninterest income" - see Table 4 for a reconciliation of reported noninterest income to "adjusted noninterest income." Adjusted noninterest income amounted to $73.4 million in 2020, a 23.1% increase from the $59.6 million recorded in 2019, The 2019 adjusted noninterest income of $59.6 million was a 2.4% increase from the $58.2 million recorded in 2018.
Service charges on deposit accounts amounted to $11.1 million, $13.0 million, and $12.7 million, in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due to fewer instances of overdraft fees that we believe is likely associated with the generally higher levels of deposits maintained by our customers during 2020. We believe the increase in 2019 was primarily due to growth in our number of checking accounts, which we have been promoting with new product offerings.
Total "Other service charges, commissions and fees" amounted to $20.1 million in 2020, a 3.2% increase from the $19.5 million in 2019. The 2019 amount of $19.5 million was an 18.2% increase from the $16.5 million in 2018. This category of noninterest income includes items such as credit and debit card interchange income, ATM charges, safety deposit box rentals, fees from sales of personalized checks, and check cashing fees. The increases in this line item in 2019 and 2020 were primarily due to growth in credit and debit card interchange fees that we earn when our customers use their debit and credit cards issued by our bank. Net interchange income amounted to $14.1 million in 2020, $13.8 million in 2019 and $12.0 million in 2018. We believe the growth in card usage by our customers is due to customer payment preferences, as well as a result of ongoing promotion of these products. General growth of our bank also contributed to the increase in this line item in 2019 and 2020.
Fees from presold mortgages amounted to $14.2 million in 2020, $3.9 million in 2019, and $2.7 million in 2018. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to higher mortgage loan origination volume arising from historically low mortgage loan interest rates. The increase in 2019 was also due to increased volumes in the mortgage industry due to declining interest rates, as well as the hiring of additional loan originators.
Commissions from sales of insurance and financial products amounted to $8.8 million in 2020, $8.5 million in 2019, and $8.7 million in 2018. This line item includes commissions we receive from two primary sources - 1)
commissions from the sales of investment, annuity, and long term care insurance products, and 2) commissions from the sale of property and casualty insurance. The following table presents the contribution of each source to the total amount recognized in this line item:
As can be seen in the above table, sales of investments, annuities and long term care insurance increased in both 2019 and 2020, which was due to the increased growth and promotion of this line of business. Sales of property and casualty insurance also increased slightly in 2020 due to increased growth and promotion. The decline in this line item in 2019 was primarily due to lower contingent commissions compared to 2018, which can vary significantly and are impacted by the claims experience of the insurance carriers used by the Company.
We began offering SBA consulting services in 2016 with our May 2016 acquisition of SBA Complete. In this line of business, SBA Complete assists community banks throughout the nation with SBA origination and servicing activities. SBA consulting fees amounted to $8.6 million in 2020, $3.9 million in 2019, and $4.7 million in 2018. The increases in 2020 were due to fees earned by our SBA subsidiary, SBA Complete, related to assisting its third-party client banks with the PPP, which amounted to $4.6 million. SBA Complete also had $1.4 million in deferred revenue outstanding at December 31, 2020 that will be recorded as income upon the forgiveness portion of the PPP, which is expected to occur in the first half of 2021. The decline in these fees from 2018 to 2019 was associated with lower origination activity of our client banks.
Shortly after the acquisition of SBA Complete, we began a SBA Lending Division, which originates SBA loans throughout the nation and sells the SBA guaranteed portion of those loans, which results in loan sale gains. Loan sale volume can be volatile based on origination activity and the timing of the funding of loans in the pipeline. SBA loan sale gains amounted to $8.0 million, $8.3 million and $10.4 million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Origination of SBA loans generally declined in 2020 due to the economic impact of COVID-19. The decline from 2018 to 2019 was due to the natural volatility discussed above, as well as lower loan sale premium percentages.
Table 4 shows earnings from bank-owned life insurance income were stable with $2.5 million in 2020, $2.6 million in 2019, and $2.5 million in 2018.
During 2020, we sold approximately $220 million in mortgage-backed and commercial mortgage-backed securities at a gain of $8.0 million. The securities sold were believed to be favorably impacted by historically low interest rates and Federal Reserve stimulus measures. Securities gains or losses were not significant in 2019 or 2018, with 2019 having a net gain of $0.1 million, and 2018 having no gains or losses.
“Other gains (losses), net” amounted to a net loss of $0.1 million for 2020, a net loss of $0.2 million for 2019, and a net gain of $0.7 million in 2018. This line item represents the net effects of miscellaneous gains and losses that are non-routine in nature. The net gain of $0.7 million in 2018 primarily related to a gain on the sale of a previously closed branch building.
Noninterest Expenses
Total noninterest expenses totaled $161.3 million, $157.2 million, and $156.5 million, for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Table 5 presents the components of our noninterest expense during the past three years.
Total personnel expense increased from $96.0 million in 2019 to $101.0 million in 2020, an increase of $5.0 million, or 5.2%. Within personnel expense, salaries expense increased $5.8 million, or 7.3%, while employee benefits expense decreased from $16.8 million to $16.0 million. Salaries expense increased primarily due to a $3.3 million increase in mortgage commission expense resulting from higher mortgage loan volume in 2020. Within employee benefits, health care expense, for which the Company is self-insured, is the single largest item and decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 due to lower claims activity.
In 2019, total personnel expense increased from $92.0 million in 2018 to $96.0 million in 2019, an increase of $4.0 million, or 4.4%. Within personnel expense, salaries expense increased $4.0 million, or 5.4%, while employee benefits expense was approximately the same in 2018 and 2019 at approximately $16.9 million. Salaries expense
increased primarily due to normal wage increases for our employees, as well as the hiring of several experienced bankers.
Net occupancy expenses amounted to $11.3 million in 2020, $11.1 million in 2019, and $10.8 million in 2018. The increase in 2020 and 2019 is primarily related to increased rent expense associated with several new leases executed during the years.
Equipment related expenses amounted to $4.3 million, $5.0 million, and $5.6 million, in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. In 2018, we accelerated $0.3 million in depreciation expense associated with our ATM fleet in anticipation of replacing our ATM's in early 2019. This resulted in a decline in ATM depreciation expense in 2019, as well as lower associated repairs and maintenance costs. In 2020, the decrease in this line item related to lower machine maintenance and miscellaneous equipment purchases due to spend control efforts.
Merger and acquisition expenses amounted to $0.2 million in 2019 and $2.4 million in 2018. There were no merger and acquisition expenses in 2020. The 2018 amount was primarily comprised of severance costs and data processing conversion expenses related to the acquisition of Asheville Savings Bank.
Intangible amortization expense amounted to $4.0 million, $4.9 million, and $5.9 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. In 2019 and 2020, intangible amortization expense declined due to the amortization schedules of those intangible assets generally declining over time.
Data processing expenses did not vary significantly among the periods presented, amounting to $3.2 million, $3.1 million, and $3.2 million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Marketing expense amounted to $2.0 million in 2020, $2.7 million in 2019, and $3.1 million in 2018. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due to lowering marketing activity as a result of the pandemic. The decrease from 2018 to 2019 was due to special promotional efforts in our new and expanded market area during 2018.
Non-credit losses remained relatively unchanged for the periods presented, amounting to $1.1 million in 2020, $1.0 million in 2019, and $1.0 million in 2018. These losses primarily related to debit card and credit card fraud losses.
Income Taxes
Table 6 presents the components of income tax expense and the related effective tax rates. We recorded income tax expense of $21.7 million in 2020, $24.2 million in 2019, and $24.2 million in 2018. Our effective tax rates were stable at 21.0% for 2020, 20.8% for 2019, and 21.3% for 2018.
We expect our effective tax rate to be approximately 21.0% in 2021.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recorded stock-based compensation expense of $2.5 million, $2.3 million, and $1.6 million, for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The increases in this expense have been due to retention-based restricted stock grants made to certain officers during the years presented. See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements for more information regarding stock-based compensation.
ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND CHANGES IN FINANCIAL CONDITION
Overview
At December 31, 2020, our total assets amounted to $7.3 billion, an 18.7% increase from 2019. The following table presents detailed information regarding the nature of changes in our loans and deposits in 2019 and 2020.
As shown in the table above, in 2020 and 2019, our total loans outstanding increased $277.8 million, or 6.2%, and $204.4 million, or 4.8%, respectively. Loan growth for 2020 was primarily driven by the origination of $244.9 million in PPP loans, of which $240.7 million was outstanding at December 31, 2020. We also assumed $14.6 million in loans with the acquisition of Magnolia Financial in 2020. Loan growth for 2019 was organic and primarily driven by our expansion in high-growth markets, hiring of experienced bankers, and increases in SBA lending. We generally intend to grow our loan portfolio. We have experienced lenders in our markets and attempt to provide high levels of service to achieve growth. The pandemic negatively impacted traditional (non-PPP) organic loan growth in 2020. Our ability to grow our loans outstanding in the future will be impacted by changes in the pandemic, as well as changes in PPP loan balances.
During 2020, we experienced strong growth in our deposit base, with total deposits increasing by $1.3 billion, or 27.2% from December 31, 2019. Deposit growth in our transaction accounts (checking, money market and savings), was especially strong, increasing $1.5 billion, or 29.5% from 2019. In addition to deposits arising from PPP loans, we believe this high deposit growth was due to a combination of stimulus funds, changes in customer behaviors during the pandemic, and a flight to quality to FDIC-insured banks, as well as our ongoing deposit growth initiatives. We routinely engage in activities designed to grow and retain deposits, such as (1) emphasizing relationship banking to new and existing customers, where borrowers are encouraged and normally expected to maintain deposit accounts with us, (2) pricing deposits at rate levels that will attract and/or retain deposits, and (3) continually working to identify and introduce new products that will attract customers or enhance our appeal as a primary provider of financial services. The high deposit growth in 2020 allowed us to reduce our level of brokered deposits by $65.9 million, or 76.5% during the year. Additionally, we paid down our borrowings in 2020 by $239 million, or 79.4%, with the excess liquidity.
During 2019, we experienced an increase in total deposits of $272.0 million, or 5.8%. Within total deposits, we grew our retail deposits (non-brokered deposits) by $426 million, or 9.6%. Within our retail deposits, we experienced growth of $321.9 million, or 8.7%, in checking, money market and savings accounts, and had growth of $106.6 million, or 15.0%, in our retail time deposits. The high retail deposit growth in 2019 allowed us to reduce our level of
brokered deposits by $154 million, or 64.1% during the year. Additionally, we were able to pay down our borrowings in 2019 by $106 million.
Primarily as a result of our strong deposit growth, our liquidity levels have increased at December 31, 2020 compared to a year earlier. Our liquid assets (cash and securities) as a percentage of our total deposits and borrowings was 31.4% at December 31, 2020 compared to 21.4% at December 31, 2019.
Distribution of Assets and Liabilities
Table 7 sets forth the percentage relationships of significant components of our balance sheet at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
On the asset side, net loans to total assets decreased to 64% in 2020 compared to 72% for both 2019 and 2018, which was primarily due to the impact of the high deposit growth on total assets. The funds provided by the high deposit growth also resulted in increased security purchases in 2020 and resulted in total securities to total assets increasing from 14% in 2019 to 22% in 2020.
On the liability side, as a result of the high deposit growth, deposits increased to 86% of total liabilities and shareholders' equity in 2020, up from 80% and 79% in 2019 and 2018, respectively. In 2020 and 2019, we paid down our borrowings by $239 million and $106 million, respectively, which resulted in our borrowings decreasing to 1% and 5% of total liabilities and shareholders' equity for 2020 and 2019, respectively, compared to 7% for 2018.
Securities
Information regarding our securities portfolio as of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 is presented in Tables 8 and 9.
The composition of the investment securities portfolio reflects our investment strategy of maintaining an appropriate level of liquidity while providing a relatively stable source of income. The investment portfolio also provides a balance to interest rate risk and credit risk in other categories of the balance sheet while providing a vehicle for the investment of available funds, furnishing liquidity, and supplying securities to pledge as required collateral for certain deposits. We obtain fair values for our investment securities from a third-party investment recordkeeper, who specializes in securities purchases and sales, recordkeeping, and valuation. This recordkeeper provides us with a third-party report that contains an evaluation of internal controls that includes testwork of securities valuation. We further test the values we receive by comparing the values for a significant sample of securities to another third-party valuation service on a quarterly basis.
Total securities amounted to $1.621 billion, $890 million, and $603 million, at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The increase in securities in 2020 and 2019 was primarily due to deploying excess cash balances into fixed rate securities that we initiated to realize higher yields.
The majority of our “government-sponsored enterprise” securities carry one maturity date, often with an issuer call feature. At December 31, 2020, of the $70.2 million in available for sale government-sponsored enterprise securities, $40.0 million were issued by the Federal Farm Credit Bank system, and the remaining $30.2 million were issued by the Federal Home Loan Bank system.
Nearly all of our $1.338 billion in available for sale mortgage-backed securities at December 31, 2020 were issued by Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae, Ginnie Mae, or the SBA, each of which is a government agency or government-sponsored corporation and guarantees the repayment of the securities. Included in this total are commercial mortgage-backed securities of $428.5 million. Mortgage-backed securities vary in their repayment in correlation with the underlying pools of mortgage loans.
Our investment policy permits us to hold up to 15% of our securities portfolio in corporate bonds. These bonds have the most credit risk of any of our securities. At December 31, 2020, our $45.2 million investment in corporate bonds was comprised of the following:
____________________________________________________________
(1)Ratings issued by Moody’s
(2)Rating issued by Kroll Bond Rating Agency.
We have concluded that any unrealized losses associated with our corporate bonds are due to interest rate considerations and not due to credit concerns.
At December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, net unrealized gains (losses) of $20.4 million, $9.7 million, and ($12.4 million), respectively, were included in the carrying value of securities classified as available for sale. Management evaluated any unrealized losses on individual securities at each year end and determined them to be of a temporary nature and caused by fluctuations in market interest rates and the overall economic environment, not by concerns about the ability of the issuers to meet their obligations. Net unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable deferred income taxes, are included as part of a separate component of shareholders’ equity (accumulated other comprehensive income) as of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, we held $167.6 million in securities classified as held to maturity, which are carried at amortized cost. These securities had fair values that exceeded their carrying values by $3.2 million at December 31, 2020. Approximately $30.0 million of the securities held to maturity are mortgage-backed securities that have been issued by either Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae. The remaining $137.6 million in securities held to maturity are comprised almost entirely of highly-rated municipal bonds issued by state and local governments throughout the nation. We have no significant concentration of bond holdings from one government entity, with the single largest exposure to any one entity being $5.6 million. Management evaluated any unrealized losses on individual securities at each year end and determined them to be of a temporary nature and caused by fluctuations in market interest rates, not by concerns about the ability of the issuers to meet their obligations.
The weighted average taxable-equivalent yield for the securities available for sale portfolio was 1.62% at December 31, 2020. The expected weighted average life of the available for sale portfolio using the call date for above-market callable bonds, the maturity date for all other non-mortgage-backed securities, and the expected life for mortgage-backed securities, was 5.7 years.
The weighted average taxable-equivalent yield for the securities held to maturity portfolio was 2.11% at December 31, 2020. The expected weighted average life of the held to maturity portfolio using the call date for above-market callable bonds, the expected life for mortgage-backed securities, and the maturity date for all other securities, was 7.9 years.
We expect the adoption of CECL to result in an insignificant amount of credit losses related to our securities portfolio.
The following table provides the names of issuers for which the Company has investment securities totaling in excess of 10% of shareholders’ equity and the fair value and amortized cost of these investments as of December 31, 2020. All of these securities are issued by government sponsored corporations.
Loans
The loan portfolio is the largest category of our earning assets and is comprised of commercial loans, real estate mortgage loans, real estate construction loans, and consumer loans. The majority of our loan portfolio is within our 36 county market area, which are located in western, central and eastern North Carolina and three counties in northeastern South Carolina. We also have a portfolio of SBA loans that have been made on a nationwide basis. The diversity of the economic bases of our market areas has historically provided a stable lending environment.
In 2020, loans outstanding increased $277.8 million, or 6.2%, whereas in 2019, loans outstanding increased $204.4 million, or 4.8%. The growth in 2020 was primarily due to $240.9 million in PPP loans outstanding at December 31, 2020 (see discussion below) and $14.6 million in loans assumed from the acquisition of Magnolia Financial. The growth in 2019 was generated internally and was concentrated primarily within our higher growth markets.
The majority of our loan portfolio over the years has been real estate mortgage loans, with loans secured by real estate historically comprising approximately 87% to 89% of our outstanding loan balances. In 2020, our loans secured by real estate decreased to 82% of outstanding loan balances due to PPP loans, which are unsecured loans and are included in the line item "commercial, financial, and agricultural." Except for construction, land development and other land loans, the majority of our “real estate” loans are personal and commercial loans where cash flow from the borrower’s occupation or business is the primary repayment source, with the real estate pledged providing a secondary repayment source.
Table 10 provides a summary of the loan portfolio composition of our total loans at each of the past five year ends.
Commercial, financial, and agricultural loans increased from 9% at December 31, 2016 to 11% at December 31, 2019, due primarily to growth in loans made to municipalities and loans originated by our SBA Lending Division. This category of loans further increased in 2020 to 17% of total loans as of December 31, 2020 due primarily to the $241 million in PPP loans outstanding at year-end.
Residential real estate loans have declined from 28% of total loans at December 31, 2016 to 21% of total loans at December 31, 2020. This decline has been due to a combination of factors including consumers refinancing their home loans held by the Bank with long term fixed rate loans, which we typically sell in the secondary market. Additionally, the Carolina Bank loan portfolio acquired during 2017 had only an 11% mix of residential real estate loans.
Commercial real estate loans as a percentage of total loans has increased steadily over the past five years and amounted to 43% of all loans at December 31, 2020. Consistent with our community banking strategy, we have placed emphases on this type of loan growth and hired a number of experienced community bankers, who have originated a significant amount of business loans secured by real estate. Also, growth in our SBA loan portfolio has contributed to the increase in this category.
Table 11 provides a summary of scheduled loan maturities over certain time periods, with fixed rate loans and adjustable rate loans shown separately. Approximately 12% of our accruing loans outstanding at December 31, 2020 mature within one year and 51% of total loans mature within five years, with both of those measures being consistent with recent years. As of December 31, 2020, the percentages of variable rate loans and fixed rate loans as compared to total performing loans were 26% and 74%. In recent years, the mix of variable rate loans to fixed rate loans has been shifting to more fixed rate loans as fixed rate loans continue to be popular with many borrowers in order to lock in a low interest rate during the historically low interest rate environment that has been in effect. Also at December 31, 2020, we held $241 million in PPP loans, which all carry a fixed rate of interest. While fixed rate loans presents risk to our Company if interest rates rise, we measure our interest rate risk closely and, as
discussed in the section “Interest Rate Risk” below, we do not believe that an increase in interest rates would materially negatively impact our net interest income.
Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") Loans
PPP loans, which we began originating in April 2020, are loans to qualified small businesses and other entities administered by the SBA under the provisions of the CARES Act and subsequent federal acts. Loans covered by the PPP may be eligible for loan forgiveness for certain costs incurred related to payroll and other eligible expenses. The remaining loan balance after forgiveness of any amounts is still fully guaranteed by the SBA. Terms of the PPP loans include the following (i) maximum amount limited to the lesser of $10 million or an amount calculated using a payroll-based formula, (ii) maximum loan term of five years, (iii) interest rate of 1.00%, (iv) no collateral or personal guarantees are required, (v) no payments are required until the date on which the forgiveness amount relating to the loan is remitted to the lender and (vi) loan forgiveness up to the full principal amount of the loan and any accrued interest, subject to certain requirements including that no more than 40% of the loan forgiveness amount may be attributable to non-payroll costs. In return for processing and booking a PPP loan, the SBA paid lenders a processing fee tiered by the size of the loan (5% for loans of not more than $350 thousand; 3% for loans of more than $350 thousand and less than $2 million; and 1% for loans of at least $2 million).
PPP loans include loans to businesses and other entities that are reported as commercial loans originated under the guidelines discussed above. During 2020, we funded approximately $244.9 million of PPP loans and through December 31, 2020, we had received $4.0 million in forgiveness payments from the SBA. At December 31, 2020, we had $240.9 million in PPP loans outstanding, which represented 30.8% of our commercial, financial, and agricultural loans and 5.1% of our total loans. We expect that the majority of our outstanding PPP loans will be forgiven in 2021. Also, we are originating new PPP loans in 2021 as a result of legislation that provided additional funds for this relief program.
During 2020, we amortized net deferred PPP fees of $4.1 million as interest income. At December 31, 2020, we have $6.0 million in remaining deferred PPP origination fees that will be recognized over the lives of the loans, with accelerated amortization expected to result from the loan forgiveness process. We expect substantially all of these fees will be recognized in the first half of 2021 as a result of the loan forgiveness process.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets include nonaccrual loans, troubled debt restructurings, loans past due 90 or more days and still accruing interest, and foreclosed properties. As a matter of policy we place all loans that are past due 90 or more days on nonaccrual basis, and thus there were no loans at any of the past five year ends that were 90 days past due and still accruing interest.
Nonaccrual loans are loans on which interest income is no longer being recognized or accrued because management has determined that the collection of interest is doubtful. Placing loans on nonaccrual status negatively impacts earnings because (i) interest accrued but unpaid as of the date a loan is placed on nonaccrual status is reversed and deducted from interest income, (ii) future accruals of interest income are not recognized until it becomes probable that both principal and interest will be paid and (iii) principal charged-off, if appropriate, may necessitate additional provisions for loan losses that are charged against earnings. In some cases, where borrowers are experiencing financial difficulties, loans may be restructured to provide terms significantly different from the originally contracted terms.
Table 12 summarizes our nonperforming assets at the dates indicated.
In the past several years, we have generally benefited from improving economic conditions and successfully implemented a combination of strategies to reduce nonperforming assets. However, in 2020, a portion of our SBA loan portfolio was delinquent, and thus those loans did not qualify for the SBA's relief payment plan. Many of those loans defaulted for both pandemic and other reasons and were transferred to nonaccrual status. Due primarily to those SBA loans, our total nonperforming loans increased from $33.9 million at December 31, 2019 to $44.6 million at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020, we held $170 million in total SBA loans, of which $136 million were the unguaranteed portions of those loans.
Table 12a presents our nonperforming assets at December 31, 2020 by general geographic region.
The following is the composition, by loan type, of all of our nonaccrual loans at each period end:
The nonaccrual table above generally indicates a net increase in nonaccrual loans during the year, with the “Commercial, financial and agricultural” and "Real estate - mortgage - commercial and other" categories experiencing the largest increases. Both of the increases were primarily driven by SBA loans that were placed on nonaccrual status during 2020. At December 31, 2020, we had $18.4 million in nonaccrual SBA loans compared to $9.0 million a year earlier. The unguaranteed portions of those loans amounted to $12.1 million at December 31, 2020 and $5.2 million at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, SBA loans accounted for approximately $9.3 million of our nonaccrual loans in the "Commercial, financial and agricultural” category and $9.1 million of our nonaccrual loans in the "Real estate - mortgage - commercial and other" category.
Due to government and the Company's COVID-19 relief programs, the nonperforming asset level at December 31, 2020 does not likely reflect the full impact of COVID-19. While there are still many uncertainties associated with the pandemic and the stimulus measures taken by the United States government to address it, higher unemployment levels and business closures would generally be expected to result in higher levels of nonperforming assets in the future.
As shown in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements, our accruing past due loans (30 or more days) amounted to $22.3 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.4 million from the $23.7 million at December 31, 2019. Due to government and the Company's COVID-19 relief programs, the past due amounts at December 31, 2020 have not been negatively impacted by the pandemic in a significant manner. As previously discussed, since the onset of the pandemic in March 2020, we worked with many of our borrowers and provided loan payment deferrals, with the Company deferring payments on approximately $774 million loans at June 30, 2020. Over the second half of 2020, most of those borrowers resumed making payments and loans on deferral status declined to $16.6 million, or 0.4% of total loans at December 31, 2020.
Management routinely monitors the status of certain large loans that, in management’s opinion, have credit weaknesses that could cause them to become nonperforming loans. In addition to the nonperforming loan amounts discussed above and economic conditions that do not significantly worsen, management believes that an estimated $15 to $20 million of loans that were performing in accordance with their contractual terms at December 31, 2020 have the potential to develop problems in the near term depending upon the particular financial situations of the borrowers and economic conditions in general. Management has taken these potential problem loans into consideration when evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020 (see discussion below).
Loans classified for regulatory purposes as loss, doubtful, substandard, or special mention that have not been disclosed in the problem loan amounts and the potential problem loan amounts discussed above do not represent or result from trends or uncertainties that management reasonably expects will materially impact future operating results, liquidity, or capital resources, or represent material credits about which management is aware of any information that causes management to have serious doubts as to the ability of such borrowers to comply with the loan repayment terms.
We provide additional information regarding the credit quality classification status of our loans in tables contained in Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements. Those tables indicate that at December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020, our level of classified and nonaccrual loans to total loans amounted to approximately 1.3% and 1.4%, respectively. We believe that government relief programs have resulted in fewer loans migrating to classified risk grades than would otherwise been the case as a result of the pandemic. Instead, certain of those loans have been moved to Special Mention status, which resulted in that risk grade of loans increasing from $50.3 million at December 31, 2019 to $61.3 million at December 31, 2020.
Foreclosed properties includes primarily foreclosed real estate. Total foreclosed real estate amounted to $2.4 million, $3.9 million, and $7.4 million, at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Generally, we have experienced decreases in foreclosed real estate over the past several years primarily due to increased property sales activity and the improvement in our overall asset quality.
The following table presents the detail of our foreclosed real estate at each of the past two year ends:
Allowance for Loan Losses and Loan Loss Experience
The allowance for loan losses is created by direct charges to operations (known as a “provision for loan losses” for the period in which the charge is taken). Losses on loans are charged against the allowance in the period in which such loans, in management’s opinion, become uncollectible. Recoveries realized during the period are credited to this allowance. We consider our procedures for recording the amount of the allowance for loan losses and the related provision for loan losses to be a critical accounting policy. See the heading “Critical Accounting Policies” above for further discussion.
The factors that influence management’s judgment in determining the amount charged to operating expense include recent loan loss experience, composition of the loan portfolio, evaluation of probable inherent losses and current economic conditions.
We use a loan analysis and grading program to facilitate our evaluation of probable inherent loan losses and the adequacy of our allowance for loan losses. In this program, credit risk grades are assigned by management and tested by an internal loan review department and also an independent third-party consulting firm. The testing program includes an evaluation of a sample of new loans, loans we identify as having potential credit weaknesses, loans past due 90 days or more, loans originated by new loan officers, nonaccrual loans and any other loans identified during previous regulatory and other examinations.
We strive to maintain our loan portfolio in accordance with what management believes are conservative loan underwriting policies that result in loans specifically tailored to the needs of our market areas. Every effort is made to identify and minimize the credit risks associated with such lending strategies. We have no foreign loans, few agricultural loans and do not engage in significant lease financing or highly leveraged transactions. Commercial loans are diversified among a variety of industries. The majority of loans captioned in the tables discussed below as “real estate” loans are personal and commercial loans where real estate provides additional security for the loan. Collateral for the majority of these loans is located within our principal market area.
The total allowance for loan losses amounted to $52.4 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $21.4 million at December 31, 2019 and $21.0 million at December 31, 2018. Table 13 sets forth the allocation of the allowance for loan losses at the dates indicated. However, the allowance for loan losses is available to absorb losses in all categories.
Our allowance for loan losses is primarily based on mathematical model with the primary factors impacting this model being loan growth, net charge-off history, and asset quality trends, as well as specific reserves we set aside on certain individual loans exhibiting signs of deterioration. Our allowance for loan loss model utilizes the net charge-offs experienced in the most recent years as a significant component of estimating the current allowance for loan losses that is necessary. Thus, older years (and parts thereof) systematically age out and are excluded from the analysis as time goes on. In recent years, the new periods have had generally lower levels of net charge-offs (and net recoveries in some periods) than the older periods rolling out of the model, and thus mostly offset upward adjustments to the allowance that would normally be required to reflect new loan growth and the net charge-offs experienced. Thus, the low level of net charge-offs (or net recoveries) experienced in recent years had been the primary reason for the low (or negative) provisions for loan losses that have been necessary until 2020 to appropriately adjust the level or our allowance for loan losses.
In March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic began to impact our nation. The subsequent closures of, or restrictions on, many businesses and job losses continue to result in widespread negative economic impacts. The U.S. Government has taken steps to lessen the negative impacts, including stimulus payments and the SBA's payment relief program. Under the SBA's payment relief program, the SBA made principal and interest payments on most of our SBA loans for six months in 2020. This program resumed in February 2021 with additional payments being made by the SBA for either three months or eight months, depending on the nature of the business. Additionally, as previously discussed, we implemented a loan deferral program. We are uncertain as to the extent that these programs have reduced probable loan losses, and due to that uncertainty and the temporary nature of the programs, we have not relied on these programs as significant positive factors in the risk grading of loans in our portfolio.
In determining the appropriate level of allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020, we reviewed the industry types that we believed have significantly heightened risk as a result of the pandemic, which included, among others, hospitality, retail stores, and restaurants. At December 31, 2020, we held approximately $175 million in hotel loans and $82 million in restaurant loans, which we believe are the highest risk loans. Based on that analysis, we assigned elevated loan loss reserve percentages for certain of those loan types that brought the total reserve percentages to a level consistent with what we believe are the probable loss rates incurred in a stressed economic scenario. The higher loss rates were generally determined based on our historical high one year loss rates for those loan types. As a result of the analysis, approximately $24.8 million of COVID-19 related qualitative reserves are included in the Company's December 31, 2020 allowance for loan loss amount of $52.3 million.
Also, as discussed previously,our SBA loan portfolio accounted for a significant portion of our net-charge offs in 2020 and nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2020. Accordingly, our level of allowance for loans losses at December 31, 2020 reflects heightened reserves for our SBA loan portfolio compared to prior periods, primarily in the "Commercial, financial, and agricultural' and "Real estate - mortgage - commercial and other" categories, as reflected in Table 13.
For the years indicated, Table 14 summarizes our balances of loans outstanding, average loans outstanding, and a detailed rollforward of the allowance for loan losses.
Net loan charge-offs (recoveries) of total loans amounted to $4.0 million in 2020, $1.9 million in 2019, and ($1.3 million) in 2018. In 2020, we recorded $3.2 million of net charge-offs within our SBA loan portfolio, which was concentrated in the "commercial, financial, and agricultural" category. In 2019, the increases in the categories of "Commercial, financial, and agricultural" and "Real estate - mortgage - commercial and other" were driven by $2.1 million in net charge-offs within our SBA loan portfolio. In 2018, we received full payoffs on four loans that had been previously charged-down by approximately $3.3 million and are included in the table as recoveries, contributing significantly to the net recovery position for the year.
The ratio of our allowance to total loans was 1.11%, 0.48%, and 0.50%, at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. As discussed above, the higher level of allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by estimated probable losses arising from the economic impact of COVID-19. Our relatively low level of allowance to total loans in 2019 and 2018 was also significantly impacted by the acquisitions of Carolina Bank and Asheville Savings Bank, which had over $1 billion in total loans. Applicable accounting guidance did not allow us to record an allowance for loan losses upon the acquisition of loans - instead the acquired loans were recorded at their discounted fair value, which included the consideration of any expected losses. No allowance for loan losses is recorded for the acquired loans unless the expected credit losses exceed the remaining unamortized discounts - based on an individual basis for purchased credit impaired loans and on a pooled basis for performing acquired loans. See Critical Accounting Policies above for further discussion. Unaccreted discount on acquired loans, which is available to absorb loan losses on those acquired loans, amounted to $8.9 million, $12.7 million, and $17.3 million, at December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019, and December 31, 2018, respectively.
Management considers the allowance for loan losses adequate to cover probable loan losses on the loans outstanding as of each reporting date. It must be emphasized, however, that the determination of the allowance using our procedures and methods rests upon various judgments and assumptions about economic conditions and other factors affecting loans. No assurance can be given that we will not in any particular period sustain loan losses that are sizable in relation to the amount reserved or that subsequent evaluations of the loan portfolio, in light of conditions and factors then prevailing, will not require significant changes in the allowance for loan losses or future charges to earnings.
In addition, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review the allowance for loan losses and losses on foreclosed real estate. Such agencies may require us to recognize additions to the allowance based on the examiners’ judgments about information available to them at the time of their examinations.
The way that we reserve for loan losses will experience a significant change in 2021, as a result of new guidance issued by the FASB. The Company was initially expecting to adopt this new guidance on January 1, 2020, but due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the related CARES Act and subsequent legislation, we elected to defer the implementation of CECL, and now expect to adopt it as of January 1, 2021. CECL requires an entity to utilize a new impairment model known as the current expected credit loss ("CECL") model to estimate its lifetime "expected credit losses" and record an allowance that, when deducted from the amortized cost basis of the financial assets, presents the net amount expected to be collected on the financial assets. The CECL framework is expected to result in earlier recognition of credit losses and is expected to be significantly influenced by the composition, characteristics and quality of our loan portfolio, as well as the prevailing economic conditions and forecasts. We will initially apply the impact of the new guidance through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the year of adoption, which we now expect to be January 1, 2021. At this time, we expect our allowance for credit losses will increase by approximately $12-14 million and that our reserve for unfunded commitments will increase by $6-$7 million.
The CECL standard provides significant flexibility and requires a high degree of judgment with regards to pooling financial assets with similar risk characteristics and adjusting the relevant historical loss information in order to develop an estimate of expected lifetime losses. Providing for losses over the life of our loan portfolio is a change to the previous method of providing allowances for loan losses that are probable and incurred. This change may require us to increase our allowance for loan losses rapidly in future periods, and greatly increases the types of data we need to collect and review to determine the appropriate level of the allowance for loan losses. It may also result in even small changes to future forecasts having a significant impact on the allowance, which could make the allowance more volatile, and regulators may impose additional capital buffers to absorb this volatility.
Deposits
Deposits are a critical part of our business, as they provide the primary funding source for our loans and investments. Accordingly, as discussed below, we have implemented various strategies and developed competitive products to promote growth of our deposit balances.
At December 31, 2020, deposits outstanding amounted to $6.274 billion, an increase of 27.2%, or $1.342 billion, from the $4.931 billion at December 31, 2019, all of which was organic growth. Within our retail deposits (non-brokered), we experienced growth of $1.456 billion, or 29.5%, in checking, money market and savings accounts, and experienced a decline of $114 million, or 2.3%, in our retail time deposits. As a result of the strong retail deposit growth in 2020, we were able to reduce our level of brokered deposits during the year by $65.9 million, a decrease of 76.5%. In addition to deposits arising from PPP loans, our high deposit growth in 2020 is believed to be due to a combination of stimulus funds, changes in customer behaviors during the pandemic, a flight to quality to FDIC-insured banks, as well as our ongoing deposit growth initiatives.
During 2019, we experienced an increase in total deposits of $272.0 million, or 5.8%, which was substantially all retail deposit growth. Within our retail deposits, we experienced growth of $321.9 million, or 8.7%, in checking, money market and savings accounts, and had growth of $106.6 million, or 15.0%, in our retail time deposits.
We routinely engage in activities designed to grow and retain deposits, such as (1) emphasizing relationship banking to new and existing customers, where borrowers are encouraged and normally expected to maintain deposit accounts with us, (2) pricing deposits at rate levels that will attract and/or retain deposits, and (3) continually working to identify and introduce new products that will attract customers or enhance our appeal as a primary provider of financial services.
The nature of our deposit growth is illustrated in the table on page 45. The following table reflects the mix of our deposits at each of the past three year ends:
Our deposit mix continues a trend of being more heavily concentrated in transaction and non-time deposit accounts, with time deposits declining from 21% of total deposits at December 31, 2018, to 18% at December 31, 2019, to 13% at December 31, 2020. This is beneficial for us, as non-time deposit accounts generally carry lower interest rates compared to time deposits. Prior to the very low interest rate environment that we have been in for the past decade, the time deposit concentration was closer to 50%. We believe the lower mix of time deposits has been due to the relatively small gap between the interest rates that we pay on transaction accounts versus the rates we pay on time deposits.
Table 15 presents the average amounts of our deposits and the average yield paid for those deposits for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
As of December 31, 2020, we held approximately $564.4 million in time deposits of $100,000 or more, of which $375.7 million are in denominations of $250,000 or more. Table 16 is a maturity schedule of time deposits of $100,000 or more and time deposits of $250,000 or more as of December 31, 2020. This table shows that 88% of our time deposits greater than $100,000 and 90.0% of our time deposits greater than $250,000 mature within one year.
As of December 31, 2020, we held approximately $2.3 billion in uninsured deposits, including $283.0 million in time deposits.
At each of the past three year ends, we have no deposits issued through foreign offices, nor do we believe that we held any deposits by foreign depositors.
Borrowings
We typically utilize borrowings to provide balance sheet liquidity and to fund imbalances in our loan growth compared to our deposit growth. Our borrowings outstanding totaled $61.8 million at December 31, 2020, $300.7 million at December 31, 2019, and $406.6 million at December 31, 2018. Table 2 shows that average borrowings were $186.4 million in 2020, $332.6 million in 2019, and $406.9 million in 2018.
In both 2019 and 2020, we used a portion of the excess cash generated from deposit growth that exceeded loan growth to pay down borrowings of $106 million and $239 million, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had three sources of readily available borrowing capacity - 1) an approximately $1.02 billion line of credit with the FHLB, of which $8 million was outstanding at December 31, 2020 and $247 million was outstanding at December 31, 2019, 2) a $100 million federal funds line of credit with a correspondent bank, of which none was outstanding at December 31, 2020 or 2019, and 3) an approximately $134 million line of credit through the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond’s (FRB) discount window, of which none was outstanding at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Our line of credit with the FHLB can be structured as either short-term or long-term borrowings, depending on the particular funding or liquidity need, and is secured by our FHLB stock and a blanket lien on most of our real estate loan portfolio. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the average amount of FHLB borrowings outstanding was approximately $132.4 million with a weighted average interest rate for the year of 1.13%. The maximum amount of short-term FHLB borrowings outstanding at any month-end during 2020 was $348.2 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the average amount of FHLB borrowings outstanding was approximately $278.4 million with a weighted average interest rate for the year of 2.22%. The maximum amount of short-term FHLB borrowings outstanding at any month-end during 2019 was $352.3 million.
Our correspondent bank relationship allows us to purchase up to $100 million in federal funds on an overnight, unsecured basis (federal funds purchased). We had no borrowings under this line at December 31, 2020 or 2019. There were no federal funds purchased outstanding at any month-end during 2020 or 2019.
We also have a line of credit with the FRB discount window. This line is secured by a blanket lien on a portion of our commercial and consumer loan portfolio (excluding real estate loans). Based on the collateral that we owned as of December 31, 2020, the available line of credit was approximately $134 million. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no borrowings outstanding under this line.
In addition to the lines of credit described above, we also have of $56.7 million of trust preferred security debt outstanding at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Each of our three issuances have 30 year final maturities and were structured in a manner that allows them to qualify as Tier 1 capital for regulatory capital adequacy requirements. We may call these debt securities at par on any quarterly interest payment, but do not expect to do so. The interest rate on these debt securities adjusts on a quarterly basis at a rate of three-month LIBOR plus 2.70% for $20.6 million, three-month LIBOR plus 1.39% on $25.8 million, and LIBOR + 2.00% for $10.3 million that was assumed in the Carolina Bank acquisition.
Liquidity, Commitments, and Contingencies
Our liquidity is determined by our ability to convert assets to cash or to acquire alternative sources of funds to meet the needs of our customers who are withdrawing or borrowing funds, and our ability to maintain required reserve levels, pay expenses and operate the Company on an ongoing basis. Our primary liquidity sources are net income from operations, cash and due from banks, federal funds sold and other short-term investments. Our securities portfolio is comprised almost entirely of readily marketable securities which could also be sold to provide cash.
As noted above, in addition to internally generated liquidity sources, at December 31, 2020, we had the ability to obtain borrowings from the following three sources - 1) an approximately $1.02 billion line of credit with the FHLB, 2) a $100 million federal funds line with a correspondent bank, and 3) an approximately $134 million line of credit through the FRB’s discount window.
Our overall liquidity increased at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 due to significant deposit growth that outpaced our loan growth. Our liquid assets (cash and securities) as a percentage of our total deposits and borrowings amounted to 31.4% at December 31, 2020 compared to 21.4% at December 31, 2019.
We continue to believe our liquidity sources, including unused lines of credit, are at an acceptable level and remain adequate to meet our operating needs in the foreseeable future. We will continue to monitor our liquidity position carefully and will explore and implement strategies to increase liquidity if deemed appropriate.
In the normal course of business we have various outstanding contractual obligations that will require future cash outflows. In addition, there are commitments and contingent liabilities, such as commitments to extend credit, that may or may not require future cash outflows.
Table 18 reflects our contractual obligations and other commercial commitments outstanding as of December 31, 2020. Any of our $8 million in outstanding borrowings with the FHLB may be accelerated immediately by the FHLB in certain circumstances, including material adverse changes in our condition or if our qualifying collateral is less than the amount required under the terms of the borrowing agreement.
In the normal course of business there are various outstanding commitments and contingent liabilities such as commitments to extend credit, which are not reflected in the financial statements. The following table presents a summary of our outstanding loan commitments as of December 31, 2020:
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we also had $14.1 million and $12.0 million, respectively, in standby letters of credit outstanding. We had no carrying amount for these standby letters of credit at either of those dates. The nature of the standby letters of credit is that of a stand-alone obligation made on behalf of our customers to suppliers of the
customers to guarantee payments owed to the supplier by the customer. The standby letters of credit are generally for terms of one year, at which time they may be renewed for another year if both parties agree. The payment of the guarantees would generally be triggered by a continued nonpayment of an obligation owed by the customer to the supplier. The maximum potential amount of future payments (undiscounted) we could be required to make under the guarantees in the event of nonperformance by the parties to whom credit or financial guarantees have been extended is represented by the contractual amount of the financial instruments discussed above. In the event that we are required to honor a standby letter of credit, a note, already executed by the customer, becomes effective providing repayment terms and any collateral. Over the past two years, we have had to honor only a few standby letters of credit, none of which resulted in any loss to the Company. We expect any draws under existing commitments to be funded through normal operations.
It has been our experience that deposit withdrawals are generally able to be replaced with new deposits when needed. Based on that assumption, management believes that it can meet its contractual cash obligations and existing commitments from normal operations.
We are not involved in any legal proceedings that, in management’s opinion, are likely to have a material effect on the consolidated financial position of the Company.
Capital Resources and Shareholders’ Equity
Shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2020 amounted to $893.4 million compared to $852.4 million at December 31, 2019 and $764.2 million at December 31, 2018. The two basic components that typically have the largest impact on our shareholders’ equity are net income, which increases shareholders’ equity, and dividends declared, which decrease shareholders’ equity. Additionally, any stock issuances can significantly increase shareholders’ equity, including those associated with acquisitions, and any stock repurchases reduce shareholders’ equity.
In 2020, the most significant factors that impacted our equity were 1) the $81.5 million net income reported for 2020, which increased equity, 2) common stock dividends declared of $20.8 million, which reduced equity, 3) other comprehensive income of $9.2 million (primarily driven by increases in unrealized gains on available securities for sale), which increased equity, and 4) stock repurchases of $31.9 million, which decreased equity. See the Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity within the consolidated financial statements for disclosure of other less significant items affecting shareholders’ equity.
In 2019, the most significant factors that impacted our equity were 1) the $92.0 million net income reported for 2019, which increased equity, 2) common stock dividends declared of $16.0 million, which reduced equity, 3) other comprehensive income of $17.1 million (primarily driven by increases in unrealized gains on available securities for sale), which increased equity, 4) stock repurchases of $10.0 million, which decreased equity, and 5) the issuance of $3.1 million in stock related to the conclusion of an earn-out period related to a 2016 acquisition, which increased equity. See the Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity within the consolidated financial statements for disclosure of other less significant items affecting shareholders’ equity.
In 2018, the most significant factors that impacted our equity were 1) the $89.3 million net income reported for 2018, which increased equity, and 2) common stock dividends declared of $11.9 million, which reduced equity. See the Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity within the consolidated financial statements for disclosure of other less significant items affecting shareholders’ equity.
With the acquisition of Carolina Bank in March 2017, we assumed a deferred compensation plan for certain members of Carolina Bank’s board of directors that is fully funded by Company stock, which was valued at $7.7 million on the date of acquisition. Subsequent to the acquisition in 2017, approximately $5.5 million of the deferred compensation has been paid to the plan participants. The balances of the related asset and liability were each $2.2 million at December 31, 2020, both of which are presented as components of shareholders’ equity.
As discussed in “Borrowings” above, we also currently have $56.7 million in trust preferred securities outstanding, all of which qualify as Tier I capital under both current and forthcoming regulatory standards.
We are not aware of any recommendations of regulatory authorities or otherwise which, if they were to be implemented, would have a material effect on our liquidity, capital resources, or operations.
The Company and the Bank must comply with regulatory capital requirements established by the Federal Reserve and the Commissioner. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory, and possibly
additional discretionary, actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
The primary source of funds for the payment of dividends by the Company is dividends received from its subsidiary, the Bank. The Bank, as a North Carolina banking corporation, may declare dividends so long as such dividends do not reduce its capital below its applicable required capital (typically, the level of capital required to be deemed “adequately capitalized.”) As of December 31, 2020, approximately $590,672,000 of the Company’s investment in the Bank is restricted as to transfer to the Company without obtaining prior regulatory approval.
Table 20 presents our regulatory capital ratios as of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. All of our capital ratios have significantly exceeded the minimum regulatory thresholds for all periods covered by this report.
In this economic environment, our goal is to maintain our capital ratios at levels at least 200 basis points higher than the “well capitalized” thresholds set for banks. At December 31, 2020, our tier 1 leverage ratio was 9.88% compared to the regulatory well capitalized bank-level threshold of 5.00% and our total risk-based capital ratio was 15.37% compared to the 10.50% regulatory well capitalized threshold.
In addition to regulatory capital ratios, we also closely monitor our ratio of tangible common equity to tangible assets (“TCE Ratio”). Our TCE Ratio was 9.08% at December 31, 2020 compared to 10.20% at December 31, 2019, with the decline in 2020 being due to the high asset growth that was a result of high deposit growth.
See “Supervision and Regulation” under “Business” above and Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of other matters that may affect our capital resources.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Derivative Financial Instruments
Off-balance sheet arrangements include transactions, agreements, or other contractual arrangements pursuant to which we have obligations or provide guarantees on behalf of an unconsolidated entity. We have no off-balance sheet arrangements of this kind other than letters of credit and repayment guarantees associated with our trust preferred securities.
Derivative financial instruments include futures, forwards, interest rate swaps, options contracts, and other financial instruments with similar characteristics. We have not engaged in significant derivatives activities through December 31, 2020 and have no current plans to do so.
Interest Rate Risk (Including Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk -