Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A)
The following MD&A relates to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements of First BanCorp. (the “Corporation,” “we,” “us,” “our,” or “First BanCorp.”) and should be read in conjunction with such financial statements and the notes thereto. This section also presents certain financial measures that are not based on generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). See “Basis of Presentation” below for information about why the non-GAAP financial measures are being presented and the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable GAAP financial measures for which the reconciliation is not presented earlier.
The detailed financial discussion that follows focuses on 2020 results compared to 2019. For a discussion of 2019 results compared to 2018, see Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in the Corporation’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Description of Business
First BanCorp. is a diversified financial holding company headquartered in San Juan, Puerto Rico offering a full range of financial products to consumers and commercial customers through various subsidiaries. First BanCorp. is the holding company of FirstBank Puerto Rico (“FirstBank” or the “Bank”) and FirstBank Insurance Agency. Through its wholly-owned subsidiaries, the Corporation operates in Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands (“USVI”), the British Virgin Islands (“BVI”), and the State of Florida, concentrating on commercial banking, residential mortgage loans, finance leases, credit cards, personal loans, small loans, auto loans, and insurance agency activities.
SIGNIFICANT EVENTS
Acquisition of Banco Santander Puerto Rico
Effective as of September 1, 2020, the Corporation completed its previously announced acquisition of Santander Bancorp, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Santander Holdings USA, Inc. and the holding company of Banco Santander Puerto Rico (“BSPR”), pursuant to a stock purchase agreement dated as of October 21, 2019, by and among FirstBank and Santander Holdings USA, Inc. (the “Stock Purchase Agreement”). Pursuant to the terms of the Stock Purchase Agreement and, in consideration for the acquisition, the Corporation paid cash consideration in an amount of approximately $1.3 billion for all of the issued and outstanding common stock of Santander Bancorp, the sole shareholder of BSPR. The acquisition of BSPR expanded the Corporation’s presence in Puerto Rico, with a growth of over 30% in our customer base, to approximately 675,000 banking customers, increased its operational scale and strengthened its competitiveness in consumer, commercial, business banking, and residential lending. The acquisition also allowed the Corporation to increase its deposit base at low cost, which enhanced FirstBank’s funding and risk profile.
At acquisition, including measurement period adjustments, the estimated fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed primarily consisted of the following:
 $2.5 billion of loans
 $1.7 billion of cash and cash equivalents
 $1.2 billion of investment securities
 $35.4 million of core deposit intangible
 $3.8 million of purchased credit card relationship intangible
 $4.2 billion of deposits
The Corporation accounted for the acquisition as a business combination in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC” or “Codification”) Topic No. 805, “Business Combinations” (“ASC 805”). Accordingly, the Corporation recorded the assets and liabilities assumed, as of the date of the acquisition, at their respective fair values and allocated to goodwill the excess of the consideration over the fair value of the net assets acquired. The determination of fair value requires management to make estimates about discount rates, future expected cash flows, market conditions and other future events that are highly subjective in nature and subject to change. Fair value estimates related to the acquired assets and liabilities are subject to adjustment for up to one year after the closing date of the acquisition as additional information relative to the closing date fair values becomes available and such information is considered final, whichever is earlier. As of December 31, 2020, the purchase price remains subject to final adjustments as certain estimates related to the acquired loan portfolio, intangible assets, and certain other assets and liabilities are subject to continuing refinement. Management anticipates that the ongoing review could result in adjustments to the acquisition date valuation amounts but does not anticipate that these adjustments, if any, would be material as the Corporation expects to finalize its analysis over the next few months.
The Corporation continues to make progress in integration activities, with the mortgage banking systems and insurance business integration completed early in the fourth quarter of 2020, and the conversion of the commercial business systems completed in February 2021. The Corporation is on track to convert various other platforms and currently expects that the full system conversions will be completed by the end of the summer of 2021. In addition, the Corporation expects to consolidate 9 to 10 banking branches during 2021.
The Corporation is also making progress in reducing personnel and service contract expenses and completing other business rationalization activities. The total amount of merger and restructuring costs related to the BSPR acquisition is estimated to be approximately $65 million. Cumulative merger and restructuring expenses of $37.9 million have been incurred through December 31, 2020, of which $26.5 million was incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 and $11.4 million was incurred during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Corporation anticipates that most of the remainder of the estimated expenses will be incurred in the first half of 2021. Included in the 2020 expenses is a $4.3 million charge recorded in connection with an Employee Voluntary Separation Program (“VSP”) offered to eligible employees in the Puerto Rico region. Approximately 100 employees participated in the program. The estimated total cost of the VSP is approximately $9.2 million; thus, the Corporation anticipates additional charges in the first half of 2021 to correspond with the effective separation dates of the employees. The Corporation also estimates that the combined entities will achieve total annual pre-tax savings of approximately $47 million, which are expected to be fully realized during 2022.
For additional information about the acquisition of BSPR and the Corporation’s accounting treatment thereof, please see Note 2 - Business Combination, to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 caused by a novel strain of the coronavirus was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization, and, since then, COVID-19 has spread widely to many countries and caused significant disruption in economic activity, including in the markets in which the Corporation operates. Both the extensiveness of the pandemic itself, as well as the measures taken to mitigate the virus' spread globally, are unprecedented in modern times and their effects continue to be pervasive. While vaccination efforts have begun, in many geographic locations, the virus continues to spread and new variants of the virus have emerged. Accordingly, nearly a year after the initial identification of the threat, all of the direct and indirect consequences and implications of COVID-19 and measures to mitigate its spread continue to be unknown and may not emerge for some time.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Puerto Rico’s government has issued several orders including, among other things, a stay-at-home mandate on March 15, 2020, which was subsequently extended for non-permitted activities until June 15, 2020, the lockdown of non-essential businesses, and a nightly curfew. On May 4, 2020, the Puerto Rico government began to implement a gradual reopening plan. While the economy of Puerto Rico has reopened, guidelines continue to affect how individuals interact and how businesses and the government operate and the operations and financial results of the Corporation have been and could continue to be adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The latest executive orders issued by the Puerto Rico’s governor, among other things, shortened the nightly curfew, expanded the permitted operating hours for businesses, and increased the capacity limit of businesses to operate to 50%, with the exception of restaurants that continues to operate with a 30% capacity limit.
The Corporation’s businesses in the other jurisdictions in which it operates have also been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. On March 26, 2020, Florida’s Governor issued a stay-at-home order, and the state began to reopen essential operations through a phase-in process on May 4, 2020. On September 25, 2020, the state of Florida moved into the third and final phase of its reopening plan that essentially lifted all COVID-19 restrictions on restaurants and other businesses across the state. Additionally, in the USVI, the government issued a stay-at-home order on March 23, 2020, which was subsequently extended until May 3, 2020. The USVI’s tourism-based economy reopened its borders for a second time on September 19, 2020, allowing access to both U.S. citizens and international tourists. The USVI is in now in their “Safer at Home” phase of its COVID-19 path to a new normal, meaning that nonessential businesses can operate and gatherings of up to 50 people are permitted, though the USVI government encourages citizens to remain at home when possible. In the BVI, the borders were closed to tourism for approximately nine months in 2020, and the BVI was among the last jurisdictions in the Caribbean to reopen its borders to commercial air traffic. On December 1, 2020, the BVI government began its third phase in the border reopening process allowing international travel and the re-opening of the tourism industry, albeit with strict restrictions in place, including multiple tests and a mandatory four-day quarantine. Additionally, seaports in the BVI remain closed and are set to reopen on March 1, 2021.
The Corporation has implemented various steps to protect its employees, consistent with guidance from federal and local authorities, such as requiring that a majority of support staff work remotely and implementing stricter safety and cleaning protocols, including measures for contact tracing and preventive testing and following various government directives regarding social distancing and use of personal protective equipment, such as face masks. The Corporation has limited in-person banking hours, with branches in Puerto Rico operating from 8:30 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. on weekdays and 1:00 p.m. on Saturdays. The Corporation also enhanced client awareness of its digital banking offerings. During 2020, digital monetary transactions increased over 55%, when compared to the prior year, and the number of the Corporation’s digital banking registered users increased by 45% since the beginning of the year.
Governments globally intervened with fiscal policies to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including through the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act of 2020 (the “CARES Act of 2020”) in the United States (“U.S.”), which provides economic relief to businesses and individuals. Some of the provisions of the CARES Act of 2020 improved the ability of impacted borrowers, including Puerto Rico residents, to repay their loans, including by providing direct cash payments to eligible taxpayers below specified income limits, expanded unemployment insurance benefits and eligibility, and provided relief designed to prevent layoffs and business closures. Under the provisions of the CARES Act of 2020, as amended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (“Consolidated Appropriations Act”) enacted on December 27, 2020 (the “amended CARES Act of 2020”), financial institutions may permit loan modifications for borrowers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic without categorizing the modifications as Troubled Debt Restructurings (“TDR”), as long as the loan meets certain conditions, including the requirement that the loan was current as of December 31, 2019.
In keeping with regulatory guidance to work with borrowers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Corporation implemented a temporary loan payment deferral program. In addition, the Revised Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus issued in April 2020 (the “Revised Interagency Statement”) specified that short-term modifications made to a borrower affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and governmental shutdown orders do not need to be identified as TDRs if the loans were current at the time the modification plan was implemented. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had under temporary deferred repayment arrangements 688 loans, totaling approximately $32.7 million, or 0.3%, of the total loan portfolio held for investment balance. The $32.7 million of loans under deferred repayment agreements as of December 31, 2020 consisted of 89 residential mortgage loans totaling $18.4 million, 580 consumer loans totaling $8.0 million, and 19 commercial and construction loans totaling $6.3 million. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020, commercial loans totaling $244.3 million, or 2.07% of the total portfolio held for investment balance, were permanently modified under the provisions of Section 4013 of the CARES Act of 2020, as amended by Section 541 of the Consolidated Appropriations Act. These permanent modifications on commercial loans were primarily related to borrowers in industries with longer expected recovery times, mostly hospitality, retail and entertainment industries.
The Small Business Administration (“SBA”) implemented the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) established by the CARES Act of 2020 and intended to prevent job losses and small business failure due to losses caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. SBA PPP borrowers may be eligible for loan forgiveness if the funds were used for eligible payroll costs, payments on business mortgage interest payments, rent, or utilities during a specified period. The Corporation was able to quickly establish its process for participating in the SBA PPP program beginning in April 2020. During 2020, the Corporation executed over 6,000 loans for approximately $390.3 million in the two rounds of the program. The acquisition of BSPR added $77.6 million of SBA PPP loans to the Corporation’s loan portfolio. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the SBA approved and remitted payments to the Corporation for forgiveness applications totaling $48.9 million in principal balance. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s SBA PPP loans portfolio, net of unearned fees of $6.8 million, totaled $406.0 million.
In January 2021, the SBA announced rules related to the expansion and extension of the original PPP program and the authorization of another round of PPP loans pursuant to the Consolidated Appropriations Act. As of February 25, 2021, the Corporation has received approval from the SBA for 2,166 client applications under this round of the program, totaling $149.0 million, of which approximately $138.4 million has already been funded.
During 2020, the Corporation also participated in the Main Street Lending Program (“Main Street”), authorized under the CARES Act of 2020 and established by the Federal Reserve, designed to support lending to small and medium-sized businesses that were in sound financial condition before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Under this program, the Corporation originates loans to borrowers meeting the terms and requirements of the program, including requirements as to eligibility, use of proceeds and priority, and sells a 95% participation interest in these loans to a special purpose vehicle organized by the Federal Reserve, the Main Street Facilities LLC (“Main Street SPV”), to purchase the participation interests from eligible lenders, including the Corporation. During 2020, the Corporation originated 23 loans under this program totaling $184.4 million in principal amount and sold participation interests totaling $175.1 million to the Main Street SPV.
The Corporation’s consolidated financial statements include a provision for credit losses on loans, finance leases and debt securities of $171.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $39.8 million for 2019. While the initial reserve required for non-PCD loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition amounted to $38.9 million in 2020, the remainder of the charges to the provision was largely related to the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on current and forecasted economic and market conditions. In addition, although increased customer activity was reflected in the third and fourth quarters of 2020, the preventative measures taken by local governments to stem the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic adversely affected the Corporation’s transaction fee income for the year ended December 31, 2020. Despite the contribution of additional fee income related to the acquired operations, total transaction fee income from credit and debit cards, automated teller machines (“ATMs”), and merchant and point-of-sale (“POS”) transactions decreased by approximately $1.0 million during 2020, as compared to 2019. Further, the lower interest rate environment adversely affected the Corporation’s net interest income and reduced the net interest margin by 70 basis points to 4.15% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 4.85% for 2019. Nevertheless, as of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s and the Bank’s capital ratios were well in excess of all regulatory capital requirements and the Corporation maintained high liquidity levels with the cash and liquid securities to total assets ratio exceeding 21.6% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 15.8% as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had approximately $1.2 billion in available unused lines of credit at the Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) and approximately $960 million available for borrowings through the Federal Reserve Board’s (“FED”) Primary Credit Discount Window Program, if needed. While the Corporation believes that it has sufficient capital to withstand an extended economic recession brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic, its financial results and regulatory capital ratios could be adversely impacted by further credit losses and it is unable to predict the full extent, nature or duration of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on its results of operations and financial condition at this time.
Update on Previously Reported Cybersecurity Incident
On October 23, 2020, we experienced a cybersecurity incident that affected certain of the Corporation’s service channels. As a result of the incident and the security protocols that we activated to protect the Corporation’s information and that of its customers, certain bank services were temporarily suspended for our customers. We restored normal operations shortly thereafter and did not experience any material day-to-day impact from the temporary suspension. The investigation into the incident is substantially complete and no evidence of misuse of personal information has been identified. While we expect to send regulatory-required notices, in accordance with local laws, related to potential exposure of personal information of affected individuals, we believe that the incident has been contained and we do not expect the incident to have a material impact on our business, operations or financial condition. Nevertheless, there can be no guarantee that we will not experience material adverse effects, such as loss of customer confidence, further disruptions in our operations, or remediation, mitigation, compliance or legal costs.
Overview of Results of Operations
First BanCorp.'s results of operations depend primarily on its net interest income, which is the difference between the interest income earned on its interest-earning assets, including investment securities and loans, and the interest expense incurred on its interest-bearing liabilities, including deposits and borrowings. Net interest income is affected by various factors, including: the interest rate environment; the volumes, mix and composition of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities; and the re-pricing characteristics of these assets and liabilities. The Corporation's results of operations also depend on the provision for credit losses, non-interest expenses (such as personnel, occupancy, the deposit insurance premium and other costs), non-interest income (mainly service charges and fees on deposits, and insurance income), gains (losses) on sales of investments, gains (losses) on mortgage banking activities, and income taxes.
The Corporation had net income of $102.3 million, or $0.46 per diluted common share, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $167.4 million, or $0.76 per diluted common share, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The key drivers of the Corporation’s GAAP financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, include the following:
 Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $600.3 million, compared to $567.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by a $2.8 billion increase in average interest-earning assets, primarily related to the acquisition of BSPR, which, at closing added $2.5 billion of loans and $1.2 billion of investment securities, as well as increased investment securities purchases, and a lower cost of funds driven by a lower cost of deposits, partially offset by the effects of a lower interest rate environment on loan and investment yields.
The net interest margin decreased by 70 basis points to 4.15% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 4.85% for 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the effect of the low interest rate environment on the repricing of variable rate commercial loans and interest-bearing cash balances, as well as on the U.S. agencies premium amortization expense. In addition, net interest margin was adversely affected by a higher proportion of low-yielding assets, such as the interest-bearing cash balances, U.S agencies bonds and mortgage-backed securities (“MBS”), and SBA PPP loans, to total interest-earning assets, partially offset by the decrease in the average interest rate paid on interest-bearing deposits. See “Net Interest Income” below for additional information.
 The provision for credit losses on loans, finance leases, and debt securities increased by $131.2 million to $171.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $39.8 million for 2019. Approximately $38.9 million of the provision for 2020 was a result of the initial reserves required by the current expected credit losses (“CECL”) methodology for loans purchased without evidence of deteriorated credit quality since origination (“non-PCD loans”) in conjunction with the acquisition of BSPR. The remaining increase was driven by the adverse effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on economic forecasts employed in the Corporation’s CECL methodology, with the most significant effect reflected in reserve builds for commercial retail real estate loans affected by deterioration in the Commercial Real Estate Price Index forecasts. Effective January 1, 2020, the Corporation adopted the CECL model required by ASC Topic 326, “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses” (“ASC 326”), which replaced the incurred loss methodology. ASC 326 does not require restatement of comparative period financial statements; as such, results for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflect the adoption of ASC 326, while prior periods reflect results under the previously required incurred loss methodology. The adoption of ASC 326 resulted in a cumulative increase of approximately $93.2 million in the allowance for credit losses (“ACL”) as of January 1, 2020.
Net charge-offs totaled $47.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, or 0.48% of average loans, a decrease of $33.5 million, compared to net charge-offs of $81.4 million, or 0.91% of average loans, for 2019. The decrease in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects a $16.3 million decrease in net charge-offs taken on commercial and construction loans, a $10.6 million decrease in residential mortgage loans net charge-offs, and a $6.6 million decrease in consumer loans net charge-offs. The decrease in commercial and construction loans net charge-offs reflects the effect in 2019 of both, an $11.4 million charge-off taken on a commercial mortgage loan in the Florida region and a $5.7 million charge-off taken against a commercial and industrial loan in the Puerto Rico region. Meanwhile, the decrease in net charge-offs taken on residential mortgage and consumer loans reflects, in part, the effect of the temporary deferred repayment arrangements provided to borrowers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic that maintained the delinquency status that existed at the date of the modification until the end of the deferral period. See “Provision for Credit Losses” and “Risk Management” below for analyses of the ACL and non-performing assets and related ratios.
 The Corporation recorded non-interest income of $112.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $90.6 million for 2019. The increase was primarily related to: (i) a $13.2 million gain on sales of approximately $392.2 million of available-for-sale U.S. agencies MBS and $803.3 million of U.S. Treasury Notes; (ii) a $5.1 million increase in revenues from mortgage banking activities, driven by a higher volume of loan originations and sales; and (iii) a $5.0 million benefit recorded in 2020 resulting from the final settlement of the Corporation’s business interruption insurance claim associated with lost profits caused by Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017. These increases were partially offset by the effect in 2019 of a $2.3 million net gain recorded on the sales of approximately $11.4 million in nonaccrual commercial and construction loans held for sale. See “Non-Interest Income” below for additional information.
 Non-interest expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $424.2 million, compared to $378.5 million 2019. Non-interest expenses for 2020 included $26.5 million of merger and restructuring costs associated with the acquisition and integration of BSPR, compared to $11.4 million in 2019. Total non-interest expenses in 2020 also included $5.4 million of COVID-19 pandemic-related expenses, primarily related to additional cleaning, safety materials and security measures. Adjusted for the above-mentioned merger and COVID-19 expenses, total non-interest expenses increased by $25.3 million compared to 2019, primarily related to incremental expenses associated with operations, personnel and branches acquired from BSPR, partially offset by reductions in other real estate owned (“OREO”) losses and expenses and the effect of both, volume-related expense reductions and several expense control measures taken in response to the current economic environment that includes actions such as modifications of business promotion strategies, elimination of all traveling expenses, and reassessment of project plans, among others. See “Non-Interest Expenses” below for additional information.
 For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Corporation recorded an income tax expense of $14.1 million, compared to $72.0 million for 2019. The variance was mostly attributable to the lower level of pre-tax income in 2020, driven by the aforementioned charges to the provision for credit losses, as well as the effect of an $8.0 million partial reversal of the Corporation’s deferred tax asset valuation allowance after considering significant positive evidence on the utilization of net operating losses due to the acquisition of BSPR. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had a deferred tax asset of $329.3 million (net of a valuation allowance of $102.0 million, including a valuation allowance of $59.9 million against the deferred tax assets of the Corporation’s banking subsidiary, FirstBank), compared to a net deferred tax asset of $264.8 million as of December 31, 2019. On January 1, 2020, the Corporation recognized $31.3 million in deferred tax assets in connection with the transitional adjustment resulting from the adoption of the CECL accounting standard. The BSPR acquisition added $28.9 million of net deferred tax assets at the acquisition date. See “Results of Operations - Income Taxes” below for additional information.
 As of December 31, 2020, total assets were approximately $18.8 billion, an increase of $6.2 billion from December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly the result of the acquisition of BSPR, which, as of the acquisition date, added $5.6 billion in total assets, primarily loans and investment securities. In addition, there was an $849.7 million increase in cash and cash equivalents and higher purchases of investment securities during 2020 in connection with, among other things, strong deposit growth in part resulting from COVID-19 related factors, such as a government stimulus for consumers and small businesses and lower consumer spending. See “Financial Condition and Operating Data Analysis” below for additional information.
 As of December 31, 2020, total liabilities were $16.5 billion, an increase of $6.1 billion from December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly related to the acquisition of BSPR, which added approximately $4.2 billion in total deposits as of December 31, 2020. In addition, there was organic growth of $2.0 billion in non-brokered deposits, primarily in demand deposits reflecting the effect of payments received by individuals and commercial customers from government stimulus packages, as well as the effect of payment deferral programs. See “Risk Management - Liquidity Risk and Capital Adequacy” below for additional information about the Corporation’s funding sources.
 As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s stockholders’ equity was $2.3 billion, an increase of $47.1 million from December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by the earnings generated during 2020 and a $60.5 million increase in other comprehensive income (“OCI”) related to changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities, partially offset by the $62.3 million transition adjustment related to the adoption of CECL that was recorded against beginning retained earnings, and the common and preferred stock dividends declared in 2020 totaling $46.4 million. The Corporation’s common equity tier 1 (“CET1”) capital, tier 1 capital, total capital and leverage ratios were 17.31%, 17.61%, 20.37% and 11.26%, respectively, as of December 31, 2020, compared to CET1 capital, tier 1 capital, total capital and leverage ratios of 21.60%, 22.00%, 25.22%, and 16.15%, respectively, as of December 31, 2019. As permitted by the regulatory capital framework, the Corporation elected the option to delay for two years the effect of the estimate of the CECL methodology on regulatory capital, relative to the incurred loss methodology’s effect on capital, followed by a three-year transition period. See “Risk Management - Capital” below for additional information.
 Total loan production, including purchases, refinancings, renewals and draws from existing revolving and non-revolving commitments, but excluding the utilization activity on outstanding credit cards, was $4.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.9 billion for 2019. As mentioned above, the Corporation originated $390.3 million of SBA PPP loans and $184.4 million of Main Street loans during 2020. Excluding those loans, total loan originations decreased by $342.7 million to $3.6 billion in 2020, compared to $3.9 billion for 2019, consisting of: (i) a $178.4 million decrease in commercial and construction loan originations, reflecting the effect of disruptions in economic activity affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, in particular during the second quarter of 2020; (ii) a $233.2 million decrease in consumer loan originations, predominantly personal loans and auto loans, reflecting the effect of the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic-related lockdowns and quarantines; and (iii) a $68.8 million increase in residential mortgage loan originations, benefited from a larger volume of conforming loan originations and refinancings driven by the effect of lower mortgage loan interest rates and increased home purchase activity.
 Total non-performing assets were $293.5 million as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of $23.9 million from December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily related to: (i) an $18.6 million decrease in the OREO portfolio balance, driven by sales; and (ii) a $5.2 million decrease in nonaccrual commercial and construction loans, driven by charge-offs totaling $5.9 million taken on two commercial loans in the Puerto Rico region, and the payoff of two large nonaccrual commercial loans totaling $5.0 million, partially offset by the inflow to nonaccrual status of a $6.1 million matured commercial and industrial loan in the Puerto Rico region. See “Risk Management - Non-Accruing and Non-Performing Assets” below for additional information.
 Adversely classified commercial and construction loans decreased by $65.3 million to $155.2 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven by the upgrade in the credit risk classification of a $117.5 million commercial mortgage loan relationship in the Puerto Rico region during the first quarter of 2020, partially offset by the downgrade in the third quarter of 2020 of two commercial relationships in the Florida region engaged in the transportation industry, totaling $38.8 million. The Corporation is closely monitoring its loan portfolio to identify potential at-risk segments, the payment performance after the end of payment deferral periods, the need for extensions of payment deferral arrangements or permanent modifications, and the performance of different sectors of the economy in all of the markets where the Corporation operates.
The Corporation’s financial results for 2020 and 2019 included the following items that management believes are not reflective of core operating performance, are not expected to reoccur with any regularity or may reoccur at uncertain times and in uncertain amounts (the “Special Items”):
Year ended December 31, 2020
 Merger and restructuring costs of $26.5 million ($16.6 million after-tax) related to the BSPR acquisition, integration, and related restructuring initiatives. Merger and restructuring costs in 2020 primarily included consulting, legal, valuation, and other professional service fees associated with the acquisition, the aforementioned VSP offered to eligible employees, retention and other compensation bonuses, and expenses related to system conversions and other integration-related efforts.
 Gain on sales of U.S. agencies MBS and U.S Treasury notes of $13.2 million. The gain on tax-exempt securities or realized at the tax-exempt international banking entity subsidiary level had no effect on the income tax expense recorded in 2020.
 Tax benefit of $8.0 million related to the partial reversal of the deferred tax asset valuation allowance.
 Costs of $5.4 million ($3.4 million after-tax) related to the COVID-19 pandemic response efforts, primarily costs related to additional cleaning, safety materials, and security measures.
 Gain of $0.1 million realized on the repurchase of $0.4 million of trust-preferred securities (“TRuPs”). The gain, realized at the holding company level, had no effect on the income tax expense in 2020.
 Benefit of $5.0 million ($3.1 million after-tax) resulting from the final settlement of the Corporation’s business interruption insurance claim related to lost profits caused by Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017.
 Benefit of $1.2 million ($0.7 million after-tax) from insurance recoveries associated with hurricane-related expenses incurred primarily in the Puerto Rico region.
Year ended December 31, 2019
 Merger and restructuring costs of $11.4 million ($7.2 million after-tax) in connection with the BSPR acquisition and related restructuring initiatives. Merger and restructuring costs primarily included advisory, legal, valuation, and other professional service fees associated with the then pending acquisition of BSPR, as well as a $3.4 million charge related to a separate voluntary separation program offered to eligible employees at FirstBank during the fourth quarter of 2019 in connection with initiatives to capitalize on expected operational efficiencies from the acquisition.
 Net loan loss reserve release of $6.4 million ($4.0 million after-tax) in connection with revised estimates of the qualitative reserves associated with the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria, primarily related to consumer and commercial loans.
 Benefit of $1.9 million ($1.2 million after-tax) resulting from hurricane-related insurance recoveries related to repairs and maintenance costs, and impairments associated with facilities in the Virgin Islands.
 Expense recovery of $2.3 million related to an employee retention benefit payment (the “Benefit”) received by the Bank pursuant to the Disaster Tax Relief and Airport Extension Act of 2017, as amended (the “Disaster Tax Relief Act”). The Benefit was recorded as an offset to employees’ compensation and benefits expenses and is not treated as taxable income by virtue of the Disaster Tax Relief Act.
The following table reconciles for 2020 and 2019 the reported net income to adjusted net income, a non-GAAP financial measure that excludes the Special Items identified above:
(1)See "Basis of Presentation" below for the individual tax impact related to reconciling items.
Critical Accounting Policies and Practices
The accounting principles of the Corporation and the methods of applying these principles conform to GAAP. In preparing the consolidated financial statements management is required to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect the amounts recorded for assets, liabilities and contingent liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. The Corporation’s critical accounting estimates that are particularly susceptible to significant changes include: 1) the ACL; 2) income taxes; 3) classification and valuation of financial instruments; and 4) acquired loans. Actual results could differ from estimates and assumptions, if different outcomes or conditions prevail.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The Corporation maintains an ACL for loans and finance leases based upon management’s estimate of the lifetime expected credit losses in the loan portfolio, as of the balance sheet date, excluding loans held for sale. Additionally, the Corporation maintains an ACL for debt securities classified as either held-to-maturity or available-for-sale, and other off-balance sheet credit exposures (e.g., unfunded loan commitments). In connection with the adoption of CECL, the Corporation updated its approach for estimating expected credit losses, which requires management to exercise judgment and make estimates in new areas, as described more fully below, and updated its accounting policies. For more information, see Note 1 - Nature of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. For loans and finance leases, unfunded loan commitments, and held-to-maturity debt securities, the estimate of lifetime credit losses includes the use of quantitative models that incorporate forward-looking macroeconomic scenarios that are applied over the contractual lives of the portfolios, adjusted, as appropriate, for prepayments and permitted extension options using historical experience. For available-for-sale debt securities, the ACL is measured using a risk-adjusted discounted cash flow approach, that also considers relevant current and forward-looking economic variables, and is limited to the difference between the fair value of the security and its amortized cost. Judgment is specifically applied in the determination of economic assumptions, the length of the initial loss forecast period, the reversion of losses beyond the initial forecast period, historical loss expectations, usage of macroeconomic scenarios, and qualitative factors, which may not be adequately captured in the loss model, as further discussed below.
The macroeconomic scenarios utilized by the Corporation include variables that have historically been key drivers of increases and decreases in credit losses, as well as the estimated effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on such variables. These variables include, but are not limited to, unemployment rates, housing and commercial real estate prices, gross domestic product levels, retail sales, interest-rate forecasts, corporate bond spreads and changes in equity market prices. The Corporation derives the economic forecasts it uses in its ACL model from Moody's Analytics. The latter has a large team of economists, data-base managers and operational engineers with a history of producing monthly economic forecasts for over 25 years.
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation used the base-case economic scenario from Moody’s Analytics in its estimation of credit losses. The Corporation has currently set an initial forecast period (“reasonable and supportable period”) of 2 years and a reversion period of up to 3 years, utilizing a straight-line approach and reverting back to the historical macroeconomic mean for Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands regions. For the Florida region, the methodology considers a reasonable and supportable forecast period and an implicit reversion towards the historical trend that varies for each macroeconomic variable, achieving the steady state by year 5. After the reversion period, a historical loss forecast period covering the remaining contractual life, adjusted for prepayments, is used based on the change in key historical economic variables during representative historical expansionary and recessionary periods. Changes in economic forecasts impact the probability of default (“PD”), loss-given default (“LGD”), and exposure at default (“EAD”) for each instrument, and therefore influence the amount of future cash flows for each instrument the Corporation does not expect to collect.
Although no one economic variable can fully demonstrate the sensitivity of the ACL calculation to changes in the economic variables used in the model, the Corporation has identified certain economic variables that have significant influence in the Corporation’s model for determining the ACL. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s ACL model incorporated the following assumptions for key economic variables in the base-case scenario:
 Commercial Real Estate Price Index year-over-year decrease of approximately 8.6% in the first quarter of 2021, followed by declines ranging from 15.9% - 22.1% during the remainder of 2021.
 Regional Home Price Index in Puerto Rico (purchase only prices), year-over-year decrease of approximately 4.4% in the first quarter of 2021, followed by declines ranging from 1.9% - 8.5% during the remainder of 2021. For the Florida region and the U.S. mainland (all transactions, including refinances), year-over-year decrease of approximately 2.2% and 0.1%, respectively, in the first quarter of 2021, followed by declines ranging from 4.2% - 4.8% for the Florida region and 0.1% - 0.3% for the U.S. mainland during the remainder of 2021.
 Levels of regional unemployment in Puerto Rico at approximately 8.4% in the first quarter of 2021, followed by modest improvements throughout the remainder of 2021 to an approximate level of 8.2% by the end of 2021. For the Florida region and the U.S. mainland, unemployment rate of 7.9% and 7.5%, respectively, in the first quarter of 2021, followed by modest improvements throughout the remainder of 2021 to an approximate level of 7.5% in Florida and 7.2% in the U.S. mainland by the end of 2021.
 A modest year-over-year decrease in real gross national product (“GNP”) in Puerto Rico of approximately 0.9% in the first quarter of 2021, followed by increasing levels of real GNP growth ranging from 2.8% - 6.1% during the remainder of 2021. For each of the Florida region and the U.S. mainland, year-over-year decrease in real GDP of approximately 0.7%, in the first quarter of 2021, followed by increasing levels of real GDP growth between 5.0% - 9.9% for the Florida region and 4.1% - 10.2% for U.S. mainland during the remainder of 2021.
Further, the Corporation periodically considers the need for qualitative adjustments to the ACL. Qualitative adjustments may be related to and include, but not be limited to, factors such as: (i) management’s assessment of economic forecasts used in the model and how those forecasts align with management’s overall evaluation of current and expected economic conditions; (ii) organization specific risks such as credit concentrations, collateral specific risks, nature and size of the portfolio and external factors that may ultimately impact credit quality, and (iii) other limitations associated with factors such as underwriting changes, among others. Management reviews the need for and appropriate level of qualitative adjustments on a quarterly basis, and as such, the amount and allocation of qualitative adjustments may change in future periods.
The ACL can also be impacted by unanticipated changes in asset quality of the portfolio, such as increases in risk rating downgrades in our commercial portfolio, deterioration in borrower delinquencies or credit scores in our credit card portfolio or increases in the loan-to-value ratio (“LTVs”) in our residential real estate portfolio. In addition, while we have incorporated our estimated impact of COVID-19 into our ACL, the ultimate impact of the pandemic is still unknown, including how long economic activities will be impacted and what effect the unprecedented levels of government fiscal and monetary actions will have on the economy and our credit losses. Further, the current fair value of collateral is utilized to assess the expected credit losses when a financial asset is considered to be collateral dependent.
As described above, the process to determine the ACL requires numerous estimates and assumptions, some of which require a high degree of judgment and are often interrelated. Changes in the estimates and assumptions can result in significant changes in the ACL, as was the case during 2020. Upon adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, the ACL for loans, held-to-maturity and available-for-sale securities, and off-balance sheet credit exposure was increased by $93.2 million to $248.4 million. As of December 31, 2020, the total ACL for loans, held-to-maturity and available-for-sale securities, and off-balance sheet credit exposure increased to $401.1 million, including the effect of the initial ACL required for loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition and reserve builds during the year that were significantly affected by the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic in current and forecasted macroeconomic variables discussed above. In connection with the BSPR acquisition, the Corporation recorded an initial ACL of $38.9 million for non-PCD loans (including unfunded commitments) through an increase to the provision for credit losses and established an initial ACL for PCD loans of $28.7 million through an adjustment to the acquired loan balance and the ACL. Our process for determining the ACL is further discussed in Note 1 - Nature of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Income Taxes
The Corporation is required to estimate income taxes in preparing its consolidated financial statements. This involves the estimation of current income tax expense together with an assessment of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. The determination of current income tax expense involves estimates and assumptions that require the Corporation to assume certain positions based on its interpretation of current tax regulations. Management assesses the relative benefits and risks of the appropriate tax treatment of transactions, taking into account statutory, judicial and regulatory guidance, and recognizes tax benefits only when deemed probable. Changes in assumptions affecting estimates may be required in the future and estimated tax liabilities may need to be increased or decreased accordingly. The Corporation adjusts the accrual of tax contingencies in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the progress of tax audits, case law and emerging legislation. The Corporation’s effective tax rate includes the impact of tax contingencies and changes to such accruals, as considered appropriate by management. When particular tax matters arise, a number of years may elapse before such matters are audited by the taxing authorities and finally resolved. Favorable resolution of such matters or the expiration of the statute of limitations may result in the release of tax contingencies that the Corporation recognizes as a reduction to its effective tax rate in the year of resolution. Unfavorable settlement of any particular issue could increase the effective tax rate and may require the use of cash in the year of resolution.
The determination of deferred tax expense or benefit is based on changes in the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities that generate temporary differences. The carrying value of the Corporation’s net deferred tax asset assumes that the Corporation will be able to generate sufficient future taxable income based on estimates and assumptions. If these estimates and related assumptions change, the Corporation may be required to record valuation allowances against its deferred tax assets, resulting in additional income tax expense in the consolidated statements of income. Management evaluates its deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis and assesses the need for a valuation allowance, if any. A valuation allowance is established when management believes that it is more likely than not that some portion of its deferred tax assets will not be realized. The determination of whether a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is appropriate is subject to considerable judgment and requires the evaluation of positive and negative evidence that can be objectively verified. Positive evidence necessary to overcome the negative evidence includes whether future taxable income in sufficient amounts and character within the carryforward periods is available under the tax law. Consideration must be given to all sources of taxable income, including, as applicable, the future reversal of existing temporary differences, future taxable income forecasts exclusive of the reversal of temporary differences and carryforwards, and tax planning strategies. When negative evidence (e.g., cumulative losses in recent years, history of operating loss or tax credit carryforwards expiring unused) exists, more positive evidence than negative evidence will be necessary. The Corporation has concluded that based on the level of positive evidence, it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will be realized, net of the existing valuation allowances at December 31, 2020 and 2019. However, there is no guarantee that the tax benefits associated with the deferred tax assets will be fully realized. The positive evidence considered by management in arriving at its conclusion included factors such as: FirstBank’s three-year cumulative income position; sustained periods of profitability; management’s proven ability to forecast future income accurately and execute tax strategies; forecasts of future profitability under several potential scenarios that support the partial utilization of NOLs prior to their expiration from 2021 through 2024; and the utilization of NOLs over the past three-years. The negative evidence considered by management included: uncertainties about the state of the Puerto Rico economy, including considerations relating to the effect of hurricane and pandemic recovery funds together with Puerto Rico government debt renegotiation efforts and the ultimate sustainability of the latest fiscal plan certified by the PROMESA oversight board.
Refer to Note 27 - Income Taxes, to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information related to Income Taxes.
Classification and Related Values of Investment Securities
Management determines the appropriate classification of debt securities at the time of purchase. Management classifies debt securities as held to maturity when the Corporation has the intent and ability to hold the securities to maturity. Held-to-maturity securities are stated at amortized cost. Management classifies debt securities as trading when the Corporation has the intent to sell the securities in the near term. Debt securities classified as trading securities, if any, are reported at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses included in earnings. Debt securities not classified as held-to-maturity or held for trading are classified as available-for-sale. Available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses excluded from earnings and reported net of deferred taxes in accumulated OCI (a component of stockholders’ equity). Unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities do not affect earnings until realized or an ACL is recorded. Management classifies investments in equity securities that do not have publicly or readily determinable fair values as equity securities in the statements of financial condition and recognizes them at the lower of cost or realizable value. The Corporation recognizes marketable equity securities at fair value with changes in unrealized gains or losses recorded through earnings. The assessment of fair value applies to certain of the Corporation’s assets and liabilities, including the investment portfolio. Fair values are volatile and are affected by factors such as market interest rates, the rates at which prepayments occur and discount rates.
Valuation of financial instruments
The measurement of fair value is fundamental to the Corporation’s presentation of its financial condition and results of operations. The Corporation holds debt and equity securities, derivatives, and other financial instruments at fair value. The Corporation holds its investments and liabilities mainly to manage liquidity needs and interest rate risks. The Corporation’s significant assets reflected at fair value on the Corporation’s financial statements consisted of available-for-sale investment securities.
The Corporation categorizes the fair value of its available-for-sale debt securities using a three-level hierarchy for fair value measurements that distinguishes between market participant assumptions developed based on market data obtained from sources independent of the Corporation (observable inputs) and the Corporation’s own assumptions about market participant assumptions developed based on the best information available in the circumstances (unobservable inputs). The hierarchy of inputs used in determining the fair value maximizes the use of observable inputs and minimizes the use of unobservable inputs by requiring that observable inputs be used when available. The hierarchy level assigned to each security in the Corporation’s investment portfolio was based on management’s assessment of the transparency and reliability of the inputs used to estimate the fair values at the measurement date. See Note 30 - Fair Value, to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
The fair value of available-for-sale investment securities was the market value based on quoted market prices (as is the case with U.S. Treasury notes), when available (Level 1). If quoted market prices are unavailable, the fair value is based on market prices for identical or comparable assets (as is the case with MBS and callable U.S. agency debt) that are based on observable market parameters, including benchmark yields, reported trades, quotes from brokers or dealers, issuer spreads, bids, offers and reference data, including market research operations (Level 2). Observable prices in the market already consider the risk of nonperformance. If listed prices or quotes are not available, fair value is based upon discounted cash flow models that use unobservable inputs due to the limited market activity of the instrument, as is the case with private label MBS held by the Corporation (Level 3).
Private label MBS are collateralized by fixed-rate mortgages on single-family residential properties in the U.S.; the interest rate on the securities is variable, tied to 3-month LIBOR and limited to the weighted-average coupon of the underlying collateral. The market valuation represents the estimated net cash flows over the projected life of the pool of underlying assets applying a discount rate that reflects market observed floating spreads over LIBOR, with a widening spread based on a nonrated security. The market valuation is derived from a model that utilizes relevant assumptions such as the prepayment rate, default rate, and loss severity on a loan level basis. The Corporation modeled the cash flow from the fixed-rate mortgage collateral using a static cash flow analysis according to collateral attributes of the underlying mortgage pool (i.e., loan term, current balance, note rate, rate adjustment type, rate adjustment frequency, rate caps, and others) in combination with prepayment forecasts based on historical portfolio performance. The Corporation models the variable cash flow of the security using the 3-month LIBOR forward curve.
Under ASC 326, adopted on January 1, 2020, declines in fair value that are credit-related are now recorded on the balance sheet through an ACL with a corresponding adjustment to earnings and declines that are noncredit-related are recognized through other comprehensive income/loss.
If the Corporation intends to sell a debt security in an unrealized loss position or determines that it is more likely than not that the Corporation will be required to sell a debt security before it recovers its amortized cost basis, the debt security is impaired and it is written down to fair value with all losses recognized in earnings. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation did not intend to sell any debt securities in an unrealized loss position and it is not more likely than not that the Corporation will be required to sell any debt securities before recovery of their amortized cost basis.
For debt securities in an unrealized loss position for which the Corporation does not intend to sell the debt security and it is not more likely than not that the Corporation will be required to sell the debt security, the Corporation determines whether the loss is due to credit-related factors or noncredit-related factors. For debt securities in an unrealized loss position for which the losses are determined to be the result of both credit-related and noncredit-related factors, the credit loss is determined as the difference between the present value of the cash flows expected to be collected and the amortized cost basis of the debt security.
Available-for-sale debt securities held by the Corporation at year-end primarily consisted of securities issued by U.S. government-sponsored entities (“GSEs”), and the aforementioned private label MBS. Given the explicit and implicit guarantees provided by the U.S. federal government, the Corporation believes the credit risk in securities issued by the GSEs is low. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Corporation determined the credit losses for private label MBS based on a risk-adjusted discounted cash flow methodology that considers qualitative and quantitative factors specific to the instruments, including PDs and LGDs that consider, among other things, historical payment performance, loan-to-value attributes and relevant current and forward-looking macroeconomic variables, such as regional unemployment rates and the housing price index obtained from the economic scenarios described in the ACL discussion above.
The Corporation recognized impairment losses on available-for-sale debt securities, of $1.6 million resulting from credit-related factors during 2020, compared to $0.9 million for 2019.
Acquired Loans
Loans acquired through a purchase or a business combination are recorded at their fair value as of the acquisition date. The Corporation performs an assessment of acquired loans to first determine if such loans have experienced more than insignificant deterioration in credit quality since their origination and thus should be classified and accounted for as purchased credit deteriorated (“PCD”) loans. For loans that have not experienced more than insignificant deterioration in credit quality since origination, referred to as non-PCD loans, the Corporation records such loans at fair value, with any resulting discount or premium accreted or amortized into interest income over the remaining life of the loan using the interest method. Additionally, upon the purchase or acquisition of non-PCD loans, the Corporation measures and records an ACL based on the Corporation’s methodology for determining the ACL. The ACL for non-PCD loans is recorded through a charge to the provision for credit losses in the period in which the loans were purchased or acquired.
Acquired loans that are classified as PCD are recognized at fair value, which includes any resulting premiums or discounts. Premiums and non-credit loss related discounts are amortized or accreted into interest income over the remaining life of the loan using the interest method. Unlike non-PCD loans, the initial ACL for PCD loans is established through an adjustment to the acquired loan balance and not through a charge to the provision for credit losses in the period in which the loans were acquired. Characteristics relevant to the classification of PCD loans include: delinquency, payment history since origination, credit scores migration and/or other factors the Corporation may become aware of through its initial analysis of acquired loans that may indicate there has been more than insignificant deterioration in credit quality since a loan’s origination. In connection with the BSPR acquisition on September 1, 2020, the Corporation acquired PCD loans and non-PCD loans with an aggregate fair value of approximately $752.8 million and $1.8 billion, respectively. The fair value of the loans acquired from BSPR was estimated based on a discounted cash flow method under which the present value of the contractual cash flows was calculated based on certain valuation assumptions such as default rates, loss severity, and prepayment rates, consistent with the Corporation’s CECL methodology, and discounted using a market rate of return that accounts for both the time value of money and investment risk factors. The discount rate utilized to analyze fair value considered the cost of funds rate, capital charge, servicing costs, and liquidity premium, mostly based on industry standards.
For PCD loans that prior to the adoption of ASC 326 were classified as purchased credit impaired (“PCI”) loans and accounted for under ASC Subtopic 310-30, “Loans and Debt Securities Acquired with Deteriorated Credit Quality” (“ASC Subtopic 310-30”), the Corporation adopted ASC 326 using the prospective transition approach. As allowed by ASC 326, the Corporation elected to maintain pools of loans accounted for under ASC Subtopic 310-30 as “units of accounts,” conceptually treating each pool as a single asset. As of December 31, 2020, such PCD loans consisted of $128.4 million of residential mortgage loans and $2.5 million of commercial mortgage loans acquired by the Corporation as part of previously completed asset acquisitions. As the Corporation elected to maintain pools of units of account for loans previously accounted for under ASC Subtopic 310-30, the Corporation is not able to remove loans from the pools until they are paid off, written off or sold (consistent with the Corporation’s practice prior to adoption of ASC 326), but is required to follow ASC 326 for purposes of the ACL. Regarding interest income recognition for PCD loans that existed at the time of adoption of ASC 326, the prospective transition approach for PCD loans required by ASC 326 was applied at a pool level, which froze the effective interest rate of the pools as of January 1, 2020. According to regulatory guidance, the determination of nonaccrual or accrual status for PCD loans that the Corporation has elected to maintain in previously existing pools pursuant to the policy election right upon adoption of ASC 326 should be made at the pool level, not the individual asset level. In addition, the guidance provides that the Corporation can continue accruing interest and not report the PCD loans as being in nonaccrual status if the following criteria are met: (i) the Corporation can reasonably estimate the timing and amounts of cash flows expected to be collected, and (ii) the Corporation did not acquire the asset primarily for the rewards of ownership of the underlying collateral, such as for use in operations or improving the collateral for resale. Thus, the Corporation continues to exclude these pools of PCD loans from nonaccrual loan statistics. In accordance with ASC 326, the Corporation did not reassess whether modifications to individual acquired loans accounted for within pools were TDR as of the date of adoption.
OTHER ESTIMATES
In addition to the critical accounting estimates we make in connection with the ACL, fair value measurements, and income taxes the accounting for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, pension and postretirement benefit obligations, and provisions for losses that may arise from litigation and regulatory proceedings (including governmental investigations) are also based on estimates and assumptions.
Goodwill is assessed for impairment annually in the fourth quarter or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that indicate an impairment may exist. When assessing goodwill for impairment, first, a qualitative assessment can be made to determine whether it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its estimated carrying value. If the results of the qualitative assessment are not conclusive, a quantitative goodwill test is performed. Alternatively, a quantitative goodwill test can be performed without performing a qualitative assessment. Identifiable intangible assets are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest that an asset’s or asset group’s carrying value may not be fully recoverable. Judgment is required to evaluate whether indications of potential impairment have occurred, and to test intangible assets for impairment, if required.
See Note 1 - Nature of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Note 2 - Business Combination, and Note 14 - Goodwill and Other Intangibles, to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information about goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, including intangible assets recorded in connection with the acquisition of BSPR.
As part of the BSPR acquisition, the Corporation maintains two frozen qualified noncontributory defined benefit pension plans, and a related complementary post-retirements benefits plan covering medical benefits and life insurance after retirement. Calculation of the obligations and related expenses under these plans requires the use of actuarial valuation methods and assumptions, which are subject to management judgment and may differ if different assumptions are used. See Note 24 - Employee Benefit Plans, to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for disclosures related to the benefit plans.
As necessary, we also estimate and provide for potential losses that may arise out of litigation and regulatory proceedings to the extent that such losses are probable and can be reasonably estimated. Judgment is required in making these estimates and our final liabilities may ultimately be materially different. Our total estimated liability in respect of litigation and regulatory proceedings is determined on a case-by-case basis and represents an estimate of probable losses after considering, among other factors, the progress of each case, proceeding or investigation, our experience and the experience of others in similar cases, proceedings or investigations, and the opinions and views of legal counsel.
Results of Operations
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the excess of interest earned by First BanCorp. on its interest-earning assets over the interest incurred on its interest-bearing liabilities. First BanCorp.’s net interest income is subject to interest rate risk due to the repricing and maturity mismatch of the Corporation’s assets and liabilities. Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $600.3 million, compared to $567.1 million for 2019. On a tax-equivalent basis and adjusted to exclude the changes in the fair value of derivative instruments, net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $621.4 million compared to $587.4 million for 2019. The increase in net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was substantially related to the BSPR acquisition and a lower cost of funds, partially offset by the effect of the lower interest rate environment on loan and investment yields.
The following tables include a detailed analysis of net interest income for the indicated periods. Part I presents average volumes (based on the average daily balance) and rates on an adjusted tax-equivalent basis and Part II presents, also on an adjusted tax-equivalent basis, the extent to which changes in interest rates and changes in the volume of interest-related assets and liabilities have affected the Corporation’s net interest income. For each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the tables provide information on changes in (i) volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior period rates) and (ii) rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior period volumes). The Corporation has allocated rate-volume variances (changes in rate multiplied by changes in volume) to either the changes in volume or the changes in rate based upon the effect of each factor on the combined totals.
Net interest income on an adjusted tax-equivalent basis and excluding the change in the fair value of derivative instruments is a non-GAAP financial measure. For the definition of this non-GAAP financial measure, refer to the discussion in "Basis of Presentation" below.
(1)On an adjusted tax-equivalent basis. The Corporation estimated the adjusted tax-equivalent yield by dividing the interest rate spread on exempt assets by 1 less the Puerto Rico statutory tax rate of 37.5% and adding to it the cost of interest-bearing liabilities. The tax-equivalent adjustment recognizes the income tax savings when comparing taxable and tax-exempt assets. Management believes that it is a standard practice in the banking industry to present net interest income, interest rate spread and net interest margin on a fully tax-equivalent basis. Therefore, management believes these measures provide useful information to investors by allowing them to make peer comparisons. The Corporation excludes changes in the fair value of derivatives from interest income and interest expense because the changes in valuation do not affect interest received or paid.
(2)Government obligations include debt issued by government-sponsored agencies.
(3)Unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities are excluded from the average volumes.
(4)Average loan balances include the average of nonaccrual loans.
(5)Interest income on loans includes $7.3 million and $9.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, of income from prepayment penalties and late fees related to the Corporation’s loan portfolio.
Portions of the Corporation’s interest-earning assets, mostly investments in obligations of some U.S. government agencies and U.S. government-sponsored entities (“GSEs”), generate interest that is exempt from income tax, principally in Puerto Rico. Also, interest and gains on sales of investments held by the Corporation’s international banking entities (“IBEs”) are tax-exempt under Puerto Rico tax law (see “Income Taxes” below for additional information). Management believes that the presentation of interest income on an adjusted tax-equivalent basis facilitates the comparison of all interest data related to these assets. The Corporation estimated the tax equivalent yield by dividing the interest rate spread on exempt assets by 1 less the Puerto Rico statutory tax rate (37.5%) and adding to it the average cost of interest-bearing liabilities. The computation considers the interest expense disallowance required by Puerto Rico tax law.
Management believes that the presentation of net interest income excluding the effects of the changes in the fair value of the derivative instruments (“valuations”) provides additional information about the Corporation’s net interest income and facilitates comparability and analysis from period to period. The changes in the fair value of the derivative instruments have no effect on interest due on interest-bearing liabilities or interest earned on interest-earning assets.
Interest income on interest-earning assets primarily represents interest earned on loans held for investment and investment securities.
Interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities primarily represents interest paid on brokered CDs, retail deposits, repurchase agreements, advances from the FHLB and junior subordinated debentures.
Unrealized gains or losses on derivatives represent changes in the fair value of derivatives, primarily interest rate caps used for protection against rising interest rates.
Net interest income amounted to $600.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $32.2 million, when compared to $567.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $32.2 million increase in net interest income was primarily due to:
 A $23.3 million increase in interest income on consumer loans and finance leases, mainly due to a $283.6 million increase in the average balance of this portfolio, which resulted in an increase in interest income of approximately $29.2 million, largely related to auto loans and finance leases. The increase in average balance reflects the effect of both consumer loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition and organic growth. The benefit of the increase in the average balance of the consumer loan portfolio was partially offset, among other things, by a $2.1 million decrease in late charges and penalty fees assessed, and the downward repricing of credit card loans.
 A $16.2 million decrease in interest expense, primarily due to: (i) a $6.3 million decrease in interest expense on interest bearing checking, savings and non-brokered time deposits, including a decrease of approximately $18.1 million related to lower average interest rates paid, partially offset by an increase of approximately $11.7 million in interest expense related to a $1.9 billion increase in the average balance; (ii) a $3.7 million decrease in interest expense on FHLB advances, primarily related to a $210.0 million decrease in the average balance; (iii) a $3.0 million decrease in interest expense on brokered CDs, primarily related to a $142.8 million decrease in the average balance; and (iv) a $3.1 million decrease in interest expense related to the downward repricing of floating-rate junior subordinated debentures tied to the decrease in the three-month LIBOR index.
 A $2.4 million increase in interest income on commercial and construction loans, reflecting a $727.3 million increase in the average commercial and construction loan portfolio balance, primarily related to both the effect of loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition and the SBA PPP loans originated in 2020. Total discount accretion related to fair value marks on commercial and construction loans acquired from BSPR amounted to $5.5 million in 2020. Additionally, interest income includes $7.5 million on average SBA PPP loan balances of $272.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase related to higher average balances in 2020, was partially offset by the downward repricing of variable-rate commercial and construction loans, the origination of new loans at lower rates than loans repaid, and the effect in 2019 of a $3.0 million accelerated discount accretion from the payoff of a previously-acquired commercial mortgage loan.
As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate on approximately 39% of the Corporation’s commercial and construction loans, excluding SBA PPP loans, was based upon LIBOR indexes and 15% was based upon the Prime Rate index. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the average one-month LIBOR rate declined 171 basis points, the average three-month LIBOR rate declined 168 basis points, and the average Prime Rate declined 174 basis points, compared to the average rates for such indexes for the same period in 2019.
 A $2.3 million increase in interest income on residential mortgage loans, reflecting a $75.7 million increase in the average balance of this portfolio, primarily related to loans acquired from BSPR.
Partially offset by:
 A $10.0 million decrease in interest income from interest-bearing cash balances, which consisted primarily of deposits maintained at the New York FED. Balances at the New York FED earned 0.44% during 2020 compared to 2.12% for 2019, a decrease attributable to declines in the Federal Funds target rate. The adverse effect of lower rates was partially offset by a $609.6 million increase in the average balance of interest-bearing cash balances, primarily related to the growth in deposits gathered from customers.
 A $1.0 million decrease in interest income on investment securities, mainly related to a $10.9 million increase in the premium amortization expense on U.S. agencies MBS affected by the low interest rate environment (including $2.2 million related to U.S. agencies MBS acquired in the BSPR transaction), a $2.7 million decrease in interest income on U.S. agencies bonds, driven by lower yields available on recent purchases, a $0.8 million decrease in interest income on Puerto Rico municipalities bonds, primarily related to the downward repricing of such bonds, which are tied to short-term market interest rates, and a $0.7 million decrease in FHLB stock dividends related to the lower investment in FHLB stock. These variances were almost entirely offset by the increase in interest income resulting from a $853.7 million increase in the average balance of U.S. agencies MBS.
The net interest margin decreased by 70 basis points to 4.15% for 2020, compared to 4.85% for 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by the effect of the low interest rate environment on the repricing of variable rate commercial loans and interest-bearing cash balances, as well as on the increase in the U.S. agencies premium amortization expense. In addition, net interest margin was adversely affected by a higher proportion of low-yielding assets, such as interest-bearing cash balances, U.S agencies bonds and MBS, and SBA PPP loans, to total interest-earning assets, partially offset by the decrease in the average interest rate paid on interest-bearing deposits.
On an adjusted tax-equivalent basis, net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $34.0 million to $621.4 million, compared to the same period in 2019. The tax-equivalent adjustment increased by $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period a year ago, primarily related to an increase in the average balance of U.S. agencies MBS held by the IBE subsidiary First Bank Overseas.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses consists of provisions for credit losses on loans and finance leases and, unfunded loan commitments, as well as held-to-maturity and available-for-sale debt securities. On January 1, 2020, the Corporation adopted ASU 2016-13, which replaced the incurred loss methodology with the CECL methodology to estimate the ACL of certain financial assets considering, among other things, expected future changes in macroeconomic conditions. The Corporation adopted ASU 2016-13 using the modified retrospective method, resulting in a cumulative increase of approximately $93.2 million in the total ACL with a corresponding decrease, net of applicable taxes, in beginning retained earnings as of January 1, 2020. Results for reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2020 are presented under ASU 2016-13 while prior period amounts continue to be reported in accordance with previously applicable GAAP. See Note 1 - Nature of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of the Form 10-K for further information about the day-one impact on the date of adoption of ASU 2016-13, as well as a description of the methodologies that the Corporation follows to determine the ACL.
The principal changes in the provision for credit losses by main categories follow:
Provision for credit losses for loans and finance leases
The provision for credit losses for loans and finance leases increased by $128.5 million to $168.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $40.2 million for 2019. The CECL accounting standard requires the Corporation to provide for an ACL for non-PCD loans at the time of acquisition through a direct charge to earnings, in addition to any fair value adjustments on these loans. Accordingly, the Corporation recorded a $37.5 million provision for credit losses for non-PCD loans acquired in the BSPR acquisition in the third quarter of 2020. The provision of credit losses do not include $28.7 million of reserves established at acquisition date for PCD loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition. The following table shows the breakdown of the provision for credit losses by portfolio for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The $128.5 million increase in the provision for credit losses for loans and finance leases consisted of:
 Provision for credit losses for the commercial and construction loans portfolio of $89.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a $16.9 million net loan loss reserve release for commercial and construction loans for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding the $13.8 million charge recorded in 2020 related to the initial reserves required for non-PCD commercial loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition, the adverse variance of $93.0 million was driven by a $74.4 million reserve build (i.e., provision of $76.1 million less net charge-offs of $1.7 million) in 2020 reflecting the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on forecasted macroeconomic variables used in the Corporation’s CECL model. The increase in the ACL was reflected in all regions where the Corporation operates, with the higher provisions recorded for loans related to the hospitality, office and retail real estate industries. The reserve release recorded in 2019 was primarily related to a $3.4 million reserve release associated with the resolution of uncertainties surrounding the repayment prospects of a hurricane-affected commercial customer, a $6.0 million release associated with the effect of qualitative adjustments to account for developments in resolution strategies for non-performing loans, and the effect of reserve releases related to both lower historical loss rates and the upgrade in the credit-risk classification of certain commercial loans.
 Provision for credit losses for the consumer loans and finance leases portfolio of $56.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $43.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding the $10.1 million charge recorded in 2020 related to the initial reserves required for non-PCD consumer loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition, the provision for consumer loans increased by $3.3 million driven by a $9.6 million reserve build (i.e., provision of $46.3 million less net charge-offs of $36.7 million) in 2020 reflecting the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on economic forecasts used in the Corporation’s CECL model, primarily reflected in auto loans, finance lease and credit card loans during the first half of 2020. Key economic variables in the consumer loan portfolio are unemployment rates and retail sales. In addition, the variance reflects the effect in the first quarter of 2019 of a $3.0 million reserve release related to revised estimates associated with the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria, attributable to the updated payment patterns and credit risk analyses applied to consumer borrowers subject to payment deferral programs that expired early in 2018.
 Provision for credit losses for the residential mortgage loans portfolio of $22.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding the $13.6 million charge recorded in 2020 related to the initial reserves required for non-PCD residential mortgage loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition, the provision for residential mortgage loans decreased by $5.3 million, reflecting the overall decrease in the size of the legacy residential mortgage portfolio and declines in net charge-offs that more than offset the adverse effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on economic forecasts in the first half of the year. Key economic variables in the residential mortgage loan portfolio are unemployment rates and the regional home price index.
See “Risk Management - Credit Risk Management” below for an analysis of the ACL, non-performing assets, and related information, and see “Financial Condition and Operating Data Analysis - Loan Portfolio and Risk Management - Credit Risk Management” below for additional information concerning the Corporation’s loan portfolio exposure in the geographic areas where the Corporation does business.
Provision for credit losses for unfunded loan commitments
The Corporation recorded a provision for credit losses for unfunded commercial and construction loan commitments and standby letters of credit of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The provision recorded in 2020 primarily consisted of a $1.3 million charge recorded in connection with unfunded loan commitments assumed in the BSPR acquisition. During 2019, the Corporation recorded a $0.4 million release on this reserve.
Provision for credit losses for held-to-maturity and available-for-sale debt securities
During the first quarter of 2020, as a result of CECL requirements in effect since January 1, 2020, the Corporation established an ACL of $8.1 million for held-to-maturity Puerto Rico municipalities bonds. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Corporation recorded a release of credit losses of $0.6 million, primarily related to the repayment of certain bonds of the legacy debt securities portfolio. In the third quarter of 2020, the Corporation recorded a $1.3 million initial reserve for PCD debt securities acquired in the BSPR acquisition. The initial reserve established for PCD debt securities acquired in the BSPR acquisition was not established through a charge to the provision for credit losses, but rather through an initial adjustment to the debt securities’ amortized cost basis. Meanwhile, the Corporation recorded charges to the provision for credit losses for available-for-sale securities of $1.6 million during 2020, substantially all recorded in the first half of 2020. These charges were in connection with private label MBS and a residential mortgage pass-through MBS issued by the Puerto Rico Housing Finance Authority (“PRHFA”) that resulted from a decline in the present value of expected cash flows based upon the performance of the underlying mortgages and the effect of a deterioration in forecasted economic conditions due to the COVID-19 pandemic. ASU 2016-13 requires the determination of expected credit losses over the life of held-to-maturity securities and changed the accounting for available-for-sale debt securities to require credit losses to be presented as an allowance rather than as a write-down on available-for-sale debt securities that management does not intend to sell or believes that it is more likely than not that it will not be required to sell.
Non-interest income primarily consists of income from service charges on deposit accounts, commissions derived from various banking and insurance activities, gains and losses on mortgage banking activities, interchange and other fees related to debit and credit cards, and net gains and losses on investment securities.
Service charges on deposit accounts include monthly fees, overdraft fees, and other fees on deposit accounts, as well as corporate cash management fees.
Income from mortgage banking activities includes gains on sales and securitizations of loans, revenues earned for administering residential mortgage loans originated by the Corporation and subsequently sold with servicing retained, and unrealized gains and losses on forward contracts used to hedge the Corporation’s securitization pipeline. In addition, lower-of-cost-or-market valuation adjustments to the Corporation’s residential mortgage loans held-for-sale portfolio and servicing rights portfolio, if any, are recorded as part of mortgage banking activities.
Insurance income consists mainly of insurance commissions earned by the Corporation’s subsidiary, FirstBank Insurance Agency, Inc.
The other operating income category is composed of miscellaneous fees such as debit, credit card and POS interchange fees, as well as contractual shared revenues from merchant contracts sold in 2015.
The net gain (loss) on investment securities reflects gains or losses as a result of sales that are consistent with the Corporation’s investment policies and, prior to 2020, OTTI charges on the Corporation’s investment securities portfolio.
The gain on early extinguishment of debt is related to the repurchase in 2020 of $0.4 million in TRuPs of FBP Statutory Trust I. The Corporation repurchased TRuPs resulted in a commensurate reduction in the related amount of the floating rate junior subordinated debentures (“Subordinated Debt”). The Corporation’s purchase price equated to 75% of the $0.4 million par value. The 25% discount resulted in a gain of $0.1 million which is reflected in the consolidated statements of income as a Gain on early extinguishment of debt. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation still had Subordinated Debt outstanding in the aggregate amount of $183.8 million.
Non-interest income amounted to $111.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $90.6 million for 2019. The $20.6 million increase in non-interest income was primarily due to:
 The $13.2 million gain on sales of investment securities consisting of: (i) a $13.0 million gain on sales of approximately $392.2 million on available-for-sale U.S. agencies MBS; and (ii) a $0.2 million gain on sales of approximately $803.3 million of available-for-sale U.S. Treasury Notes acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition.
 A $5.1 million increase in revenues from mortgage banking activities, driven by a $6.0 million increase in realized gain on sales of residential mortgage loans in the secondary market. Total loans sold in the secondary market to U.S. GSEs during 2020 amounted to $476.4 million, with a related net gain of $18.1 million (net of realized losses of $2.0 million on to-be-announced (“TBA”) MBS hedges), compared to total loans sold in the secondary market in 2019 of $374.0 million, with a related net gain of $12.2 million (net of realized losses of $1.8 million on TBA MBS hedges).
 A $4.3 million increase in gain from hurricane-related insurance recoveries, included as part of Other operating income in the table above, driven by the $5.0 million benefit recorded in 2020 resulting from the final settlement of the Corporation’s business interruption insurance claim associated with lost profits caused by Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017.
 Fee income of $1.4 million recorded in connection with the sale of a 95% participation in the $184.4 million of Main Street loans originated during the fourth quarter of 2020, includes as part of Other operating income the table above.
 A $0.7 million increase in service charges on deposits accounts, primarily related to the income generated by the acquired BSPR operations for the last four months of the year, that more than offset the reduction in the number of returned checks, paid items and overdraft fee transactions, adversely affected by the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Partially offset by:
 The effect in 2019 of a $2.3 million net gain recorded on the sales of approximately $11.4 million in nonaccrual commercial and construction loans held for sale, included as part of Other operating income in the table above.
 A $0.9 million decrease in transactional fee income from credit and debit cards, ATMs, POS and merchant-related activities as a result of the disruptions caused by quarantines and lockdowns of non-essential businesses in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily during the second quarter of 2020. These amounts are included as part of Other operating income in the table above.
 A $0.8 million decrease in insurance income, driven by lower credit protection, life and commercial insurance commissions, adversely affected by a lower volume of new loan originations (excluding SBA PPP loans), partially offset by higher insurance contingent commission received by the insurance agency.
Non-interest expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $424.2 million, compared to $378.5 million for 2019. Included in non-interest expenses are the following Special Items:
 Merger and restructuring costs associated with the acquisition of BSPR of $26.5 million in 2020, compared to $11.4 million for 2019. These costs primarily included consulting, legal, valuation, advisory and other professional service fees associated with the acquisition, VSPs offered to eligible employees, retention and other compensation bonuses, and expenses related to system conversions and other integration related efforts.
 COVID-19 pandemic-related expenses of $5.4 million in 2020consisting of: (i) expenses of $1.8 million in connection with bonuses paid to branch personnel and other essential employees for working during the pandemic, as well as employee-related expenses such as expenses for the administration of COVID-19 tests, and purchases of personal protective materials, recorded as Employees’ compensation and benefits in the table above; (ii) expenses of $2.7 million associated with cleaning and security protocols, included as part of Occupancy and equipment costs in the table above; (iii) expenses of $0.6 million related to communications established with customers, included as part of Business promotion expenses in the table above; (iv) $0.3 million in sales and use taxes, included as part of Taxes, other than income taxes in the table above; and (v) $0.1 million in other miscellaneous expenses, included as part of Other expenses in the table above.
 Benefit from hurricane-related insurance recoveries recorded as contra-expense in 2020 amounting to $1.2 million, compared to $1.3 million in 2019, primarily related to repairs, maintenance and other hurricane-related expenses. Most of these benefits were recorded as a contra-expense of Occupancy and Equipment costs in the table above.
 Expense recovery of $2.3 million related to the employee retention benefit payment received by the Bank in 2019 by virtue of the Disaster Tax Relief Act. The Benefit was recorded as an offset to employees’ compensation and benefits expenses.
On a non-GAAP basis, adjusted non-interest expenses, excluding the effect of the Special Items mentioned above, amounted to $393.5 million for 2020, compared to $370.2 million for 2019. The $23.3 million increase in adjusted non-interest expenses primarily reflect the effect of operations, personnel, and branches acquired from BSPR, partially offset by reductions in OREO losses and expenses and the effect of both, volume-related expense reductions and several expense control measures taken in response to the current economic environment that includes actions such as modifications of business promotion strategies, elimination of all traveling expenses, and reassessment of project plans, among others. Some of the most significant variances in adjusted non-interest expenses follows:
 A $10.6 million increase in adjusted employee’ compensation and benefits, primarily driven by incremental expenses related to personnel retained from the acquisition of BSPR, partially offset by a $2.9 million increase in deferred loan origination costs, primarily in connection with the origination of SBA PPP loans.
 An $8.3 million increase in adjusted occupancy and equipment expenses, primarily related to incremental expenses associated with the acquired operations, partially offset by the effect in 2019 of a $0.9 million charge related to the expensing of previously capitalized costs upon the outsourcing of certain technology solutions and changes in the scope and requirements of a technology-related project.
 A $5.5 million increase in adjusted Other expenses, in the table above, including: (i) a $2.8 million increase in amortization of intangible assets expense, primarily associated with the intangibles assets recognized in connection with the BSPR acquisition; (ii) a $1.6 million increase in local supervisory assessment fees, primarily associated with the increase in total assets; and (iii) a $1.2 million increase in legal and operational losses reserves.
 A $6.6 million increase in adjusted professional service fees, including a $10.4 million increase in outsourced technology fees, primarily related to temporary technology processing costs of the acquired BSPR operations while system conversions are completed, efforts intended to enhance disaster recovery capabilities and data security matters, and costs incurred in connection with the platform used for the origination of SBA PPP loans. These costs were partially offset by a $2.2 million decrease in collection fees, appraisals and title-related matters and a $1.9 million decrease in adjusted consulting and legal expenses.
 A $2.7 million increase in credit and debit card processing expenses, primarily related to incremental expenses of the acquired operations.
 A $2.2 million increase in adjusted taxes, other than income taxes expenses, primarily related to incremental municipal license taxes and property taxes of the acquired operations.
Partially offset by:
 An $11.0 million decrease in losses from OREO operations, primarily related to a $7.8 million decrease in write-downs and losses on sales of OREO properties and a $4.0 million decrease in OREO-related operating expenses, primarily repairs, maintenance, taxes and security measures. These variances were partially offset by a $0.8 million decrease in income recognized from rental payments associated with OREO income-producing properties.
 A $4.0 million decrease in adjusted business promotion expenses, primarily related to a $3.1 million decrease in expenses incurred in advertising, marketing, public relations, and sponsorship activities, and a $0.7 million decrease in the cost of the credit card rewards program.
The adjusted non-interest expenses and adjusted components of non-interest expenses financial metrics presented above are non-GAAP financial measures. See Basis of Presentation below for additional information and reconciliation of total non-interest expenses and certain non-interest expense components to adjusted total non-interest expenses and certain adjusted non-interest expense components.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense includes Puerto Rico and USVI income taxes, as well as applicable U.S. federal and state taxes. The Corporation is subject to Puerto Rico income tax on its income from all sources. As a Puerto Rico corporation, FirstBank is treated as a foreign corporation for U.S. and USVI income tax purposes and, accordingly, is generally subject to U.S. and USVI income tax only on its income from sources within the U.S. and USVI or income effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business in those jurisdictions. Any such tax paid in the U.S. and USVI is also creditable against the Corporation’s Puerto Rico tax liability, subject to certain conditions and limitations.
Under the Puerto Rico Internal Revenue Code of 2011, as amended (the “2011 PR Code”), the Corporation and its subsidiaries are treated as separate taxable entities and are not entitled to file consolidated tax returns and, thus, the Corporation is generally not entitled to utilize losses from one subsidiary to offset gains in another subsidiary. Accordingly, in order to obtain a tax benefit from a net operating loss (“NOL”), a particular subsidiary must be able to demonstrate sufficient taxable income within the applicable NOL carry-forward period. Pursuant to the 2011 PR Code, the carry-forward period for NOLs incurred during taxable years that commenced after December 31, 2004 and ended before January 1, 2013 is 12 years; for NOLs incurred during taxable years commencing after December 31, 2012, the carryover period is 10 years. The 2011 PR Code provides a dividend received deduction of 100% on dividends received from “controlled” subsidiaries subject to taxation in Puerto Rico and 85% on dividends received from other taxable domestic corporations.
The Corporation has maintained an effective tax rate lower than the maximum statutory rate mainly by investing in government obligations and MBS exempt from U.S. and Puerto Rico income taxes and by doing business through an IBE unit of the Bank, and through the Bank’s subsidiary, FirstBank Overseas Corporation, whose interest income and gains on sales is exempt from Puerto Rico income taxation. The IBE unit and FirstBank Overseas Corporation were created under the International Banking Entity Act of Puerto Rico (the “IBE Act”), which provides for total Puerto Rico tax exemption on net income derived by IBEs operating in Puerto Rico on the specific activities identified in the IBE Act. An IBE that operates as a unit of a bank pays income taxes at the corporate standard rates to the extent that the IBE’s net income exceeds 20% of the bank’s total net taxable income.
The CARES Act of 2020 includes several provisions to stimulate the U.S. economy in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic. Among these are tax provisions that temporarily modified the taxable income limitations for NOL usage to offset future taxable income, NOL carryback provisions and other related income and non-income based tax laws. The Corporation has evaluated such provisions and determined that the impact of the CARES Act of 2020 on the income tax provision and deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 was not significant.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Corporation recorded an income tax expense of $14.0 million compared to $72.0 million for 2019. The income tax expense for 2020 reflects, among other things, the effect of lower pre-tax income driven by the significant charges to the provision for credit losses recorded in 2020 associated with the adverse effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economic forecasts employed by the Corporation in the CECL model, as well as the initial reserves required for non-PCD loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition. Additionally, the variance reflects the effect of the $8.0 million partial reversal of the Corporation’s deferred tax asset valuation allowance after considering significant positive evidence on the utilization of net operating losses due to the acquisition of BSPR. The decrease in the income tax expense in 2020 also reflects a lower proportion of taxable to exempt income. The Corporation’s effective tax rate for 2020, excluding entities from which a tax benefit cannot be recognized and discrete items, decreased to 17%, compared to 30% for 2019.
On January 1, 2020, the Corporation increased its deferred tax assets by $31.3 million in connection with the transitional adjustment resulting from the adoption of the CECL accounting standard. In addition, the BSPR acquisition added $28.9 million of net deferred tax assets as of the acquisition date. In connection with the acquisition of BSPR, the Corporation re-evaluated the forecast of its projected taxable income, and, after consideration of the available positive and negative evidence, a partial release of the valuation allowance of $8.0 million was recorded in the third quarter of 2020.
After completion of the deferred tax asset valuation allowance analysis for the fourth quarter of 2020, management concluded that, as of December 31, 2020, it is more likely than not that FirstBank, the banking subsidiary, will generate sufficient taxable income to realize $144.7 million of its deferred tax assets related to NOLs within the applicable carry-forward periods. The net deferred tax assets of FirstBank amounted to $329.1 million as of December 31, 2020, net of a valuation allowance of $59.9 million, compared to a deferred tax asset of $264.8 million, net of a valuation allowance of $55.6 million, as of December 31, 2019. The positive evidence considered by management in arriving at its conclusion included factors such as: FirstBank’s three-year cumulative income position; sustained periods of profitability; management’s proven ability to forecast future income accurately and execute tax strategies; forecasts of future profitability, under several potential scenarios that support the partial utilization of NOLs prior to their expiration from 2021 through 2024; and the utilization of NOLs over the past three-years. The negative evidence considered by management included: uncertainties around the state of the Puerto Rico economy, including considerations on the impact of hurricane and pandemic recovery funds together with Puerto Rico government debt renegotiation efforts and the ultimate sustainability of the latest fiscal plan certified by the PROMESA oversight board.
Management’s estimate of future taxable income is based on internal projections that consider historical performance, multiple internal scenarios and assumptions, as well as external data that management believes is reasonable. If events are identified that affect the Corporation’s ability to utilize its deferred tax assets, the analysis will be updated to determine if any adjustments to the valuation allowance are required. If actual results differ significantly from the current estimates of future taxable income, even if caused by adverse macro-economic conditions, the remaining valuation allowance may need to be increased. Such an increase could have a material adverse effect on the Corporation’s financial condition and results of operations. Conversely, a higher than projected proportion of taxable income to exempt income could lead to a higher usage of available NOLs and a lower amount of disallowed NOLs from projected levels of tax-exempt income, per the 2011 PR code, which in turn could result in further releases of the deferred tax valuation allowance; any such decreases could have a material positive effect on the Corporation’s financial condition and results of operations.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately $210.7 million of the deferred tax assets of the Corporation are attributable to temporary differences or tax credit carryforwards that have no expiration date, compared to $92.0 million in 2019. The valuation allowance attributable to FirstBank’s deferred tax assets of $59.9 million as of December 31, 2020 is related to the estimated NOL disallowance attributable to projected levels of tax-exempt income, NOLs attributable to the Virgin Islands jurisdiction, and capital losses. The remaining balance of $43 million of the deferred tax asset valuation allowance non-attributable to FirstBank is mainly related to NOLs and capital losses at the holding company level. The Corporation will continue to provide a valuation allowance against its deferred tax assets in each applicable tax jurisdiction until the need for a valuation allowance is eliminated. The need for a valuation allowance is eliminated when the Corporation determines that it is more likely than not the deferred tax assets will be realized. The ability to recognize the remaining deferred tax assets that continue to be subject to a valuation allowance will be evaluated on a quarterly basis to determine if there are any significant events that would affect the ability to utilize these deferred tax assets.
The Corporation has U.S. and USVI sourced NOL carryforwards. Section 382 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (“Section 382”) limits the ability to utilize U.S. and USVI NOLs for income tax purposes in such jurisdictions following an event that is considered to be an “ownership change”. Generally, an “ownership change” occurs when certain shareholders increase their aggregate ownership by more than 50 percentage points over their lowest ownership percentage over a three-year testing period. Upon the occurrence of a Section 382 ownership change, the use of NOLs attributable to the period prior to the ownership change is subject to limitations and only a portion of the U.S. and USVI NOLs may be used by the Corporation to offset its annual U.S. and USVI taxable income, if any.
In 2017, the Corporation completed a formal ownership change analysis within the meaning of Section 382 covering a comprehensive period and concluded that an ownership change had occurred during such period. The Section 382 limitation has resulted in higher U.S. and USVI income tax liabilities than we would have incurred in the absence of such limitation. The Corporation has mitigated to an extent the adverse effects associated with the Section 382 limitation as any such tax paid in the U.S. or USVI is creditable against Puerto Rico tax liabilities or taken as a deduction against taxable income. However, our ability to reduce our Puerto Rico tax liability through such a credit or deduction depends on our tax profile at each annual taxable period, which is dependent on various factors. For 2020 and 2019, the Corporation incurred an income tax expense of approximately $4.9 million and $4.5 million, respectively, related to its U.S. operations. The limitation did not impact the USVI operations in 2020 and 2019.
OPERATING SEGMENTS
Based upon the Corporation’s organizational structure and the information provided to the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation, the operating segments are based primarily on the Corporation’s lines of business for its operations in Puerto Rico, the Corporation’s principal market, and by geographic areas for its operations outside of Puerto Rico. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had six reportable segments: Commercial and Corporate Banking; Consumer (Retail) Banking; Mortgage Banking; Treasury and Investments; United States operations; and Virgin Islands operations. Management determined the reportable segments based on the internal structure used to evaluate performance and to assess where to allocate resources. Other factors, such as the Corporation’s organizational chart, nature of the products, distribution channels, and the economic characteristics of the products, were also considered in the determination of the reportable segments. For additional information regarding First BanCorp.’s reportable segments, please refer to Note 36 - Segment Information, to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
The accounting policies of the segments are the same as those described in Note 1 - Nature of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. The Corporation evaluates the performance of the segments based on net interest income, the provision for credit losses, non-interest income, and direct non-interest expenses. The segments are also evaluated based on the average volume of their interest-earning assets less the ACL. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, other operating expenses not allocated to a particular segment amounted to $165.4 million and $125.9 million, respectively. Expenses pertaining to corporate administrative functions that support the operating segment, but are not specifically attributable to or managed by any segment, are not included in the reported financial results of the operating segments. The unallocated corporate expenses include certain general and administrative expenses and related depreciation and amortization expenses.
The Treasury and Investments segment lends funds to the Consumer (Retail) Banking, Mortgage Banking, Commercial and Corporate Banking and United States operations segments to finance their lending activities and borrows from those segments. The Consumer (Retail) Banking segment also lends funds to other segments. The Corporation allocates the interest rates charged or credited by the Treasury and Investment and the Consumer (Retail) Banking segments based on market rates. The difference between the allocated interest income or expense and the Corporation’s actual net interest income from centralized management of funding costs is reported in the Treasury and Investments segment.
The Commercial and Corporate Banking segment consists of the Corporation’s lending and other services for large customers represented by specialized and middle-market clients and the public sector. FirstBank has developed expertise in a wide variety of industries. The Commercial and Corporate Banking segment offers commercial loans, including commercial real estate and construction loans, and floor plan financings, as well as other products, such as cash management and business management services. A substantial portion of the commercial and corporate banking portfolio is secured by the underlying real estate collateral and the personal guarantees of the borrowers. Since commercial loans involve greater credit risk than a typical residential mortgage loan because they are larger in size and more risk is concentrated in a single borrower, the Corporation has and maintains a credit risk management infrastructure designed to mitigate potential losses associated with commercial lending, including underwriting and loan review functions, sales of loan participations and continuous monitoring of concentrations within portfolios.
The highlights of the Commercial and Corporate Banking segment’s financial results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include the following:
 Segment income before taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $45.0 million, compared to $85.8 million for 2019, for the reasons discussed below.
 Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $135.6 million, compared to $91.3 million for 2019. The increase in net interest income was primarily attributable to the increase in the average balance of performing loans, driven by both the effect of commercial loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition and the SBA PPP loans originated in 2020.
 For 2020, there was a $74.6 million charge to the provision for credit losses, compared to a net loan loss reserve release of $18.0 million for 2019. The charge to the provision in 2020 includes a $13.8 million charge related to the initial reserves required for non-PCD commercial loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition and higher reserve builds reflecting the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on forecasted macroeconomic variables used in the Corporation’s CECL model. The net loan loss reserve release in 2019 was primarily attributable to a release of approximately $10.3 million related to lower historical loss rates; (ii) loan loss recoveries of approximately $2.1 million associated with commercial and construction loans that were fully charged-off in prior periods; and (iii) a $3.4 million release associated with the effect of qualitative adjustments to account for developments in resolution strategies for nonaccrual loans.
 Total non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $12.6 million compared to $11.7 million for 2019. The increase was mainly related to a $2.2 million increase in service charges on deposits, primarily due to cash management fee income from corporate customers, fee income of $0.5 million recorded in connection with the participation interests sold on Main Street loans originated in the Puerto Rico region, and a benefit of approximately $0.8 million related to the portion of the business interruption insurance recoveries allocated to this operating segment. These variances were partially offset by the effect in 2019 of a $2.3 million gain recorded in connection with the sale of $11.4 million in nonaccrual commercial and construction loans in the Puerto Rico region.
 Direct non-interest expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $28.6 million, compared to $35.1 million for 2019. The decrease reflects a reduction of $7.8 million in net OREO losses, primarily related to lower write-downs and losses on sales of commercial OREO properties in Puerto Rico, and the effect of a $2.4 million increase in deferred loan origination costs, primarily in connection with the origination of SBA PPP loans. These variances were partially offset by incremental expenses related to the acquired commercial operations of BSPR, primarily employees’ compensation related to this operating segment.
Consumer (Retail) Banking
The Consumer (Retail) Banking segment consists of the Corporation’s consumer lending and deposit-taking activities conducted mainly through FirstBank’s branch network and loan centers in Puerto Rico. Loans to consumers include auto, boat and personal loans, credit card loans and lines of credit. Deposit products include interest-bearing and non-interest bearing checking and savings accounts, individual retirement accounts (“IRAs”) and retail CDs. Retail deposits gathered through each branch of FirstBank’s retail network serve as one of the funding sources for the lending and investment activities.
Consumer lending historically has been mainly driven by auto loan originations. The Corporation follows a strategy of seeking to provide outstanding service to selected auto dealers that provide the channel for the bulk of the Corporation’s auto loan originations.
Personal loans, credit cards, and, to a lesser extent, boat loans also contribute to interest income generated on consumer lending. Management plans to continue to be active in the consumer loan market, applying the Corporation’s strict underwriting standards. Other activities included in this segment are finance leases and insurance activities in Puerto Rico.
The highlights of the Consumer (Retail) Banking segment’s financial results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include the following:
 Segment income before taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $86.4 million, compared to $138.4 million for 2019, for the reasons discussed below.
 Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $220.7 million, compared to $244.5 million for 2019. The decrease was mainly due to lower income from funds loaned to other business segments due to lower medium-term market interest rates, partially offset by the increase in the average volume of consumer loans in Puerto Rico that reflects the effect of both consumer loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition and organic growth.
 The provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $13.1 million to $54.1 million, compared to $41.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase reflects the effect in 2020 of the $10.1 million charge related to the initial reserves required for non-PCD consumer loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition, and the effect of a $3.0 million reserve release recorded in 2019 in connection with revised estimates associated with the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria on consumer loans in Puerto Rico.
 Non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $51.0 million, compared to $51.7 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily related to a $1.2 million decrease in service charges on deposits primarily related to a reduction on the number of returned checks, paid items, and overdraft fee transactions, adversely affected by disruptions in business activities caused by the COVID-19 pandemic that more than offset the income contributed by the acquired operations for the last four months of the year. In addition, transaction fee income from credit and debit cards and merchant-related activities decreased by $0.4 million, and insurance commission income in Puerto Rico decreased by $0.9 million. These variances were partially offset by a benefit of approximately $2.4 million related to the portion of the business interruption insurance recoveries allocated to this operating segment.
 Direct non-interest expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $131.1 million, compared to $116.9 million for 2019. The increase was primarily due to incremental expenses related to the acquired operations of BSPR, primarily employees’ compensation, occupancy and equipment, and credit and debit cards processing fees related to this operating segment.
Mortgage Banking
The Mortgage Banking segment conducts its operations mainly through FirstBank. The segment’s operations consist of the origination, sale and servicing of a variety of residential mortgage loan products. Originations are sourced through different channels, such as FirstBank branches and purchases from mortgage bankers, and in association with new project developers. The mortgage banking segment focuses on originating residential real estate loans, some of which conform to the Federal Housing Administration (the “FHA”), the Veterans Administration (the “VA”), and U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development (“RD”) standards. Loans originated that meet the FHA’s standards qualify for the FHA’s insurance program whereas loans that meet the standards of the VA or the U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development (“RD”) are guaranteed by their respective federal agencies.
Mortgage loans that do not qualify under the FHA, VA, or RD programs are referred to as conventional loans. Conventional real estate loans can be conforming or non-conforming. Conforming loans are residential real estate loans that meet the standards for sale under the U.S. Federal National Mortgage Association (“FNMA”) and the U.S. Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (“FHLMC”) programs. Loans that do not meet FNMA or FHLMC standards are referred to as non-conforming residential real estate loans. The Corporation’s strategy is to penetrate markets by providing customers with a variety of high quality mortgage products to serve their financial needs through a faster and simpler process and at competitive prices. The Mortgage Banking segment also acquires and sells mortgages in the secondary markets. Residential real estate conforming loans are sold to investors like FNMA and FHLMC. The Corporation has commitment authority to issue GNMA MBS.
The highlights of the Mortgage Banking segment’s financial results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include the following:
 Segment income before taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $42.5 million, compared to $37.3 million for 2019, for the reasons discussed below.
 Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $76.0 million, compared to $68.8 million for 2019. The increase in net interest income was mainly due to the increase in the average balance of residential mortgage loans in the Puerto Rico region driven by residential mortgage loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition.
 The provision for credit losses for 2020 was $22.5 million, compared to $13.5 million for 2019. The increase in the provision primarily reflects the effect in 2020 of the $13.6 million charge related to the initial reserves required for non-PCD residential mortgage loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition, partially offset by the overall decline in the size of the legacy residential mortgage loans portfolio and a decrease in net charge-off levels.
 Non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $22.1 million, compared to $16.8 million for 2019. The increase was mainly due to a $5.2 million increase in realized gains from sales of residential mortgage loans and a benefit of $0.7 million related to the portion of the business interruption insurance recoveries allocated to this operating segment.
 Direct non-interest expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $33.1 million, compared to $34.8 million for 2019. The decrease was mainly related to a $3.3 million decrease in losses on OREO operations, and a $2.1 million decrease in professional service fees. These variances were partially offset by incremental expenses related to the acquired commercial operations of BSPR, primarily employees’ compensation, occupancy and equipment costs, and professional service fees related to this operating segment.
Treasury and Investments
The Treasury and Investments segment is responsible for the Corporation’s treasury and investment management functions. The treasury function, which includes funding and liquidity management, lends funds to the Commercial and Corporate Banking segment, the Mortgage Banking segment, the Consumer (Retail) Banking segment and the United States operations segment to finance their respective lending activities and borrows from those segments. The Treasury function also obtains funds through brokered deposits, advances from the FHLB, and repurchase agreements involving investment securities, among other possible funding sources.
The investment function is intended to implement a leverage strategy for the purposes of liquidity management, interest rate risk management and earnings enhancement.
The interest rates charged or credited by Treasury and Investments are based on market rates.
The highlights of the Treasury and Investments segment’s financial results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include the following:
 Segment income before taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $95.4 million, compared to $70.7 million for 2019, for the reasons discussed below.
 Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $87.9 million, compared to net interest income of $73.6 million for 2019. The increase was mainly related to a decrease in interest expense attributable to lower average balances of brokered CDs and FHLB advances, as well as the decrease in the average cost of variable-rate repurchase agreements. In addition, there was an increase in income from funds loaned to other business segments due to the overall increase in the average volume of commercial and residential loans. The variances were partially offset by higher premium amortization expense of U.S. agencies MBS and a decrease in interest income on deposits maintained at the New York FED attributable to the low interest rate environment.
 Non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $13.7 million, compared to non-interest loss of $0.2 million for 2019. The variance primarily reflects the effect of the $13.2 million gain realized on sales of available-for-sale investment securities.
 Direct non-interest expenses for 2020 were $3.4 million, compared to $2.7 million for 2019. The increase was mainly related to incremental expenses related to the acquired operations of BSPR, primarily employees’ compensation related to this operating segment.
United States Operations
The United States Operations segment consists of all banking activities conducted by FirstBank on the U.S. mainland. FirstBank provides a wide range of banking services to individual and corporate customers primarily in southern Florida through 10 banking branches. The United States Operations segment offers an array of both consumer and commercial banking products and services. Consumer banking products include checking, savings and money market accounts, retail CDs, internet banking services, residential mortgages, and home equity loans and lines of credit. Retail deposits, as well as FHLB advances and brokered CDs, allocated to this operation serve as funding sources for its lending activities.
The commercial banking services include checking, savings and money market accounts, retail CDs, internet banking services, cash management services, remote data capture and automated clearing house, or ACH, transactions. Loan products include the traditional commercial and industrial (“C&I”) and commercial real estate products, such as lines of credit, term loans and construction loans.
The highlights of the United States operations segment’s financial results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, include the following:
 Segment income before taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $12.3 million, compared to $24.0 million for 2019, for the reasons discussed below.
 Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $54.0 million, compared to $62.5 million for 2019. The decrease was mainly due to the downward repricing of variable-rate commercial and construction loans, and the origination of new loans at lower rates than loans repaid, partially offset by a decrease in interest expense associated with lower average volumes of FHLB advances and brokered CDs allocated to this operating segment.
 The Corporation recognized a provision for credit losses on loans for this operating segment of $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $7.3 million for 2019. The increase reflects the effect of reserves build in 2020 associated with the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on macroeconomic variables employed in the Corporation’s CECL model, primarily for the commercial portfolios.
 Total non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $4.6 million, compared to $2.8 million for 2019. The increase was primarily related to fee income of $1.0 million recorded in connection with the sale of the 95% participation interests in Main Street loans originated in 2020, and a $0.7 million increase in gain on sales of residential mortgage loans in the secondary market.
 Direct non-interest expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $33.8 million, compared to $34.1 million for 2019. The decrease was mainly due to a $0.4 million decrease in business promotion expenses.
Virgin Islands Operations
The Virgin Islands Operations segment consists of all banking activities conducted by FirstBank in the USVI and BVI, including consumer and commercial banking services, with a total of 11 banking branches currently serving the islands in the USVI of St. Thomas, St. Croix and St. John, and the island of Tortola in the BVI. The Virgin Islands Operations segment is driven by its consumer, commercial lending and deposit-taking activities.
Loans to consumers include auto and boat loans, lines of credit, and personal and residential mortgage loans. Deposit products include interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing checking and savings accounts, IRAs, and retail CDs. Retail deposits gathered through each branch serve as the funding sources for its own lending activities.
The highlights of the Virgin Islands operations’ financial results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include the following:
 Segment income before taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $0.2 million, compared to $9.1 million for 2019, for the reasons discussed below.
 Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $26.1 million, compared to $26.3 million for 2019. The decrease in net interest income was primarily related to the decrease in the average balance of residential mortgage loans in this operating segment.
 The Corporation recognized a provision for credit losses of $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net loan loss reserve release of $4.0 million for 2019. The variance was primarily related to reserve builds in 2020 in connection with the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on macroeconomic variables employed in the Corporation’s CECL model, primarily for the commercial portfolios. The net loan loss reserve release in 2019 was primarily related to a $2.9 million release associated with the effect of qualitative adjustments to account for developments in resolution strategies for nonaccrual loans and a $1.7 million loan loss recovery on a commercial and industrial loan charged off in prior periods.
 Non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $7.3 million, compared to $7.7 million for 2019. The decrease was mainly related to a $0.5 million decrease in fee-based income from credit and debit cards as well as merchant-related activities, and a $0.2 million decrease in service charges on deposits, both affected by disruptions in business activities caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a $0.4 million increase in hurricane-related insurance recoveries, primarily due to the portion of the business interruption insurance recoveries recorded in 2020 related to this operating segment.
 Direct non-interest expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $28.8 million compared to $29.0 million for 2019. The decrease was mainly due to a $0.9 million decrease in employees’ compensation and benefits expenses, partially offset by higher occupancy and equipment costs associated, in part, with the effect in 2019 of hurricane-related extra expenses insurance recoveries of $0.5 million recorded for this operating segment.
The Corporation’s total average assets were $15.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $12.5 billion for 2019, an increase of $2.7 billion. The variance primarily reflects: (i) an increase of $1.7 billion in the average balance of investment securities and interest-bearing cash balances, reflecting both increased purchases of investment securities and growth in cash balances supported by strong deposit growth during 2020, as well as the effect of investment securities acquired in conjunction with the acquisition of BSPR; and (ii) a $1.1 billion increase in the average balance of total loans, reflecting both the effect of loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition and the volume of SBA PPP loans originated in 2020.
The Corporation’s total average liabilities were $13.0 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.7 billion compared to December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly related to a $1.9 billion increase in the average balance of non-brokered interest-bearing deposits and a $953.2 million increase in the average balance of non-interest-bearing deposits, primarily reflecting the effect of payments received by individuals and commercial customers from government stimulus packages, payment deferral programs, and deposits assumed in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition. The increase also reflects the effect in 2020 of a call option exercised by a repurchase agreement counterparty on $200 million reverse repurchase agreements that were previously offset in the 2019 financial statements against variable-rate repurchase agreements pursuant to ASC Subtopic 210-20-45-11, “Balance Sheet - Offsetting - Other Presentation Matters - Repurchase and Reverse Repurchase Agreements.” The aforementioned variances were partially offset by a $142.8 million decrease in the average balance of brokered CDs and a $210.0 million decrease in the average balance of FHLB advances.
Assets
The Corporation’s total assets were $18.8 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $6.2 billion from December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly the result of the acquisition of BSPR, which, as of the acquisition date, added $5.6 billion in total assets, primarily loans and investment securities. In addition, there was an $849.7 million increase in cash and cash equivalents and higher purchases of investment securities during 2020 in connection with, among other things, strong deposit growth in part resulting from COVID-19 pandemic-related factors, such as government stimulus for consumers and small businesses and lower consumer spending.
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s total loan portfolio, before the ACL, amounted to $11.8 billion, an increase of $2.8 billion when compared to December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily a result of the BSPR acquisition in the Puerto Rico region, as well as new loans originations, including the origination of $390.3 million of SBA PPP loans during 2020, partially offset by loan prepayments and payoffs. On a portfolio basis, the increase in the loan portfolio consisted of a $1.9 billion increase in commercial and construction loans, a $599.0 million increase in residential mortgage loans, and a $328.0 million increase in consumer loans and finance leases.
As of December 31, 2020, the loans held for investment portfolio was comprised of commercial and construction loans (48%), residential real estate loans (30%), and consumer and finance leases (22%). Of the total gross loan portfolio held for investment of $11.8 billion as of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had credit risk concentration of approximately 79% in the Puerto Rico region, 17% in the United States region (mainly in the state of Florida), and 4% in the Virgin Islands region, as shown in the following table:
The increase in total loans in the Puerto Rico region consisted of increases of $1.7 billion in commercial and construction loans, $663.3 million in residential mortgage loans, and $340.0 million in consumer loans and finance leases. The increase reflected in all portfolio categories was primarily a result of the BSPR acquisition, as well as new loan originations, partially offset by prepayments and payoffs. Loans held for investment in the Puerto Rico region included a net purchase accounting discount of $63.0 million as of December 31, 2020 related to the acquisition of BSPR. In addition, the Corporation participated in the SBA PPP program under the CARES Act of 2020 and, as of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s SBA PPP loans, net of unearned fees of $6.8 million, totaled $406.0 million (including $301.1 million in the Puerto Rico region). The unearned fees are being accreted into income based on the two-year contractual maturity (five years for the $26.9 million in SBA PPP loans originated after June 5, 2020). During the fourth quarter of 2020, the SBA approved and remitted payments for forgiveness applications totaling $48.9 million in principal balance, resulting in the acceleration of fee income recognition in the amount of approximately $0.7 million. For loans originated under the SBA PPP loan program, interest and principal payment on these loans were originally deferred for six months following the funding date, during which time interest would continue to accrue. On October 7, 2020, the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020 (the “Flexibility Act”) extended the deferral period for borrower payments of principal, interest, and fees on all SBA PPP loans to the date that the SBA remits the borrower’s loan forgiveness amount to the lender (or, if the borrower does not apply for loan forgiveness, 10 months after the end of the borrower’s loan forgiveness covered period). The extension of the deferral period under the Flexibility Act automatically applied to all SBA PPP loans.
The increase in total loans in the Florida region consisted of a $175.5 million increase in the balance of commercial and construction loans, including $77.5 million related to SBA PPP loans, partially offset by reductions of $47.2 million in residential mortgage loans and $13.8 million in consumer loans. In addition to SBA PPP loans, the increase in commercial and construction loans was driven by the origination of eight large facilities, each in excess of $10 million totaling $137.2 million as of December 31, 2020, partially offset by a $25.2 million reduction in exposure with respect to two large commercial and construction relationships.
The increase in total loans in the Virgin Islands region consisted of a $15.6 million increase in the balance of commercial and construction loans (including SBA PPP loans totaling $27.4 million) and a $1.8 million increase in consumer loans, partially offset by a reduction of $17.1 million in residential mortgage loans. The increase in commercial and construction loans resulting from the origination of SBA PPP loans was partially offset by repayments, including the payoff of a $2.0 million nonaccrual commercial mortgage loan and a $2.2 million decrease in the balance of government loans.
FirstBanCorp. relies primarily on its retail network of branches to originate residential and consumer personal loans. The Corporation supplements its residential mortgage originations with wholesale servicing released mortgage loan purchases from mortgage bankers. The Corporation manages its construction and commercial loan originations through centralized units and most of its originations come from existing customers, as well as through referrals and direct solicitations.
The following table sets forth certain additional data (including loan production) related to the Corporation’s loan portfolio net of the ACL on loans and finance leases as of and for the dates indicated:
(1)Includes, among other things, the change in the ACL on loans and finance leases and cancellation of loans due to the repossession of the collateral and loans repurchased.
Residential Real Estate Loans
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s residential mortgage loan portfolio held for investment increased by $588.2 million, as compared to the balance as of December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of the BSPR acquisition, partially offset by principal repayments, charge-offs, and foreclosures that exceeded the volume of non-conforming residential mortgage loan originations. Approximately 92% of the $403.7 million in residential mortgage loan originations in the Puerto Rico region during 2020 consisted of conforming loan originations and refinancings.
The majority of the Corporation’s outstanding balance of residential mortgage loans in the Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands regions consisted of fixed-rate loans that traditionally carry higher yields than residential mortgage loans in the Florida region. In the Florida region, approximately 56% of the residential mortgage loan portfolio consisted of hybrid adjustable-rate mortgages. In accordance with the Corporation’s underwriting guidelines, residential mortgage loans are primarily fully-documented loans, and the Corporation does not originate negative amortization loans.
Residential mortgage loan originations and purchases for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $560.0 million, compared to $491.2 million for 2019. These amounts include purchases from mortgage bankers of $0.8 million and $18.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in residential mortgage loan originations and purchases of $68.8 million reflect increases of $63.1 million, $3.3 million, and $2.4 million in the Florida, Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico regions, respectively. The increases across all regions reflect a higher volume of refinanced loans and conforming loan originations driven by the effect of lower mortgage loan interest rates and increased home purchase activity. These increases were achieved despite the disruptions in the loan underwriting and closing processes caused by the lockdown related to the COVID-19 pandemic that was implemented in Puerto Rico on March 16, 2020. The real estate market in Puerto Rico was permitted to resume operations in mid-May 2020.
Commercial and Construction Loans
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s commercial and construction loan portfolio increased by $1.9 billion to $5.6 billion, as compared to the balance as of December 31, 2019. As explained above, the increase in the commercial and construction loan portfolio was primarily due to the acquisition of BSPR, as well as new originations including SBA PPP loans, as further discussed below.
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had $201.3 million outstanding in loans extended to the Puerto Rico government, its municipalities and public corporations, compared to $57.7 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $107.4 million consisted of loans extended to municipalities in Puerto Rico that are supported by assigned property tax revenues and $38.5 million consisted of municipal special obligation bonds. The vast majority of revenues of the municipalities included in the Corporation’s loan portfolio are independent of budgetary subsidies provided by the Puerto Rico central government. These municipalities are required by law to levy special property taxes in such amounts as are required to satisfy the payment of all of their respective general obligation bonds and notes. Late in 2015, the Government Development Bank for Puerto Rico (“GDB”) and the Municipal Revenue Collection Center (“CRIM”) signed and perfected a deed of trust. Through this deed, the Puerto Rico Fiscal Agency and Financial Advisory Authority, as fiduciary, is bound to keep the CRIM funds separate from any other deposits and must distribute the funds pursuant to applicable law. The CRIM funds are deposited at another commercial depository financial institution in Puerto Rico. In addition to loans extended to municipalities, the Corporation’s exposure to the Puerto Rico government as of December 31, 2020 included $13.6 million in loans granted to an affiliate of the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority (“PREPA”) and $41.8 million in loans to an agency of the Puerto Rico central government.
The Corporation also has credit exposure to USVI government entities. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had $61.8 million in loans to USVI government instrumentalities and public corporations, compared to $64.1 million as of December 31, 2019. Of the amount outstanding as of December 31, 2020, public corporations of the USVI owed approximately $38.6 million and an independent instrumentality of the USVI government owed approximately $23.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, all loans were currently performing and up to date on principal and interest payments.
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s total exposure to shared national credit (“SNC”) loans (including unused commitments) amounted to $882.9 million, compared to $820.4 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $168.6 million of the SNC exposure related to the portfolio in Puerto Rico and $714.3 million related to the portfolio in the Florida region.
Commercial and construction loan originations (excluding government loans) amounted to $2.8 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.4 billion for 2019. Total commercial and construction loan originations in 2020 include SBA PPP loan originations of $390.2 million and Main Street loan originations of $184.4 million. Excluding SBA PPP loans and Main Street loans originated in 2020, commercial and construction loan originations were $2.3 billion, down $179.7 million compared to 2019. The decrease reflects reductions of $154.1 million, $21.0 million, and $4.6 million in the Florida, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands regions, respectively, primarily as a result of the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on economic activities, in particular during the second quarter of 2020.
Government loan originations for 2020 amounted to $41.3 million, compared to $40.0 million for 2019. Government loan originations in both years primarily consisted of the refinancing and renewal of certain facilities in both the Virgin Islands and the Puerto Rico regions, as well as the utilization of an arranged overdraft line of credit of a government entity in the Virgin Islands region.
The composition of the Corporation’s construction loan portfolio held for investment as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 by category and geographic location follows:
The following table presents further information related to the Corporation’s construction portfolio as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020:
Consumer Loans and Finance Leases
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s consumer loan and finance lease portfolio increased by $328.0 million to $2.6 billion, as compared to the portfolio balance of $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increase primarily reflects increases in auto loans, personal loans, finance leases, and credit cards loans, which increased by $161.6 million, $83.8 million, $58.5 million, and $27.5 million, respectively, partially offset by reductions in home equity lines of credit and boat loans of $1.9 million and $1.3 million, respectively. The increase in consumer loans reflects the effect of both consumer loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition, primarily personal loans and credit card loans, and the organic growth in auto and finance leases despite disruptions caused by quarantines and lockdowns of non-essential businesses in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, which in Puerto Rico were imposed in mid-March.
Originations of auto loans (including finance leases) in 2020 amounted to $614.9 million, compared to $704.8 million for 2019. Personal loan originations in 2020, other than credit card loans, amounted to $123.8 million, compared to $267.1 million in 2019. Most of the decrease in consumer loan originations in 2020, as compared with 2019, was in the Puerto Rico region, which was significantly affected by quarantines and lockdowns of non-essential businesses in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic. The utilization activity on the outstanding credit card portfolio in 2020 amounted to approximately $328.7 million, compared to $401.8 million in 2019.
Investment Activities
As part of its liquidity, revenue diversification and interest rate risk strategies, First BanCorp. maintains an investment portfolio that is classified as available-for-sale or held to maturity. The Corporation’s total available-for-sale investment securities portfolio as of December 31, 2020 amounted to $4.6 billion, a $2.5 billion increase from December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly driven by purchases of approximately $3.8 billion of U.S. agencies MBS and bonds, and the acquisition of BSPR, which added $258.0 million of U.S. agencies residential pass-through MBS as of December 31, 2020, partially offset by sales of $392.2 million of U.S. agencies MBS, approximately $624.7 million of U.S. agencies bonds that matured or were called prior to maturity during 2020, and prepayments of $649.4 million of U.S. agencies MBS. Given the stimulus actions being taken by the federal government to contain the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, market interest rates remain at low levels, which may trigger accelerated exercises of call options and prepayment rights on investments securities in the future. These risks are directly linked to future period market interest rate fluctuations.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately 99% of the Corporation’s available-for-sale securities portfolio was invested in U.S. government and agencies debentures and fixed-rate GSEs’ MBS (mainly GNMA, FNMA and FHLMC fixed-rate securities). In addition, as of December 31, 2020, the Corporation held a bond issued by the PRHFA, classified as available for sale, specifically a residential pass-through MBS in the aggregate amount of $4.0 million (fair value - $2.9 million). This residential pass-through MBS issued by the PRHFA is collateralized by certain second mortgages originated under a program launched by the Puerto Rico government in 2010. During the second quarter of 2020, the Corporation established an ACL of $0.3 million related to such pass-through MBS issued by the PRHFA based on the results of a risk-adjusted discounted cash flow analysis that took into consideration the current performance of the underlying mortgage loans and the deteriorating forecasted economic conditions due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s held-to-maturity investment securities portfolio, before the ACL, amounted to $189.5 million, an increase of $50.8 million from December 31, 2019. The increase reflects primarily $57.2 million of Puerto Rico municipal bonds accounted for as held-to-maturity securities resulting from the BSPR acquisition. Upon adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, the Corporation recognized an ACL for held-to-maturity debt securities of approximately $8.1 million, as a cumulative effect adjustment from a change in accounting policy, with a corresponding decrease in beginning retained earnings, net of applicable income taxes. As of December 31, 2020, the ACL for held-to-maturity debt securities was $8.8 million, including the $8.1 million effect of adopting CECL, a $1.3 million initial ACL established for PCD debt securities acquired in the BSPR acquisition, and a $0.6 million release to the initial ACL established in 2020. Held-to-maturity investment securities consisted of financing arrangements with Puerto Rico municipalities issued in bond form, which the Corporation accounts for as securities, but which were underwritten as loans with features that are typically found in commercial loans. These obligations typically are not issued in bearer form, are not registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and are not rated by external credit agencies. These bonds have seniority to the payment of operating costs and expenses of the municipality and, in most cases, are supported by assigned property tax revenues. Approximately 60% of the Corporation’s municipality bonds consisted of obligations issued by three of the largest municipalities in Puerto Rico. The municipalities are required by law to levy special property taxes in such amounts as are required for the payment of all of their respective general obligation bonds and loans. Given the uncertainties as to the effects that the negative fiscal position of the Puerto Rico central government, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the measures taken, or to be taken, by other government entities may have on municipalities, the Corporation cannot be certain whether future charges to the ACL on these securities will be required.
See “Risk Management - Exposure to Puerto Rico Government” below for information and details about the Corporation’s total direct exposure to the Puerto Rico government, including municipalities.
Net interest income of future periods could be affected by prepayments of MBS. Any acceleration in the prepayments of MBS would lower yields on these securities, since the amortization of premiums paid upon acquisition of these securities would accelerate. Conversely, acceleration of the prepayments of MBS would increase yields on securities purchased at a discount, since the amortization of the discount would accelerate. These risks are directly linked to future period market interest rate fluctuations. Also, net interest income in future periods might be affected by the Corporation’s investment in callable securities. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had approximately $1.0 billion in debt securities (U.S. agencies government securities) with embedded calls, primarily purchased at par or at a discount, and with an average yield of 0.67%. See “Risk Management” below for further analysis of the effects of changing interest rates on the Corporation’s net interest income and the Corporation’s interest rate risk management strategies. Also refer to Note 5 - Investment Securities, to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, for additional information regarding the Corporation’s investment portfolio.
RISK MANAGEMENT
General
Risks are inherent in virtually all aspects of the Corporation’s business activities and operations. Consequently, effective risk management is fundamental to the success of the Corporation. The primary goals of risk management are to ensure that the Corporation’s risk-taking activities are consistent with the Corporation’s objectives and risk tolerance, and that there is an appropriate balance between risk and reward in order to maximize stockholder value.
The Corporation has in place a risk management framework to monitor, evaluate and manage the principal risks assumed in conducting its activities. First BanCorp.’s business is subject to eleven broad categories of risks: (1) liquidity risk; (2) interest rate risk; (3) market risk; (4) credit risk; (5) operational risk; (6) legal and compliance risk; (7) reputational risk; (8) model risk; (9) capital risk; (10) strategic risk; and (11) information technology risk. First BanCorp. has adopted policies and procedures designed to identify and manage the risks to which the Corporation is exposed.
Risk Definition
Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk is the risk to earnings or capital arising from the possibility that the Corporation will not have sufficient cash to meet its short-term liquidity demands, such as from deposit redemptions or loan commitments. See Liquidity and Capital Adequacy below for further details.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk is the risk arising from adverse movements in interest rates. See Interest Rate Risk Management below for further details.
Market Risk
Market risk is the risk arising from adverse movements in market rates or prices, such as interest rates or equity prices. The Corporation evaluates market risk together with interest rate risk. Both changes in market values and changes in interest rates are evaluated and forecasted. See Interest Rate Risk Management below for further details.
Credit Risk
Credit risk is the risk arising from a borrower’s or a counterparty’s failure to meet the terms of a contract with the Corporation or otherwise to perform as agreed. See Credit Risk Management below for further details.
Operational Risk
Operational risk is the risk arising from problems with the delivery of services or products. This risk is a function of internal controls, information systems, employee integrity and operating processes. It also includes risks associated with the Corporation’s preparedness for the occurrence of an unforeseen event. This risk is inherent across all functions, products and services of the Corporation. See Operational Risk below for further details.
Legal and Regulatory Risk
Legal and regulatory risk is the risk arising from the Corporation’s failure to comply with laws or regulations that can adversely affect the Corporation’s reputation and/or increase its exposure to litigation or penalties.
Reputational Risk
Reputational risk is the risk arising from any adverse effect on the Corporation’s market value, capital or earnings arising from negative public opinion, whether true or not. This risk affects the Corporation’s ability to establish new relationships or services, or to continue servicing existing relationships.
Model Risk
Model risk is the potential for adverse consequences from decisions based upon incorrect or misused model outputs and reports or based upon an incomplete or inaccurate model. The use of models exposes the Corporation to some level of model risk. Model errors can contribute to incorrect valuations and lead to operational errors, inappropriate business decisions or incorrect financial entries. The Corporation seeks to reduce model risk through rigorous model identification and validation.
Capital Risk
Capital risk is the risk that the Corporation may lose value on its capital or have an inadequate capital plan, which would result in insufficient capital resources to meet minimum regulatory requirements (the Corporation’s authority to operate as a bank is dependent upon the maintenance of adequate capital resources), support its credit rating, or support its growth and strategic options.
Strategic Risk
Strategic risk is the risk arising from adverse business decisions, poor implementation of business decisions, or lack of responsiveness to changes in the banking industry and operating environment. This risk is a function of the compatibility of the Corporation’s strategic goals, the business strategies developed to achieve those goals, the resources deployed against these goals, and the quality of implementation.
Information Technology Risk
Information technology risk is the risk arising from the loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability of information or information systems and of cyber incidents or data breaches. It includes business risks associated with the use, ownership, operation, involvement, influence, and adoption of information technology within the Corporation.
Risk Governance
The following discussion highlights the roles and responsibilities of the key participants in the Corporation’s risk management framework:
Board of Directors
The Board of Directors oversees the Corporation’s overall risk governance program with the assistance of the Board committees discussed below.
Risk Committee
The Board of Directors of the Corporation appoints the Risk Committee to assist the Board in fulfilling its responsibility to oversee the Corporation’s management of its company-wide risk management framework. The committee’s role is one of oversight, recognizing that management is responsible for designing, implementing and maintaining an effective risk management framework. The committee’s primary responsibilities are to:
 Review and discuss management’s assessment of the Corporation’s aggregate enterprise-wide profile and the alignment of the Corporation’s risk profile with the Corporation’s strategic plan, goals and objectives;
 Review and recommend to the Board the parameters and establishment of the Corporation’s risk tolerance and risk appetite;
 Receive reports from management and, if appropriate, other Board committees, regarding the Corporation’s policies and procedures related to the Corporation’s adherence to risk limits and its established risk tolerance and risk appetite or on selected risk topics;
 Oversee the strategies, policies, procedures, and systems established by management to identify, assess, measure, and manage the major risks facing the Corporation, which may include an overview of the Corporation’s credit risk, operational risk, technology risk, compliance risk, interest rate risk, liquidity risk, market risk, and reputational risk, as well as management’s capital management, planning and assessment process;
 Oversee management’s activities with respect to capital planning, including stress testing and model risk;
 Review and discuss with management risk assessments for new products and services; and
 Oversee the Corporation’s regulatory compliance.
Asset and Liability Committee
The Board of Directors appoints the Asset and Liability Committee to assist the Board in its oversight of the Corporation’s asset and liability management policies related to the management of the Corporation’s funds, investments, liquidity, and interest rate risk, and the use of derivatives. In doing so, the committee’s primary functions involve:
 The establishment of a process to enable the identification, assessment, and management of risks that could affect the Corporation’s assets and liabilities management;
 The identification of the Corporation’s risk tolerance levels for yield maximization relating to its assets and liabilities management; and
 The evaluation of the adequacy, effectiveness and compliance with the Corporation’s risk management process relating to the Corporation’s assets and liabilities management, including management’s role in that process.
Credit Committee
The Board of Directors appoints the Credit Committee to assist the Board in its oversight of the Corporation’s policies related to the Corporation’s lending function, hereafter “Credit Management.” The committee’s primary responsibilities are to:
 Review the quality of the Corporation’s credit portfolio and the trends affecting that portfolio;
 Oversee the effectiveness and administration of credit-related policies;
 Approve loans as required by the lending authorities approved by the Board; and
 Report to the Board regarding Credit Management.
Audit Committee
The Board of Directors appoints the Audit Committee to assist the Board of Directors in fulfilling its responsibility to oversee management regarding:
 The conduct and integrity of the Corporation’s financial reporting to any governmental or regulatory body, stockholders, other users of the Corporation’s financial reports and the public;
 The performance of the Corporation’s internal audit function;
 The Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures;
 The qualifications, engagement, compensation, independence and performance of the Corporation’s independent auditors, their conduct of the annual audit of the Corporation’s financial statements, and their engagement to provide any other services;
 The application of the Corporation’s related person transaction policy as established by the Board of Directors;
 The application of the Corporation’s code of business conduct and ethics as established by management and the Board of Directors;
 The preparation of the Audit Committee report required to be included in the proxy statement for the Corporation’s annual stockholders’ meeting by the rules of the SEC; and
 Oversee the Corporation’s legal risk.
Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee
The Board of Directors appoints the Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee to develop, review and assess corporate governance principles. The Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee is responsible for director succession, orientation and compensation, identifying and recommending new director candidates, overseeing the evaluation of the Board and management, recommending to the Board the designation of a candidate to hold the position of the Chairman of the Board, and directing and overseeing the Corporation’s executive succession plan.
Compensation and Benefits Committee
The Board of Directors appoints the Compensation and Benefits Committee to oversee compensation policies and practices including the evaluation and recommendation to the Board of the proper and competitive salaries and incentive compensation programs of the executive officers and key employees of the Corporation. The Committee recommends guidelines and principles for compensation programs of executive officers and key employees of the Corporation, including establishing a clear link between pay and performance and safeguards against the encouragement of excessive risk-taking.
Trust Committee
The Board of Directors of the Bank appoints the Trust Committee to assist the Board of Directors in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities with respect to the Trust Department and its fiduciary responsibilities. The Trust Committee primarily responsibilities are to ensure proper exercise of the fiduciary powers of the Bank and to review the activities of the Trust Department. The Trust Committee shall have jurisdiction over all aspects of the Trust Department and may act on behalf of the Board of Directors.
Management Roles and Responsibilities
While the Board of Directors has the responsibility to oversee the risk governance program, the management is responsible for implementing the necessary policies and procedures, and internal controls. To carry out these responsibilities, the Corporation has a clearly defined risk governance culture. To ensure that risk management is communicated at all levels of the Corporation, and each area understands its specific role, the Corporation has established several management level committees to support risk oversight, as follows:
Executive Risk Management Committee
The Executive Risk Management Committee is responsible for exercising oversight of information regarding First BanCorp.’s enterprise risk management framework, including the significant policies, procedures, and practices employed to manage the identified risk categories (credit risk, operational risk, legal and regulatory risk, reputational risk, model risk, and capital risk). In carrying out its oversight responsibilities, each committee member is entitled to rely on the integrity and expertise of those people providing information to the committee and on the accuracy and completeness of such information, absent actual knowledge of an inaccuracy.
The Chief Executive Officer appoints the Executive Risk Management Committee and members of the Corporation’s senior and executive management have the opportunity to share their insights about the types of risks that could impede the Corporation’s ability to achieve its business objectives. The Chief Risk Officer of the Corporation directs the agenda for the meetings and the Enterprise Risk Management (“ERM”) and Operational Risk Director serves as secretary of the committee and maintains the minutes on behalf of the committee. The General Auditor also participates on the committee as an observer.
The committee provides assistance and support to the Chief Risk Officer to promote effective risk management throughout the Corporation. The Chief Risk Officer and the ERM and Operational Risk Director report to the Committee matters related to the enterprise risk management framework of the Corporation, including, but not limited to:
 The risk governance structure;
 The risk competencies of the Corporation;
 The Corporation’s risk appetite statement and risk tolerance; and
 The risk management strategy and associated risk management initiatives and how both support the business strategy and business model of the Corporation.
Other Management Committees
As part of its governance framework, the Corporation has various additional risk management related-committees. These committees are jointly responsible for ensuring adequate risk measurement and management in their respective areas of authority. At the management level, these committees include:
 Management’s Investment and Asset Liability Committee (the “MIALCO”) - oversees interest rate and market risk, liquidity management and other related matters. Refer to Liquidity Risk and Capital Adequacy and Interest Rate Risk Management below for further details.
 Information Technology Steering Committee - oversees and counsels on matters related to information technology and cyber security, including the development of information management policies and procedures throughout the Corporation.
 Bank Secrecy Act Committee - oversees, monitors and reports on the Corporation’s compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act.
 Credit Committees (consisting of a Credit Management Committee and a Delinquency Committee) - oversees and establishes standards for credit risk management processes within the Corporation. The Credit Management Committee is responsible for the approval of loans above an established size threshold. The Delinquency Committee is responsible for the periodic review of (a) past-due loans, (b) overdrafts, (c) non-accrual loans, (d) OREO assets, and (e) the Bank’s watch list and criticized loans.
 Vendor Management Committee - oversees policies, procedures and related practices related to the Corporation’s vendor management efforts. The Vendor Management Committee’s primary functions involve the establishment of processes and procedures to enable the recognition, assessment, management and monitoring of vendor management risks.
 The Community Reinvestment Act Executive Committee - oversees, monitors and reports on the Corporation’s compliance with Community Reinvestment Act regulatory requirements. The Bank is committed to developing and implementing programs and products that increase access to credit and create a positive impact on low and moderate income individuals and communities.
 Anti-Fraud Committee - oversees the Corporation’s policies, procedures and related practices relating to the Corporation’s anti-fraud measures.
 Regulatory Compliance Committee - oversees the Corporation’s Regulatory Compliance Management System. The Regulatory Compliance Committee reviews and discusses any regulatory compliance laws and regulations that impact performance of regulatory compliance policies, programs and procedures. The Regulatory Compliance Committee also ensures the coordination of regulatory compliance requirements throughout departments and business units.
 Regulatory Reporting Committee - oversees and assists the senior officers in fulfilling their responsibility for oversight of the accuracy and timeliness of the required regulatory reports and related policies and procedures, addresses changes and/or concerns communicated by the regulators and addresses issues identified during the regulatory reporting process. The Regulatory Reporting Committee oversees, and updates, as necessary, the established controls and procedures designed to ensure that information in regulatory reports is recorded, processed, and accurately reported and on a timely basis.
 Complaints Management Committee - assists in overseeing the complaint management process implemented across the Corporation within the Corporation’s three marketplaces; Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands and Florida. The Complaints Management Committee supports the Corporation’s complaints management program relating to resolution of complaints within the lines of business. When appropriate, the Complaints Management Committee evaluates existing corrective actions within the lines of business related to complaints and complaint management practices within those business units.
 Project Portfolio Management Committee - reviews and oversees the performance of the portfolio and individual projects during the Project Management Cycle (Initiation, Planning, Execution, Control & Monitoring, and Closing). The Project Portfolio Management Committee balances conflicting demands between projects, decides on priorities assigned to each project based on organizational priorities and capacity, and oversees project budgets, risks and actions taken to control and mitigate risks.
 Current Expected Credit Losses (“CECL”) Committee - oversees the Corporation’s requirements for the calculation of CECL, including the implementation of new models, if necessary, selection of vendors and monitoring of the new guidance from different regulatory agencies with regards to CECL requirements. The CECL Committee reviews estimated credit loss inputs, key assumptions, and qualitative overlays. In addition, the Committee approves the determination of reasonable and supportable periods used with respect to macroeconomic forecasts, and the historical loss reversion method and parameters. The CECL Committee reports to the Credit and Audit Committee on its progress with the implementation of the new standard.
Officers
As part of its governance framework, the following officers play a key role in the Corporation’s risk management process:
 Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) - responsible for the overall risk governance structure of the Corporation. The CEO is ultimately responsible for business strategies, strategic objectives, risk management priorities, and policies.
 Chief Risk Officer (“CRO”) - responsible for the oversight of the risk management of the Corporation as well as the risk governance processes. The CRO, together with the ERM and Operational Risk Director, monitor key risks and manage the operational risk program. The CRO provides the leadership and strategy for the Corporation’s risk management and monitoring activities and is responsible for the oversight of regulatory compliance, loan review, model risk, and operational risk management.
 Chief Credit Risk Officer, Chief Lending Officer and other senior executives - responsible for managing and executing the Corporation’s credit risk program.
 Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”), together with the Corporation’s Treasurer - manage the Corporation’s interest rate and market and liquidity risk programs and, together with the Controller, if a different individual from the CFO, are responsible for the implementation of accounting policies and practices in accordance with GAAP and applicable regulatory requirements. The ERM and Operational Risk Director assists the CFO in the review of the Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures.
 Controller - responsible for the development and implementation of the Corporation’s accounting policies and practices and the review and monitoring of critical accounts and transactions to ensure that they are managed in accordance with GAAP and applicable regulatory requirements.
 Strategic Planning Director - responsible for the development of the Corporation’s strategic and business plan, by coordinating and collaborating with the executive team and all corporate bodies concerned with the strategic and business planning process.
 Investors Relations and Capital Planning Officer - responsible for improving the effective communication with investors, while enhancing the Corporation’s capital plan based on the stress test processes and proactively managing capital. The Investor Relations and Capital Planning Officer works with the Treasury, Asset and Liability Management (“ALM”), Financial Analysis, Corporate Credit Risk, and Strategic Planning units in order to follow a holistic approach to proactively manage risk and returns for shareholders under the stress testing framework.
 ERM and Operational Risk Director - responsible for driving the identification, assessment, measurement, mitigation and monitoring of key risks throughout the Corporation. The ERM and Operational Risk Director promotes and instills a culture of risk control, identifies and monitors the resolution of major and critical operational risk issues across the Corporation, and serves as a key advisor to business executives with regards to risk exposure to the organization, corrective actions and corporate policies and best practices to mitigate risks.
 Compliance Director - responsible for oversight of regulatory compliance. The Compliance Director maintains an inventory of applicable regulations, implements an enterprise-wide compliance risk assessment, and monitors compliance with significant regulations. The Compliance Director is responsible for building awareness of, and educating business units and subsidiaries on, regulatory risks.
 General Counsel - responsible for the oversight of legal risks, including matters such as contract structuring, litigation risk and all legal-related aspects. The Corporate Affairs Officer assists the General Counsel with various legal areas, including, but not limited, to SEC reporting matters, insurance coverage and liability, and contract structuring.
 Corporate Security Officer (“CSO”) - responsible for the oversight of information security policies and procedures, and the ongoing monitoring of existing and new vendors’ due diligence for information security. In addition, the CSO identifies risk factors, and determines solutions to security needs.
Other Officers
In addition to a centralized ERM function, certain lines of business and corporate functions have their own risk managers and support staff. The risk managers, while reporting directly within their respective line of business or function, facilitate communications with the Corporation’s risk management functions and work in partnership with the CRO and CFO to ensure alignment with sound risk management practices and expedite the implementation of the enterprise risk management framework and policies.
Liquidity Risk and Capital Adequacy, Interest Rate Risk, Credit Risk, Operational Risk, Legal and Compliance Risk and Concentration Risk Management
The following discussion highlights First BanCorp.’s adopted policies and procedures for liquidity risk and capital adequacy, interest rate risk, credit risk, operational risk, legal and compliance risk and concentration risk.
Liquidity Risk and Capital Adequacy
Liquidity risk involves the ongoing ability to accommodate liability maturities and deposit withdrawals, fund asset growth and business operations, and meet contractual obligations through unconstrained access to funding at reasonable market rates. Liquidity management involves forecasting funding requirements and maintaining sufficient capacity to meet liquidity needs and accommodate fluctuations in asset and liability levels due to changes in the Corporation’s business operations or unanticipated events.
The Corporation manages liquidity at two levels. The first is the liquidity of the parent company, which is the holding company that owns the banking and non-banking subsidiaries. The second is the liquidity of the banking subsidiary. During 2020, the Corporation continued to pay quarterly interest payments on the subordinated debentures associated with its TRuPs, the monthly dividend income on its non-cumulative perpetual monthly income preferred stock, and quarterly dividends on its common stock.
The Asset and Liability Committee of the Corporation’s Board of Directors is responsible to oversee management’s establishment of the Corporation’s liquidity policy, as well as approving operating and contingency procedures and monitoring liquidity on an ongoing basis. The MIALCO, which reports to the Board of Directors’ Asset and Liability Committee, uses measures of liquidity developed by management that involve the use of several assumptions to review the Corporation’s liquidity position on a monthly basis. The MIALCO oversees liquidity management, interest rate risk and other related matters.
The MIALCO is composed of senior management officers, including the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief Financial Officer, the Chief Risk Officer, the Retail Financial Services Director, the risk manager of the Treasury and Investments Division, the Financial Planning and ALM Director and the Treasurer. The Treasury and Investments Division is responsible for planning and executing the Corporation’s funding activities and strategy, monitoring liquidity availability on a daily basis, and reviewing liquidity measures on a weekly basis. The Treasury and Investments Accounting and Operations area of the Comptroller’s Department is responsible for calculating the liquidity measurements used by the Treasury and Investment Division to review the Corporation’s liquidity position on a monthly basis. The Financial Planning and ALM Director estimates the liquidity gap for longer periods.
To ensure adequate liquidity through the full range of potential operating environments and market conditions, the Corporation conducts its liquidity management and business activities in a manner that will preserve and enhance funding stability, flexibility and diversity. Key components of this operating strategy include a strong focus on the continued development of customer-based funding, the maintenance of direct relationships with wholesale market funding providers, and the maintenance of the ability to liquidate certain assets when, and if, requirements warrant.
The Corporation develops and maintains contingency funding plans. These plans evaluate the Corporation’s liquidity position under various operating circumstances and are designed to help ensure that the Corporation will be able to operate through periods of stress when access to normal sources of funds is constrained. The plans project funding requirements during a potential period of stress, specify and quantify sources of liquidity, outline actions and procedures for effectively managing liquidity through a difficult period, and define roles and responsibilities for the Corporation’s employees. Under the contingency funding plans, the Corporation stresses the balance sheet and the liquidity position to critical levels that mimic difficulties in generating funds or even maintaining the current funding position of the Corporation and the Bank and are designed to help ensure the ability of the Corporation and the Bank to honor their respective commitments. The Corporation has established liquidity triggers that the MIALCO monitors in order to maintain the ordinary funding of the banking business. The MIALCO developed contingency funding plans for the following three scenarios: a credit rating downgrade, an economic cycle downturn event, and a concentration event. The Board of Directors’ Asset and Liability Committee reviews and approves these plans on an annual basis.
The Corporation manages its liquidity in a proactive manner, in an effort to maintain a sound liquidity position. It uses multiple measures to monitor the liquidity position, including core liquidity, basic liquidity, and time-based reserve measures. As of December 31, 2020, the estimated core liquidity reserve (which includes cash and free liquid securities) was $4.1 billion, or 21.6% of total assets, compared to $2.0 billion, or 15.8% of total assets as of December 31, 2019. The basic liquidity ratio (which adds available secured lines of credit to the core liquidity) was approximately 27.9% of total assets as of December 31, 2020, compared to 20.1% of total assets as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had $1.2 billion available for additional credit from the FHLB. Unpledged liquid securities, mainly fixed-rate MBS and U.S. agency debentures, amounted to approximately $2.6 billion as of December 31, 2020. The Corporation does not rely on uncommitted inter-bank lines of credit (federal funds lines) to fund its operations and does not include them in the basic liquidity measure. As of December 31, 2020, the holding company had $17.1 million of cash and cash equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents at the Bank level as of December 31, 2020 were approximately $1.5 billion. The Bank had $216.2 million in brokered CDs as of December 31, 2020, of which approximately $115.9 million mature over the next twelve months. In addition, the Corporation had non-maturity brokered deposits totaling $225.5 million as of December 31, 2020. Liquidity at the Bank level is highly dependent on bank deposits, which fund 82% of the Bank’s assets (or 81%, excluding brokered CDs).
Sources of Funding
The Corporation utilizes different sources of funding to help ensure that adequate levels of liquidity are available when needed. Diversification of funding sources is of great importance to protect the Corporation’s liquidity from market disruptions. The principal sources of short-term funds are deposits, including brokered deposits, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, and lines of credit with the FHLB.
The Asset and Liability Committee reviews credit availability on a regular basis. The Corporation has also sold mortgage loans as a supplementary source of funding and participates in the Borrower-in-Custody (“BIC”) Program of the FED. The Corporation has also obtained long-term funding in the past through the issuance of notes and long-term brokered CDs.
As of December 31, 2020, the amounts of brokered CDs had decreased by $218.9 million to $216.2 million from brokered CDs of $435.1 million as of December 31, 2019. Non-maturity brokered deposits, such as money market accounts maintained by a deposit broker, increased in 2020 by $103.2 million to $225.5 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in non-maturity brokered deposits includes approximately $45.3 million related to brokered deposits assumed in the acquisition of BSPR. Consistent with its strategy, the Corporation has been seeking to add core deposits. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s deposits, excluding brokered deposits and government deposits, increased by $5.1 billion to $12.8 billion. The increase reflects both the effect of deposits assumed in the acquisition of BSPR, and organic growth primarily in demand deposits, reflecting the effect of payments received by individuals and commercial customers from government stimulus packages, as well as the effect of payment deferral programs.
The Corporation continues to have access to financing through counterparties to repurchase agreements, the FHLB, and other agents, such as wholesale funding brokers. While liquidity is an ongoing challenge for all financial institutions, management believes that the Corporation’s available borrowing capacity and efforts to grow retail deposits will be adequate to provide the necessary funding for the Corporation’s business plans in the foreseeable future.
The Corporation’s principal sources of funding are discussed below:
Deposits
The following table presents the composition of total deposits as of the indicated dates:
Brokered CDs - Historically, a portion of the Corporation’s funding has been brokered CDs issued by FirstBank. Total brokered CDs decreased during 2020 by $218.9 million to $216.2 million as of December 31, 2020.
The average remaining term to maturity of the brokered CDs outstanding as of December 31, 2020 was approximately 1.2 years.
The use of brokered CDs has historically been an additional source of funding for the Corporation. It provides an additional efficient channel for funding diversification and interest rate management. Brokered CDs are insured by the FDIC up to regulatory limits; and can be obtained faster than regular retail deposits. In addition, the Corporation may obtain funds from brokers deposited in non-maturity money market accounts tied to short-term money market rates such as Fed Funds. Non-maturity brokered deposits increased by $103.2 million to $225.5 million as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, CDs in denominations of $100,000 or higher include brokered CDs in the amount of $216.1 million issued to deposit brokers in the form of large CDs that are generally participated out by brokers in amounts of less than the FDIC insurance limit.
Government deposits - As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had $1.8 billion of Puerto Rico public sector deposits ($1.6 billion in transactional accounts and $155.8 million in time deposits), compared to $826.9 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase reflects the effect of both the acquisition of BSPR and organic growth in the balance of government transactional accounts. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 23% of the public sector deposits in Puerto Rico were from municipalities and municipal agencies and 77% were from public corporations, the central government and U.S. federal government agencies in Puerto Rico.
In addition, as of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had $280.2 million of government deposits in the Virgin Islands region (December 31, 2019 - $227.2 million) and $9.7 million in the Florida region. (December 31, 2019 - $7.6 million).
Retail deposits - The Corporation’s deposit products also include regular savings accounts, demand deposit accounts, money market accounts and retail CDs. Total deposits, excluding brokered deposits and government deposits, increased by $5.1 billion to $12.8 billion from a balance of $7.7 billion as of December 31, 2019, reflecting increases of $5.0 billion, $43.2 million, and $39.5 million in the Puerto Rico, Florida and Virgin Islands regions, respectively. The increase in the Puerto Rico region was primarily due to the acquisition of BSPR, and strong deposit inflows which, in part reflects the payments received by individuals and commercial customers from government stimulus packages intended to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the effects of the payment deferral programs. The most significant increases were in demand deposits, which grew by 107%, or $3.5 billion, and saving deposits, which grew by 70%, or $1.4 billion.
Refer to “Net Interest Income” above for information about average balances of interest-bearing deposits, and the average interest rate paid on deposits for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(1)Includes borrowings of $383.2 million as of December 31, 2020 that have variable interest rates or maturities within a year.
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase - The Corporation’s investment portfolio is funded in part with repurchase agreements. The Corporation’s outstanding securities sold under repurchase agreements amounted to $300 million and $100 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. One of the Corporation’s strategies has been the use of structured repurchase agreements and long-term repurchase agreements to reduce liquidity risk and manage exposure to interest rate risk by lengthening the final maturities of its liabilities while keeping funding costs at reasonable levels. In addition to these repurchase agreements, the Corporation has been able to maintain access to credit by using cost-effective sources such as FHLB advances. See Note 18 - Securities Sold Under Agreements to Repurchase, in the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, for further details about repurchase agreements outstanding by counterparty and maturities.
During the first quarter of 2020, a repurchase agreement counterparty exercised its call option on $200 million of reverse repurchase agreements that were previously offset in the 2019 statement of financial condition against variable-rate repurchase agreements, pursuant to ASC Subtopic 210-20-45-11, “Balance Sheet - Offsetting - Other Presentation Matters - Repurchase and Reverse Repurchase Agreements.”
Under the Corporation’s repurchase agreements, as is the case with derivative contracts, the Corporation is required to pledge cash or qualifying securities to meet margin requirements. To the extent that the value of securities previously pledged as collateral declines due to changes in interest rates, a liquidity crisis or any other factor, the Corporation is required to deposit additional cash or securities to meet its margin requirements, thereby adversely affecting its liquidity.
Given the quality of the collateral pledged, the Corporation has not experienced margin calls from counterparties arising from credit-quality-related write-downs in valuations.
Advances from the FHLB - The Bank is a member of the FHLB system and obtains advances to fund its operations under a collateral agreement with the FHLB that requires the Bank to maintain qualifying mortgages and/or investments as collateral for advances taken. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance of FHLB advances was $440 million, compared to $570.0 million as of December 31, 2019. During 2020, the Corporation repaid $95 million of maturing long-term FHLB advances, which were carried at an average cost of 1.98%, and $35 million in short-term FHLB advances that were outstanding as of December 31, 2019, which were carried at a cost of 1.83%. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had $1.2 billion available for additional credit on FHLB lines of credit.
Trust-Preferred Securities - In 2004, FBP Statutory Trust I, a statutory trust that is wholly-owned by the Corporation and not consolidated in the Corporation’s financial statements, sold to institutional investors $100 million of its variable-rate TRuPs. FBP Statutory Trust I used the proceeds of the issuance, together with the proceeds of the purchase by the Corporation of $3.1 million of FBP Statutory Trust I variable rate common securities, to purchase $103.1 million aggregate principal amount of the Corporation’s junior subordinated deferrable debentures.
Also in 2004, FBP Statutory Trust II, a statutory trust that is wholly-owned by the Corporation and not consolidated in the Corporation’s financial statements, sold to institutional investors $125 million of its variable-rate TRuPs. FBP Statutory Trust II used the proceeds of the issuance, together with the proceeds of the purchase by the Corporation of $3.9 million of FBP Statutory Trust II variable rate common securities, to purchase $128.9 million aggregate principal amount of the Corporation’s junior subordinated deferrable debentures.
The subordinated debentures are presented in the Corporation’s consolidated statements of financial condition as other borrowings. The variable-rate TRuPs are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the Corporation. The $100 million junior subordinated deferrable debentures issued by the Corporation in April 2004 and the $125 million issued in September 2004 mature on June 17, 2034 and September 20, 2034, respectively; however, under certain circumstances, the maturity of the subordinated debentures may be shortened (such shortening would result in a mandatory redemption of the variable-rate TRuPs). The Collins Amendment of the Dodd-Frank Act eliminated certain TRuPs from Tier 1 Capital. Bank holding companies, such as the Corporation, were required to fully phase out these instruments from Tier I capital by January 1, 2016; however, they may remain in Tier 2 capital until the instruments are redeemed or mature.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Corporation had subordinated debentures outstanding in the aggregate amount of $183.8 million and $184.2 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation was current on all interest payments due related to its subordinated debentures. As mentioned above, during 2020, the Corporation repurchased $0.4 million of TRuPs, resulting in a commensurate reduction in the related amount of the floating rate junior subordinated debentures.
Other Sources of Funds and Liquidity - The Corporation’s principal uses of funds are for the origination of loans and the repayment of maturing deposits and borrowings. In connection with its mortgage banking activities, the Corporation has invested in technology and personnel to enhance the Corporation’s secondary mortgage market capabilities.
The enhanced capabilities improve the Corporation’s liquidity profile as they allow the Corporation to derive liquidity, if needed, from the sale of mortgage loans in the secondary market. The U.S. (including Puerto Rico) secondary mortgage market is still highly-liquid, in large part because of the sale of mortgages through guarantee programs of the FHA, VA, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”), FNMA and FHLMC. During 2020, the Corporation sold approximately $221.5 million of FHA/VA mortgage loans to GNMA, which packages them into MBS.
In addition, the FED has taken several steps to promote economic and financial stability in response to the significant economic disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. These actions are intended to stimulate economic activity by reducing interest rates and provide liquidity to financial markets so that participants have access to needed funding. During 2020, the federal funds target rate was lowered to a range of 0% to 0.25%, making the FED Discount Window Program a cost-efficient contingent source of funding for the Corporation given the highly-volatile market conditions. Although currently not in use, as of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had approximately $960 million available for funding under the FED’s BIC Program. As an SBA-qualified PPP lender, the Bank is eligible to borrow under the PPP Liquidity Facility by pledging SBA PPP loans. The Corporation is not currently utilizing this Liquidity Facility.
Effect of Credit Ratings on Access to Liquidity
The Corporation’s liquidity is contingent upon its ability to obtain external sources of funding to finance its operations. The Corporation’s current credit ratings and any downgrade in credit ratings can hinder the Corporation’s access to new forms of external funding and/or cause external funding to be more expensive, which could, in turn, adversely affect its results of operations. Also, changes in credit ratings may further affect the fair value of unsecured derivatives whose value takes into account the Corporation’s own credit risk.
The Corporation does not have any outstanding debt or derivative agreements that would be affected by credit rating downgrades. Furthermore, given the Corporation’s non-reliance on corporate debt or other instruments directly linked in terms of pricing or volume to credit ratings, the liquidity of the Corporation has not been affected in any material way by downgrades. The Corporation’s ability to access new non-deposit sources of funding, however, could be adversely affected by credit downgrades.
As of the date hereof, the Corporation’s credit as a long-term issuer is rated B+ by S&P and B+ by Fitch. As of the date hereof, FirstBank’s credit ratings as a long-term issuer are B2 by Moody’s, five notches below their definition of investment grade; BB- by S&P, three notches below their definition of investment grade; and B+ by Fitch, four notches below their definition of investment grade. The Corporation’s credit ratings are dependent on a number of factors, both quantitative and qualitative, and are subject to change at any time. The disclosure of credit ratings is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold the Corporation’s securities. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
Cash Flows
Cash and cash equivalents were $1.5 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $849.7 million when compared to the balance as of December 31, 2019. The following discussion highlights the major activities and transactions that affected the Corporation’s cash flows during 2020 and 2019:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
First BanCorp.’s operating assets and liabilities vary significantly in the normal course of business due to the amount and timing of cash flows. Management believes that cash flows from operations, available cash balances and the Corporation’s ability to generate cash through short- and long-term borrowings will be sufficient to fund the Corporation’s operating liquidity needs for the foreseeable future.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $297.7 million and $294.3 million, respectively. Net cash generated from operating activities was higher than reported net income, largely as a result of adjustments for items such as the provision for credit losses, depreciation and amortization, as well as the cash generated from sales of loans held for sale.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The Corporation’s investing activities primarily relate to originating loans to be held for investment, as well as purchasing, selling and repaying available-for-sale and held-to-maturity investment securities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $1.2 billion, primarily due to purchases of U.S. agencies MBS and the funding of commercial and consumer loan originations, partially offset by principal collected on loans and on U.S. agencies MBS prepayments, proceeds from U.S. agencies bonds that matured or were called prior to maturity, and the excess of the cash acquired in the BSPR acquisition over the cash consideration paid at closing.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $343.0 million, primarily resulting from purchases of U.S. agencies debt and MBS and liquidity used to fund loan originations, partially offset by principal collected on loans and on U.S. agencies bonds matured or called prior to maturity, as well as U.S. agencies MBS prepayments.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
The Corporation’s financing activities primarily include the receipt of deposits and the issuance of brokered CDs, the issuance of and payments on long-term debt, the issuance of equity instruments and activities related to its short-term funding. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $1.8 billion, mainly reflecting an increase in non-brokered deposits, and, to a lesser extent, proceeds from the early cancellation of long-term reverse repurchase agreements that were previously offset against variable-rate repurchase agreements in the 2019 consolidated statement of financial condition, partially offset by dividends paid on common and preferred stock and repayment of matured FHLB advances.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $106.6 million, mainly reflecting an increase in non-brokered deposits, partially offset by the repayment at maturity of brokered CDs, a short-term repurchase agreement in the amount of $50.1 million, and $205.0 million of FHLB advances, and the payment of dividends on common and preferred stock.
Capital
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s stockholders’ equity was $2.3 billion, an increase of $47.1 million from December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by the earnings generated during 2020 and a $60.5 million increase in OCI related to changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities, partially offset by the $62.3 million transition adjustment related to the adoption of CECL recorded against beginning retained earnings, and the common and preferred stock dividends declared in 2020 totaling $46.4 million. On January 28, 2021, the Corporation declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.07 per common share, which represented $0.02 per common share, or a 40%, increase from the prior quarter’s dividend level. In addition, since December 2016, the Corporation has been making monthly dividend payments on its outstanding shares of non-cumulative perpetual Series A through E preferred stock. The Corporation intends to continue to pay monthly dividend payments on the preferred stock and quarterly dividends on common stock. The Corporation’s common stock and other stock dividends, including the declaration, timing and amount, remain subject to the consideration and approval by the Corporation’s Board of Directors at the relevant times.
Set forth below are First BanCorp.'s and FirstBank's regulatory capital ratios as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The Corporation and FirstBank compute risk-weighted assets using the standardized approach required by U.S. Basel III capital rules (“Basel III rules”). The Basel III rules require the Corporation to maintain an additional capital conservation buffer of 2.5% of additional CET1 capital to avoid limitations on both (i) capital distributions (e.g., repurchases of capital instruments, dividends and interest payments on capital instruments), and (ii) discretionary bonus payments to executive officers and heads of major business lines.
Under the Basel III rules, in order to be considered adequately capitalized and not subject to the above noted limitations, the Corporation is required to maintain: (i) a minimum CET1 capital to risk-weighted assets ratio of at least 4.5%, plus the 2.5% “capital conservation buffer,” resulting in a required minimum CET1 capital ratio of at least 7%; (ii) a minimum ratio of total Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets of at least 6.0%, plus the 2.5% capital conservation buffer, resulting in a required minimum Tier 1 capital ratio of 8.5%; (iii) a minimum ratio of total Tier 1 plus Tier 2 capital to risk-weighted assets of at least 8.0%, plus the 2.5% capital conservation buffer, resulting in a required minimum total capital ratio of 10.5%; and (iv) a required minimum leverage ratio of 4%, calculated as the ratio of Tier 1 capital to average on-balance sheet (non-risk adjusted) assets.
In addition, as required under the Basel III rules, the Corporation’s TRuPs were fully phased-out from Tier 1 capital as of January 1, 2016. However, the Corporation’s TRuPs may continue to be included in Tier 2 capital until the instruments are redeemed or mature.
On July 9, 2019, the Federal Reserve Board, the FDIC, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (collectively “the agencies”) adopted a final rule that superseded certain regulatory capital transition rules and eliminated the transition provisions that are no longer operative. The final rule was effective on April 1, 2020, and eliminated: (i) the 10% CET1 capital deduction threshold, which applies individually to holdings of mortgage servicing assets, temporary difference deferred tax assets, and significant investments in the capital of unconsolidated financial institutions in the form of common stock; (ii) the 15% CET1 capital deduction threshold, which applies to the aggregate amount of such items; (iii) the 10% threshold for non-significant investments, which applies to holdings of regulatory capital of unconsolidated financial institutions; and (iv) the deduction treatment for significant investments in the capital of unconsolidated financial institutions that are not in the form of common stock. Instead, the final rule requires non-advanced approaches banking organizations to deduct from CET1 capital any amount of mortgage servicing assets, temporary difference deferred tax assets, and investments in the capital of unconsolidated financial institutions that individually exceeds 25% of CET1 capital of the banking organization (the 25% CET1 capital deduction threshold). The final rule retains the requirement that increased from 100% to 250% the risk-weighting of non-deducted mortgage servicing assets and temporary difference deferred tax assets
As part of its response to the impact of COVID-19, on March 31, 2020, the agencies issued an interim final rule that provided the option to temporarily delay the effects of CECL on regulatory capital for two years, followed by a three-year transition period. The interim final rule provides that, at the election of a qualified banking organization, the day 1 impact to retained earnings plus 25% of the change in the ACL (excluding PCD loans) from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2021 will be delayed for two years and phased-in at 25% per year beginning on January 1, 2022 over a three-year period, resulting in a total transition period of five years. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020, the capital measures of the Corporation and the Bank shown in the table above exclude the $62.3 million day 1 impact to retained earnings and 25% of the increase in the ACL (as defined in the interim final rule) from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020. The agencies may take other measures affecting regulatory capital to address the COVID-19 pandemic, although the nature and impact of such measures cannot be predicted at this time.
The tangible common equity ratio and tangible book value per common share are non-GAAP financial measures generally used by the financial community to evaluate capital adequacy. Tangible common equity is total equity less preferred equity, goodwill, core deposit intangibles, purchased credit card relationship intangible assets and insurance customer relationship intangible asset. Tangible assets are total assets less intangible assets such as goodwill, core deposit intangibles, purchased credit card relationships and insurance customer asset relationships. See “Basis of Presentation” below for additional information.
The Banking Law of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico requires that a minimum of 10% of FirstBank’s net income for the year be transferred to a legal surplus reserve until such surplus equals the total of paid-in-capital on common and preferred stock. Amounts transferred to the legal surplus reserve from retained earnings are not available for distribution to the Corporation, including for payment as dividends to the stockholders, without the prior consent of the Puerto Rico Commissioner of Financial Institutions. The Puerto Rico Banking Law provides that, when the expenditures of a Puerto Rico commercial bank are greater than receipts, the excess of the expenditures over receipts must be charged against the undistributed profits of the bank, and the balance, if any, must be charged against the legal surplus reserve, as a reduction thereof. If the legal surplus reserve is not sufficient to cover such balance in whole or in part, the Bank must charge the outstanding amount against the capital account and the Bank cannot pay dividends until it can replenish the legal surplus reserve to an amount of at least 20% of the original capital contributed. During 2020 and 2019, the Corporation transferred $11.7 million and $17.4 million, respectively, to the legal surplus reserve. FirstBank’s legal surplus reserve, included as part of retained earnings in the Corporation’s consolidated statements of financial condition, amounted to $109.3 million and $97.6 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the ordinary course of business, the Corporation engages in financial transactions that are not recorded on the balance sheet, or may be recorded on the balance sheet in amounts that are different from the full contract or notional amount of the transaction. These transactions are designed to (1) meet the financial needs of customers, (2) manage the Corporation’s credit, market and liquidity risks, (3) diversify the Corporation’s funding sources, and (4) optimize capital.
As a provider of financial services, the Corporation routinely enters into commitments with off-balance sheet risk to meet the financial needs of its customers. These financial instruments may include loan commitments and standby letters of credit. These commitments are subject to the same credit policies and approval processes used for on-balance sheet instruments. These instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount recognized in the statements of financial condition. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s commitments to extend credit amounted to approximately $2.1 billion, of which $1.1 billion related to credit card loans. Commercial and financial standby letters of credit amounted to approximately $141.0 million.
The Corporation has obligations and commitments to make future payments under contracts, such as debt and lease agreements, and other commitments to sell mortgage loans at fair value and to extend credit. Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Since certain commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amount does not necessarily represent future cash requirements. For most of the commercial lines of credit, the Corporation has the option to reevaluate the agreement prior to additional disbursements. There have been no significant or unexpected draws on existing commitments. In the case of credit cards and personal lines of credit, the Corporation can cancel the unused credit facility at any time and without cause.
Interest Rate Risk Management
First BanCorp. manages its asset/liability position in order to limit the effects of changes in interest rates on net interest income and to maintain a stable level of profitability under varying interest rate scenarios. The MIALCO oversees interest rate risk, and, in doing so, the MIALCO assesses, among other things, current and expected conditions in world financial markets, competition and prevailing rates in the local deposit market, liquidity, the pipeline of loan originations, securities market values, recent or proposed changes to the investment portfolio, alternative funding sources and related costs, hedging and the possible purchase of derivatives, such as swaps and caps, and any tax or regulatory issues that may be pertinent to these areas. The MIALCO approves funding decisions in light of the Corporation’s overall strategies and objectives.
On a quarterly basis, the Corporation performs a consolidated net interest income simulation analysis to estimate the potential change in future earnings from projected changes in interest rates. The Corporation carries out these simulations over a one-to-five-year time horizon and assumes upward and downward yield curve shifts. The rate scenarios considered in these simulations reflect gradual upward and downward interest rate movements of 200 basis points during a twelve-month period. The Corporation carries out the simulations in two ways:
(1) Using a static balance sheet, as the Corporation had on the simulation date, and
(2) Using a dynamic balance sheet based on recent patterns and current strategies.
The balance sheet is divided into groups of assets and liabilities by maturity or re-pricing structure and their corresponding interest rate yields and costs. As interest rates rise or fall, these simulations incorporate expected future lending rates, current and expected future funding sources and costs, the possible exercise of options, changes in prepayment rates, deposit decay and other factors, which may be important in projecting net interest income.
The Corporation uses a simulation model to project future movements in the Corporation’s balance sheet and income statement. The starting point of the projections corresponds to the actual values on the balance sheet on the date of the simulations.
These simulations are highly complex and are based on many assumptions that are intended to reflect the general behavior of the balance sheet components over the period in question. It is unlikely that actual events will match these assumptions in most cases. For this reason, the results of these forward-looking computations are only approximations of the true sensitivity of net interest income to changes in market interest rates. The Corporation uses several benchmark and market rate curves in the modeling process, primarily the LIBOR/SWAP curve, Prime, Treasury, FHLB rates, brokered CD rates, repurchase agreement rates and the mortgage commitment rate of 30 years.
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation forecasted the 12-month net interest income assuming December 31, 2020 interest rate curves remain constant. Then net interest income was estimated under rising and falling rate scenarios. For rising rates scenarios, the Corporation assumed a gradual (ramp) parallel upward shift of the yield curve during the first 12 months (the “+200 ramp” scenario). Conversely, for the falling rates scenario, it assumed a gradual (ramp) parallel downward shift of the yield curves during the first 12 months (the “-200 ramp” scenario). However, given the current low levels of interest rates, along with the current yield curve slope, a full downward shift of 200 basis points would represent an unrealistic scenario. Therefore, under the falling rate scenario, rates move downward up to 200 basis points, but without reaching zero. The resulting scenario shows interest rates close to zero in most cases, reflecting a flattening yield curve instead of a parallel downward scenario.
The Libor/Swap curve for December 2020, as compared to December 2019, reflected a 165 basis point reduction in the short-term horizon, between 1 to 12 months, while market rates also decreased by 141 basis points in the medium term, that is, between 2 to 5 years. In the long term, that is, over 5-year-term horizon, market rates decreased by 98 basis points, as compared to December 31, 2019 levels. The U.S. Treasury curve in the short-term horizon decreased by 147 basis points and in the medium-term horizon decreased by 139 basis points, as compared to the December 31, 2019 levels. The long-term horizon decreased by 84 basis points as compared to December 31, 2019 levels.
The Corporation continues to manage its balance sheet structure to control and limit the overall interest rate risk. As of December 31, 2020, the simulations showed that the Corporation continues to maintain an asset-sensitive position. The Corporation has continued repositioning the balance sheet and improving the funding mix, mainly driven by an increase in the average balance of interest-bearing deposits with low rate elasticity, and non-interest bearing deposits, including deposits assumed in the BSPR acquisition, reductions in brokered certificates of deposits, FHLB advances and FED advances. The above-mentioned growth in deposits contributed to fund the increase in the investment securities, and commercial loan portfolios, while maintaining higher liquidity levels. The Corporation relied on its existing funding to fund SBA PPP loans, including deposits already at the Bank, and is not currently participating in the PPP Liquidity Facility or the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility established by the FED.
The increased net interest income sensitivity for the +200 ramp scenario was driven by higher cash balances with short-term repricing, a larger portfolio of variable-rate commercial loans, primarily due to the acquisition of BSPR, and an increase in the investment securities portfolio balance. Also, the decreased net interest income sensitivity for the -200 ramp scenario was driven by a lower interest rate environment near floor levels in which a full down parallel movement of -200bps will not be materialized.
Taking into consideration the above-mentioned facts for modeling purposes, as of December 31, 2020, the net interest income for the next 12 months under a growing balance sheet scenario was estimated to increase by $36.0 million in the rising rate scenario, compared to an estimated increase of $19.6 million as of December 31, 2019. Under the falling rate, growing balance sheet scenario, the net interest income was estimated to decrease by $13.9 million, compared to an estimated decrease of $25.1 million as of December 31, 2019, reflecting the effect of current low levels of market interest rates on the base scenario and the model assumptions for the falling rate scenarios described above (i.e., no negative interest rates modeled).
Derivatives
First BanCorp. uses derivative instruments and other strategies to manage its exposure to interest rate risk caused by changes in interest rates that are beyond management’s control.
The following summarizes major strategies, including derivative activities that the Corporation uses in managing interest rate risk:
Interest Rate Cap Agreements - Interest rate cap agreements provide the right to receive cash if a reference interest rate rises above a contractual rate. The value of the interest rate cap increases as the reference interest rate rises. The Corporation enters into interest rate cap agreements for protection from rising interest rates.
Forward Contracts - Forward contracts are sales of TBA MBS that will settle over the standard delivery date and do not qualify as “regular-way” security trades. Regular-way security trades are contracts that have no net settlement provision and no market mechanism to facilitate net settlement and provide for delivery of a security within the timeframe generally established by regulations or conventions in the market-place or exchange in which the transaction is being executed. The forward sales are considered derivative instruments that need to be marked-to-market. The Corporation uses these securities to economically hedge the FHA/VA residential mortgage loan securitizations of the mortgage-banking operations. The Corporation also reports as forward contracts the mandatory mortgage loan sales commitments that it enters into with GSEs that require or permit net settlement via a pair-off transaction or the payment of a pair-off fee. Unrealized gains (losses) are recognized as part of mortgage banking activities in the consolidated statements of income.
Interest Rate Lock Commitments - Interest rate lock commitments are agreements under which the Corporation agrees to extend credit to a borrower under certain specified terms and conditions in which the interest rate and the maximum amount of the loan are set prior to funding. Under each agreement, the Corporation commits to lend funds to a potential borrower generally on a fixed rate basis, regardless of whether interest rates change in the market.
Interest rate swaps - The Corporation acquired interest rate swaps as a result of the BSPR acquisition. An interest rate swap is an agreement between two entities to exchange cash flows in the future. The agreements acquired from BSPR consist of the Corporation offering borrower-facing derivative products using a “back-to-back” structure in which the borrower-facing derivative transaction is paired with an identical, offsetting transaction with an approved dealer-counterparty. By using a back-to-back trading structure, both the commercial borrower and the Corporation are largely insulated from market risk and volatility. The agreements set the dates on which the cash flows will be paid and the manner in which the cash flows will be calculated. The fair values of interest rate swaps are recorded as components of other assets in the Corporation’s consolidated statements of financial condition. Changes in the fair values of interest rate swaps, which occur due to changes in interest rates, are recorded in the consolidated statements of income as a component of interest income on loans.
For detailed information regarding the volume of derivative activities (e.g., notional amounts), location and fair values of derivative instruments in the consolidated statements of financial condition and the amount of gains and losses reported in the consolidated statements of income, see Note 34 - Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Derivative instruments, such as interest rate caps, are subject to market risk. As is the case with investment securities, the market value of derivative instruments is largely a function of the financial market’s expectations regarding the future direction of interest rates. Accordingly, current market values are not necessarily indicative of the future impact of derivative instruments on earnings. This will depend, in part, on the level of interest rates, as well as the expectations for rates in the future.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Corporation considered all of its derivative instruments to be undesignated economic hedges.
The use of derivatives involves market and credit risk. The market risk of derivatives stems principally from the potential for changes in the value of derivative contracts based on changes in interest rates. The credit risk of derivatives arises from the potential for default of the counterparty. To manage this credit risk, the Corporation deals with counterparties that it considers to be of good credit standing, enters into master netting agreements whenever possible and, when appropriate, obtains collateral. Master netting agreements incorporate rights of set-off that provide for the net settlement of contracts with the same counterparty in the event of default.
Credit Risk Management
First BanCorp. is subject to credit risk mainly with respect to its portfolio of loans receivable and off-balance-sheet instruments, mainly loan commitments. Loans receivable represents loans that First BanCorp. holds for investment and, therefore, First BanCorp. is at risk for the term of the loan. Loan commitments represent commitments to extend credit, subject to specific conditions, for specific amounts and maturities. These commitments may expose the Corporation to credit risk and are subject to the same review and approval process as for loans made by the Bank. See “Contractual Obligations and Commitments” above for further details. The Corporation manages its credit risk through its credit policy, underwriting, independent loan review and quality control procedures, statistical analysis, comprehensive financial analysis, and established management committees. The Corporation also employs proactive collection and loss mitigation efforts. Furthermore, personnel performing structured loan workout functions are responsible for mitigating defaults and minimizing losses upon default within each region and for each business segment. In the case of the commercial and industrial, commercial mortgage and construction loan portfolios, the Special Asset Group (“SAG”) focuses on strategies for the accelerated reduction of non-performing assets through note sales, short sales, loss mitigation programs, and sales of OREO. In addition to the management of the resolution process for problem loans, the SAG oversees collection efforts for all loans to prevent migration to the nonaccrual and/or adversely classified status. The SAG utilizes relationship officers, collection specialists and attorneys. In the case of residential construction projects, the workout function monitors project specifics, such as project management and marketing, as deemed necessary.
The Corporation may also have risk of default in the securities portfolio. The securities held by the Corporation are principally fixed-rate U.S. agencies MBS and U.S. Treasury and agencies securities. Thus, a substantial portion of these instruments is backed by mortgages, a guarantee of a U.S. GSE or the full faith and credit of the U.S. government.
Management, consisting of the Corporation’s Commercial Credit Risk Officer, Retail Credit Risk Officer, Chief Lending Officer and other senior executives, has the primary responsibility for setting strategies to achieve the Corporation’s credit risk goals and objectives. Management has documented these goals and objectives in the Corporation’s Credit Policy.
Allowance for Credit Losses and Non-performing Assets
Allowance for Credit Losses for Loans and Finance Leases
The ACL for loans and finance leases represents the estimate of the level of reserves appropriate to absorb expected credit losses over the estimated life of the loans. The amount of the allowance is determined using relevant available information, from internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Historical credit loss experience is a significant input for the estimation of expected credit losses, as well as adjustments to historical loss information made for differences in current loan-specific risk characteristics, such as differences in underwriting standards, portfolio mix, delinquency level, or term. Additionally, the Corporation’s assessment involves evaluating key factors, which include credit and macroeconomic indicators, such as changes in unemployment rates, property values, and other relevant factors to account for current and forecasted market conditions that are likely to cause estimated credit losses over the life of the loans to differ from historical credit losses. Such factors are subject to regular review and may change to reflect updated performance trends and expectations, particularly in times of severe stress. The process includes judgments and quantitative elements that may be subject to significant change. An internal risk rating is assigned to each business loan at the time of approval and is subject to subsequent periodic reviews by the Corporation’s senior management. The ACL for loans and finance leases is reviewed at least on a quarterly basis as part of the Corporation’s continued evaluation of its asset quality.
The ACL for loans and finance leases was $155.1 million as of December 31, 2019. Upon adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, the Corporation recognized an increase in the ACL for loans and finance leases of approximately $81.2 million, as a cumulative effect adjustment from a change in accounting policy, with a corresponding decrease in retained earnings, net of applicable income taxes. As of December 31, 2020, the ACL for loans and finance leases was $385.9 million, up $230.8 million from December 31, 2019, driven by the $81.2 million increase as a result of adopting CECL, the $66.2 million initial ACL required with respect to loans from the acquisition of BSPR, and a charge to the provision of $131.2 million in 2020 (excluding the initial reserves required for acquired non-PCD loans in the BSPR acquisition) primarily related to the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic in forecasted economic conditions across all loan portfolio categories and geographic regions. Under ASC 326, the Corporation is required to record an ACL for estimates of life-time credit losses on loans at the time of acquisition. For non-PCD loans, the initial ACL is established through a charge to the provision for credit losses at the time of acquisition. Accordingly, the Corporation recorded approximately $37.5 million in provision for credit losses for non-PCD loans acquired in the BSPR acquisition. In addition, for PCD loans totaling $752.8 million, the Corporation established an initial ACL of $28.7 million, representing the discount embedded in the purchase price that is attributable to credit losses on these loans. The initial ACL for PCD loans is not established through a charge to the provision for credit losses, but, rather, through an initial adjustment to the loan’s amortized cost. Refer to Note 1 - Nature of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, for additional information about the day-one impact of the CECL adoption by portfolio segments and description of the methodologies used by the Corporation to determine the ACL.
The ratio of the ACL for loans and finance leases to total loans held for investment increased to 3.28% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 1.72% as of December 31, 2019, driven by the adoption of CECL and the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on forecasted economic conditions. On a non-GAAP basis, excluding SBA PPP loans, the ratio of the ACL for loans and finance leases to adjusted total loans held for investment was 3.39% as of December 31, 2020. For the definition and reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure, refer to the discussion in “Basis of Presentation” below. An explanation of the change for each portfolio follows:
 The ACL to total loans ratio for the residential mortgage portfolio increased from 1.53% as of December 31, 2019 to 3.42% as of December 31, 2020, primarily due to the effect of the CECL adoption on longer duration portfolios and the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on forecasted economic conditions.
 The ACL to total loans ratio for the commercial mortgage portfolio increased from 2.71% as of December 31, 2019 to 4.90% as of December 31, 2020, primarily due to the charges to the provision recorded in 2020 related to the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on macroeconomic variables considered for this portfolio, such as the Commercial Real Estate Price Index.
 The ACL to total loans ratio for the commercial and industrial portfolio increased from 0.68% as of December 31, 2019 to 1.18% as of December 31, 2020, reflecting the effect of the CECL adoption and the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on forecasted economic conditions. On a non-GAAP basis, excluding SBA PPP loans, the ratio of the ACL for commercial and industrial loans to adjusted total commercial and industrial loans held for investment was 1.36% as of December 31, 2020.
 The ACL to total loans ratio for the construction loan portfolio increased from 2.13% as of December 31, 2019 to 2.53% as of December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on forecasted economic conditions.
 The ACL to total loans ratio for the consumer loan portfolio increased from 2.35% as of December 31, 2019 to 4.33% as of December 31, 2020, primarily reflecting the effect of the CECL adoption on longer duration portfolios and the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on forecasted economic conditions.
The ratio of the total ACL for loans and finance leases to nonaccrual loans held for investment was 188.16% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 73.64% as of December 31, 2019. The Corporation did not acquire any of BSPR’s non-performing assets as provided in the Stock Purchase Agreement.
Substantially all of the Corporation’s loan portfolio is located within the boundaries of the U.S. economy. Whether the collateral is located in Puerto Rico, the U.S. and British Virgin Islands or the U.S. mainland (mainly in the state of Florida), the performance of the Corporation’s loan portfolio and the value of the collateral supporting the transactions are dependent upon the performance of and conditions within each specific area’s real estate market. The Corporation believes it sets adequate loan-to-value ratios following its regulatory and credit policy standards.
As shown in the following table, the ACL for loans and finance leases amounted to $385.9 million as of December 31, 2020, or 3.28% of total loans, compared with $155.1 million, or 1.72% of total loans, as of December 31, 2019. See “Results of Operation - Provision for Credit Losses” above for additional information.
(1)Net of a $0.4 million net loan loss reserve release for the year ended December 31, 2018 associated with revised estimates of the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria. For the year ended December 31, 2017, includes a charge to the provision of $14.6 million associated with the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria.
(2)Net of a $1.9 million net loan loss reserve release for the year ended December 31, 2018 associated with revised estimates of the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria. For the year ended December 31, 2017, includes a charge to the provision of $12.1 million associated with the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria.
(3)Net of loan loss reserve releases of $3.4 million and $5.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, associated with revised estimates of the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria. For the year ended December 31, 2017, includes a charge to the provision of $15.9 million associated with the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria.
(4)Net of a $0.7 million net loan loss reserve release for the year ended December 31, 2018 associated with revised estimates of the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria. For the year ended December 31, 2017, includes a charge to the provision of $3.7 million associated with the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria.
(5)Net of loan loss reserve releases of $3.0 million and $8.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, associated with revised estimates of the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria. For the year ended December 31, 2017, includes a charge to the provision of $25.0 million associated with the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria.
(6)Net of loan loss reserve releases of $6.4 million and $16.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, associated with revised estimates of the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria. For the year ended December 31, 2017, includes a provision of $71.3 million associated with the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria.
(7)Non-GAAP financial measures, see "Basis of Presentation" below for a reconciliation of this measure.
Allowance for Credit Losses for Unfunded Loan Commitments
The Corporation estimates expected credit losses over the contractual period in which the Corporation is exposed to credit risk as a result of a contractual obligation to extend credit, such as pursuant to unfunded loan commitments and standby letters of credit for commercial and construction loans, unless the obligation is unconditionally cancellable by the Corporation. The ACL for off-balance sheet credit exposures is adjusted as a provision for credit loss expense. Upon adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, the Corporation recognized an increase in the ACL for off-balance sheet exposures of approximately $3.9 million, as a cumulative effect adjustment from a change in accounting policy, with a corresponding decrease in beginning retained earnings, net of applicable income taxes. As of December 31, 2020, the ACL for off-balance sheet credit exposures was $5.1 million, including the $3.9 million effect of adopting CECL, and a $1.2 million charge to the provision in 2020 primarily related to unfunded loan commitments assumed in the BSPR acquisition.
Allowance for Credit Losses for Held-to-Maturity Debt Securities
As of December 31, 2020, the held-to-maturity securities portfolio consisted of Puerto Rico municipal bonds. Upon adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, the Corporation recognized an ACL for held-to-maturity securities of approximately $8.1 million, as a cumulative effect adjustment from a change in accounting policy, with a corresponding decrease in retained earnings, net of applicable income taxes. As of December 31, 2020, the ACL for held-to-maturity debt securities was $8.8 million, including the $8.1 million effect of adopting CECL, a $1.3 million initial ACL established for PCD debt securities acquired in the BSPR acquisition, partially offset by a $0.6 million release of credit losses primarily related to the repayment of certain bonds.
Allowance for Credit Losses for Available-for-Sale Debt Securities
During 2020, the Corporation recorded charges to the provision for credit losses of available-for-sale debt securities of $1.6 million. These charges were related to private label MBS and a residential mortgage pass-through MBS issued by the PRHFA. As of December 31, 2020, the ACL for available-for-sale debt securities was $1.3 million, including the $1.6 million provision less charge-offs of $0.3 million recorded in the second half of 2020. The ACL was derived from a decline in the present value of expected cash flows taking into consideration the performance of the underlying mortgages and the effect of a deterioration in forecasted economic conditions due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Nonaccrual Loans and Non-performing Assets
Total non-performing assets consist of nonaccrual loans (generally loans held for investment or loans held for sale on which the recognition of interest income was discontinued when the loan became 90 days past due or earlier if the full and timely collection of interest or principal is uncertain), foreclosed real estate and other repossessed properties, and non-performing investment securities, if any. When a loan is placed in nonaccrual status, any interest previously recognized and not collected is reversed and charged against interest income. Cash payments received are recognized when collected in accordance with the contractual terms of the loans. The principal portion of the payment is used to reduce the principal balance of the loan, whereas the interest portion is recognized on a cash basis (when collected). However, when management believes that the ultimate collectability of principal is in doubt, the interest portion is applied to the outstanding principal. The risk exposure of this portfolio is diversified as to individual borrowers and industries, among other factors. In addition, a large portion is secured with real estate collateral.
Nonaccrual Loans Policy
Residential Real Estate Loans - The Corporation generally classifies real estate loans in nonaccrual status when it has not received interest and principal for a period of 90 days or more.
Commercial and Construction Loans - The Corporation classifies commercial loans (including commercial real estate and construction loans) in nonaccrual status when it has not received interest and principal for a period of 90 days or more or when it does not expect to collect all of the principal or interest due to deterioration in the financial condition of the borrower.
Finance Leases - The Corporation classifies finance leases in nonaccrual status when it has not received interest and principal for a period of 90 days or more.
Consumer Loans - The Corporation classifies consumer loans in nonaccrual status when it has not received interest and principal for a period of 90 days or more. Credit card loans continue to accrue finance charges and fees until charged-off at 180 days delinquent.
Purchased Credit Deteriorated Loans - For PCD loans the nonaccrual status is determined in the same manner as for other loans, except for PCD loans that prior to the adoption of ASC 326 were classified as purchased credit impaired (“PCI”) loans and accounted for under ASC Subtopic 310-30, “Receivables - Loans and Debt Securities Acquired with Deteriorated Credit Quality” (ASC Subtopic 310-30). As allowed by ASC 326, the Corporation elected to maintain pools of loans accounted for under ASC 310-30 as “units of accounts,” conceptually treating each pool as a single asset. Regarding interest income recognition, the prospective transition approach for PCD loans was applied at a pool level which froze the effective interest rate of the pools as of January 1, 2020. According to regulatory guidance, the determination of nonaccrual or accrual status for PCD loans with respect to which the Corporation has made a policy election to maintain previously existing pools upon adoption of ASC 326 should be made at the pool level, not the individual asset level. In addition, the guidance provides that the Corporation can continue accruing interest and not report the PCD loans as being in nonaccrual status if the following criteria are met: (i) the Corporation can reasonably estimate the timing and amounts of cash flows expected to be collected, and (ii) the Corporation did not acquire the asset primarily for the rewards of ownership of the underlying collateral, such as the use in operations or improving the collateral for resale. Thus, the Corporation continues to exclude these pools of PCD loans from nonaccrual loan statistics.
Other Real Estate Owned
OREO acquired in settlement of loans is carried at fair value less estimated costs to sell off the real estate. Appraisals are obtained periodically, generally on an annual basis.
Other Repossessed Property
The other repossessed property category generally included repossessed boats and autos acquired in settlement of loans. Repossessed boats and autos are recorded at the lower of cost or estimated fair value.
Other Non-Performing Assets
This category consisted of bonds of the GDB and the Puerto Rico Public Buildings Authority prior to the sale of these non-performing bonds in the second quarter of 2017. The Corporation previously held these bonds as part of its available-for-sale investment securities portfolio.
Loans Past-Due 90 Days and Still Accruing
These are accruing loans that are contractually delinquent 90 days or more. These past-due loans are either current as to interest but delinquent as to the payment of principal or are insured or guaranteed under applicable FHA, VA or other government-guaranteed programs for residential mortgage loans. Furthermore, as required by instructions in regulatory reports, loans past due 90 days and still accruing include loans previously pooled into GNMA securities for which the Corporation has the option but not the obligation to repurchase loans that meet GNMA’s specified delinquency criteria (e.g., borrowers fails to make any payment for three consecutive months). For accounting purposes, these GNMA loans subject to the repurchase option are required to be reflected on the financial statements with an offsetting liability.
TDRs are classified as either accrual or nonaccrual loans. A loan on nonaccrual status and restructured as a TDR will remain on nonaccrual status until the borrower has proven the ability to perform under the modified structure, generally for a minimum of six months, and there is evidence that such payments can and are likely to continue as agreed. The Corporation considers performance prior to the restructuring, or significant events that coincide with the restructuring, in assessing whether the borrower can meet the new terms, which may result in the loan being returned to accrual status at the time of the restructuring or after a shorter performance period. If the borrower’s ability to meet the revised payment schedule is uncertain, the loan remains classified as a nonaccrual loan. For a discussion of permissible loan modifications under the amended CARES Act of 2020 for loans otherwise eligible for TDR, refer to Note 1 - Nature of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
(1)During the first and third quarters of 2018, the Corporation transferred $74.4 million (net of fair value write-downs of $22.2 million recorded at the time of transfers) in nonaccrual loans to held for sale. Loans transferred to held for sale consisted of nonaccrual commercial mortgage loans totaling $39.6 million (net of fair value write-downs of $13.8 million), nonaccrual construction loans totaling $33.0 million (net of fair value write-downs of $6.7 million) and nonaccrual commercial and industrial loans totaling $1.8 million (net of fair value write-downs of $1.7 million). These loans were eventually sold or paid in full during 2019 and 2018.
(2)Fair market value of bonds of the GDB and the Puerto Rico Public Buildings Authority prior to the sale completed during the second quarter of 2017.
(3)Excludes PCD loans previously accounted for under ASC Subtopic 310-30 for which the Corporation made the accounting policy election of maintaining pools of loans accounted for under ASC Subtopic 310-30 as “units of account” both at the time of adoption of ASC 326 and on an ongoing basis for credit loss measurement. These loans accrete interest income based on the effective interest rate of the loan pools determined at the time of adoption of ASC 326 and will continue to be excluded from nonaccrual loan statistics as long as the Corporation can reasonably estimate the timing and amount of cash flows expected to be collected on the loan pools. The amortized cost of such loans as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017, 2016 amounted to $130.9 million, $136.7 million, $146.6 million, $158.2 million, $165.8 million, respectively.
(4)Nonaccrual loans exclude $393.3 million, $398.3 million, $478.9 million, $374.7 million and $384.9 million of TDR loans that were in compliance with the modified terms and in accrual status as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
(5)It is the Corporation's policy to report delinquent residential mortgage loans insured by the FHA, guaranteed by the VA, and other government-insured loans as loans past-due 90 days and still accruing as opposed to nonaccrual loans since the principal repayment is insured. The Corporation continues accruing interest on these loans until they have passed the 15 months delinquency mark, taking into consideration the FHA interest curtailment process. These balances include $57.9 million of residential mortgage loans insured by the FHA that were over 15 months delinquent as of December 31, 2020.
(6) These include loans rebooked, which were previously pooled into GNMA securities, amounting to $10.7 million, $35.3 million, $43.6 million, $62.1 million, and $43.7 million as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017, and 2016, respectively. Under the GNMA program, the Corporation has the option but not the obligation to repurchase loans that meet GNMA’s specified delinquency criteria. For accounting purposes, these loans subject to the repurchase option are required to be reflected on the financial statements with an offsetting liability.
(1)During 2018, the Corporation transferred to held for sale nonaccrual commercial mortgage loans in the Puerto Rico region totaling $39.6 million (net of fair value write-downs of $13.8 million recorded at the time of transfers). These loans were eventually sold or paid in full during 2019 and 2018.
(2)During 2018, the Corporation transferred to held for sale nonaccrual commercial and industrial loans in the Puerto Rico region totaling $1.8 million (net of fair value write-downs of $1.7 million). The commercial and industrial loans transferred to held for sale were eventually sold during the first quarter of 2019.
(3)During 2018, the Corporation transferred to held for sale a $3.0 million nonaccrual construction loan in the Puerto Rico region (net of $1.6 million fair value write-down). This loan was paid in full in 2019.
(4)Fair market value of bonds of the GDB and the Puerto Rico Buildings Authority prior to the sale completed during the second quarter of 2017.
(5)Excludes PCD loans previously accounted for under ASC Subtopic 310-30 for which the Corporation made the accounting policy election of maintaining pools of loans accounted for under ASC Subtopic 310-30 as “units of account” both at the time of adoption of ASC 326 and on an ongoing basis for credit loss measurement. These loans accrete interest income based on the effective interest rate of the loan pools determined at the time of adoption of ASC 326 and will continue to be excluded from nonaccrual loan statistics as long as the Corporation can reasonably estimate the timing and amount of cash flows expected to be collected on the loan pools. The amortized cost of such loans as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017, 2016 amounted to $130.9 million, $136.7 million, $146.6 million, $158.2 million, $165.8 million, respectively.
(6) These include loans rebooked, which were previously pooled into GNMA securities, amounting to $10.7 million, $35.3 million, $43.6 million, $62.1 million, and $43.7 million as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017, and 2016, respectively. Under the GNMA program, the Corporation has the option but not the obligation to repurchase loans that meet GNMA’s specified delinquency criteria. For accounting purposes, these loans subject to the repurchase option are required to be reflected on the financial statements with an offsetting liability.
(7)During 2018, the Corporation transferred to held for sale a $30.0 million nonaccrual construction loan in the Virgin Islands region (net of a $5.1 million fair value write-down). The construction loans transferred to held for sale was eventually sold during the fourth quarter of 2018.
Total nonaccrual loans were $205.1 million as of December 31, 2020. This represents a decrease of $5.6 million from $210.7 million as of December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily related to a $5.2 million decrease in nonaccrual commercial and construction nonaccrual loans, driven by charge-offs totaling $5.9 million taken on two commercial loans in the Puerto Rico region, and the payoff of two large nonaccrual commercial loans totaling $5.0 million, partially offset by the inflow to nonaccrual status of a $6.1 million matured commercial and industrial loan in the Puerto Rico region. In addition, nonaccrual consumer loans decreased by $4.4 million. These variances were partially offset by an increase of $4.0 million in nonaccrual residential mortgage loans. The Corporation did not acquire any of BSPR’s non-performing assets, as established in the Stock Purchase Agreement.
Nonaccrual commercial mortgage loans decreased by $10.5 million to $29.6 million as of December 31, 2020 from $40.1 million as of December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily related to collections of approximately $6.4 million during 2020, including the payoff of a $2.0 million loan in the Virgin Islands region, the charge-off of $3.1 million taken on a nonaccrual commercial mortgage loan in the Puerto Rico region, and the restoration to accrual status of $1.7 million of loans related to a commercial mortgage borrower in the Puerto Rico region. Total inflows of nonaccrual commercial mortgage loans were $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.5 million for 2019.
Nonaccrual commercial and industrial loans increased by $2.1 million to $20.9 million as of December 31, 2020 from $18.8 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily related to inflows of commercial and industrial loans to nonaccrual status of $11.4 million during 2020, including a $6.1 million matured commercial and industrial loan in the Puerto Rico region, partially offset by collections of approximately $4.8 million, including the payoff of a $3.0 million commercial and industrial loan in the Puerto Rico region, and charge-offs amounting $3.6 million, including a $2.8 million charge-off taken on a nonaccrual commercial and industrial loan in the Puerto Rico region. Total inflows of nonaccrual commercial and industrial loans were $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.3 million for 2019.
Nonaccrual construction loans increased by $3.2 million to $13.0 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $9.8 million as of December 31, 2019. Total inflows of nonaccrual construction loans were $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to inflows of $6.4 million for 2019.
Nonaccrual residential mortgage loans increased by $4.0 million to $125.4 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $121.4 million as of December 31, 2019. The inflows of nonaccrual residential mortgage loans during 2020 were $33.7 million, a decrease of $14.6 million, compared to inflows of $48.3 million for 2019. The decrease in inflows primarily reflects the effect of the deferred repayment arrangements provided to qualified customers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic as further discussed below.
The following table presents the activity of residential nonaccrual loans held for investment for the indicated periods:
The amount of nonaccrual consumer loans, including finance leases, decreased by $4.4 million to $16.2 million as December 31, 2020, compared to $20.6 million as of December 31, 2019. The inflows of nonaccrual consumer loans during the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $42.1 million compared to inflows of $54.2 million for the same period in 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately $16.4 million of the loans placed in nonaccrual status, mainly commercial loans, were current, or had delinquencies of less than 90 days in their interest payments, including $5.9 million of TDRs maintained in nonaccrual status until the restructured loans meet the criteria of sustained payment performance under the revised terms for reinstatement to accrual status and there is no doubt about full collectability. Collections on these loans are being recorded on a cash basis through earnings, or on a cost-recovery basis, as conditions warrant.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, interest income of approximately $0.6 million related to nonaccrual loans with a carrying value of $55.5 million as of December 31, 2020, mainly nonaccrual construction and commercial loans, was applied against the related principal balances under the cost-recovery method.
Total loans in early delinquency (i.e., 30-89 days past due loans, as defined in regulatory report instructions) amounted to $148.8 million as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of $13.9 million compared to $162.7 million as of December 31, 2019. The variances by major portfolio categories follow:
 Residential mortgage loans in early delinquency decreased by $21.3 million to $66.5 million as of December 31, 2020, and consumer loans in early delinquency decreased by $13.8 million to $55.7 million as of December 31, 2020.
 Commercial and construction loans in early delinquency increased in 2020 by $20.3 million to $25.9 million as of December 31, 2020, driven by the migration of three matured loans with balloon payments totaling $20.2 million that are over 30 days past due and are in the process of refinancing, but with respect to which the Corporation continues to receive interest and principal payments from the borrower.
In working with borrowers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Corporation has agreed to let consumer borrowers (i.e., borrowers under residential mortgages, personal loans, auto loans, finance leases and small loans) that were current in their payments or no more than 2 payments in arrears (not having exceeded 89 days past due as of March 16, 2020) to defer payments on their loans, in some cases for up to six months. In the case of credit cards and individual lines of credit, the borrowers were required to be current or less than 29 days past due in their payments as of March 16, 2020 to qualify for the payment deferral program providing for payment deferrals, in some cases for up to six months. For both consumer and residential mortgage loans subject to the deferral programs, each borrower was required to begin making the borrower’s regularly scheduled loan payment at the end of the deferral period and the deferred amounts were moved to the end of the loan. The payment deferral programs were applied prospectively beginning, in some instances, with the deferral of the scheduled contractual payment due in March. For commercial loans, any request for payment deferral, including extensions of the repayment moratorium, has been analyzed on a case-by-case basis. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had under temporary deferred repayment arrangements 688 loans, totaling approximately $32.7 million, or 0.3% of its total loan portfolio held for investment balance, consisting of 89 residential mortgage loans, totaling $18.4 million, 580 consumer loans, totaling $8.0 million, and 19 commercial and construction loans, totaling $6.3 million. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020, 24 commercial loans totaling $224.3 million or 2.1% of total loans held for investment, were permanently modified under the provisions of Section 4013 of the CARES Act of 2020. Most of the temporary deferred payment arrangements have been done under the provisions of Section 4013 of the CARES Act of 2020 and/or the Revised Interagency Statement. In addition, moratoriums on loan repayments for consumer and residential mortgage products in Puerto Rico were mandated by local law. A loan modification covered by the provisions of the CARES Act of 2020 and/or the Revised Interagency Statement is not required to be considered as a TDR loan.
In addition, the Corporation provides homeownership preservation assistance to its customers through a loss mitigation program in Puerto Rico that is similar to the U.S. government’s Home Affordable Modification Program guidelines. Depending upon the nature of borrower’s financial condition, restructurings or loan modifications through this program, as well as other restructurings of individual commercial, commercial mortgage, construction, and residential mortgage loans fit the definition of a TDR. A restructuring of a debt constitutes a TDR if the creditor, for economic or legal reasons related to the debtor’s financial difficulties, grants a concession to the debtor that it would not otherwise consider. Modifications involve changes in one or more of the loan terms that bring a defaulted loan current and provide sustainable affordability. Changes may include, among others, the extension of the maturity of the loan and modifications of the loan rate. See Note 8 - Loans Held for Investment, to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, for additional information and statistics about the Corporation’s TDR loans.
TDR loans are classified as either accrual or nonaccrual loans. Loans in accrual status may remain in accrual status when their contractual terms have been modified in a TDR if the loans had demonstrated performance prior to the restructuring and payment in full under the restructured terms is expected. Otherwise, a loan on nonaccrual status and restructured as a TDR will remain on nonaccrual status until the borrower has proven the ability to perform under the modified structure, generally for a minimum of six months, and there is evidence that such payments can, and are likely to, continue as agreed. Performance prior to the restructuring, or significant events that coincide with the restructuring, are included in assessing whether the borrower can meet the new terms and may result in the loan being returned to accrual status at the time of the restructuring or after a shorter performance period. If the borrower’s ability to meet the revised payment schedule is uncertain, the loan remains classified as a nonaccrual loan. Loan modifications increase the Corporation’s interest income by returning a nonaccrual loan to performing status, if applicable, increase cash flows by providing for payments to be made by the borrower, and limit increases in foreclosure and OREO costs.
(1)Included in nonaccrual loans are $5.9 million in loans that are performing under the terms of the restructuring agreement but are reported in nonaccrual status until the restructured loans meet the criteria of sustained payment performance under the revised terms for reinstatement to accrual status and are deemed fully collectible.
The OREO portfolio, which is part of non-performing assets, decreased by $18.5 million to $83.1 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $101.6 million as of December 31, 2019. The following tables show the composition of the OREO portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, as well as the activity of the OREO portfolio by geographic area during the year ended December 31, 2020:
Net Charge-offs and Total Credit Losses
Net charge-offs totaled $47.9 million, or 0.48% of average loans, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $81.4 million, or 0.91%, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Commercial mortgage loan net charge-offs were $1.4 million, or 0.08% of average commercial mortgage loans, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $14.7 million, or 0.97% of average commercial mortgage loans, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Commercial mortgage loans net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a $3.1 million charge-off taken on a restructured commercial mortgage loan in the Puerto Rico region, partially offset by a $1.3 million loan loss recovery in connection with the repayment and cancellation of a nonaccrual commercial mortgage loan in the Florida region. Commercial mortgage loans net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2019 included an $11.4 million charge-off taken on a commercial mortgage loan in the Florida region in the second quarter of 2019 and a $2.1 million charge-off associated with a split loan restructuring in Puerto Rico in the first quarter of 2019.
Commercial and industrial loans net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $0.4 million, or 0.02% of average commercial and industrial loans, compared to net charge-offs of $3.7 million, or 0.16% of average commercial and industrial loans, for 2019. Commercial and industrial loans net charge-offs for 2020 included a $2.8 million charge-off taken on a commercial and industrial loan in the Puerto Rico region, partially offset by a $2.5 million loan loss recovery in connection with the repayment and cancellation of a nonaccrual commercial and industrial loan in the Puerto Rico region. Commercial and industrial loans net charge-offs for 2019 included a $5.7 million charge-off taken against a commercial and industrial loan in the Puerto Rico region, partially offset by a $1.7 million loan loss recovery in the Virgin Islands region recorded in the third quarter of 2019 associated with a commercial and industrial loan fully charged-off in prior periods.
Construction loans net recoveries for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $0.1 million, or 0.06% of average construction loans, compared to net recoveries of $0.3 million, or 0.28% of average construction loans, for 2019.
Residential mortgage loans net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $9.5 million, or 0.30% of average residential mortgage loans, compared to $20.1 million, or 0.66% of average residential mortgage loans, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Approximately $7.9 million in charge-offs during 2020 resulted from valuations of collateral dependent residential mortgage loans given high delinquency levels, compared to $12.2 million in 2019. Net charge-offs on residential mortgage loans in 2020 also included $1.6 million related to foreclosures recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $7.0 million for 2019.
Net charge-offs of consumer loans and finance leases for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $36.7 million, or 1.53% of average consumer loans and finance leases, compared to $43.3 million, or 2.05% of average consumer loans and finance leases, for 2019. The decrease compared to the same period a year ago, reflects, in part, the effect of the deferred repayment arrangements provided to consumer borrowers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic that maintained the delinquency status that existed at the date of the event until the end of the deferral period.
(1) For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, recoveries in construction loans exceeded charge-offs.
(1)For 2020, recoveries in construction loans in the Puerto Rico region exceeded charge-offs.
(2)For 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, recoveries in commercial mortgage loans in the Virgin Islands region exceeded charge-offs.
(3)For 2019, 2017 and 2016, recoveries in commercial and industrial loans in the Virgin Islands region exceeded charge-offs.
(4)For 2020. 2019 and 2017, recoveries in construction loans in the Virgin Islands region exceeded charge-offs.
(5)For 2019, total recoveries in the Virgin Islands region exceeded charge-offs.
(6)For 2019, recoveries in residential mortgage loans in the Florida region exceeded charge-offs.
(7)For 2020, 2017 and 2016, recoveries in commercial mortgage loans in the Florida region exceeded charge-offs.
(8)For 2016, recoveries in commercial and industrial loans in the Florida region exceeded charge-offs.
(9)For 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, recoveries in construction loans in the Florida region exceeded charge-offs.
(10)For 2020, total recoveries in the Florida region are substantially equal to total charge-offs.
The above ratios are not necessarily indicative of the results expected in subsequent periods. Total net charge-offs plus losses on OREO operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $51.5 million, or 0.51% of average loans and repossessed assets, compared to losses of $96.1 million, or a loss rate of 1.06%, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table presents information about the OREO inventory and credit losses for the periods indicated:
(1)Equal to net loss on OREO operations plus charge-offs, net.
(2)Calculated as net charge-offs plus market adjustments, impairments, and gains (losses) on sales of OREO divided by average loans and repossessed assets.
(3)Calculated as net charge-offs plus net loss on OREO operations divided by average loans and repossessed assets.
Operational Risk
The Corporation faces ongoing and emerging risk and regulatory pressure related to the activities that surround the delivery of banking and financial products. Coupled with external influences, such as market conditions, security risks, and legal risks, the potential for operational and reputational loss has increased. To mitigate and control operational risk, the Corporation has developed, and continues to enhance, specific internal controls, policies and procedures that are designed to identify and manage operational risk at appropriate levels throughout the organization. The purpose of these mechanisms is to provide reasonable assurance that the Corporation’s business operations are functioning within the policies and limits established by management.
The Corporation classifies operational risk into two major categories: business-specific and corporate-wide affecting all business lines. For business specific risks, a risk assessment group works with the various business units to ensure consistency in policies, processes and assessments. With respect to corporate-wide risks, such as information security, business recovery, and legal and compliance, the Corporation has specialized groups, such as the Legal Department, Information Security, Corporate Compliance, and Operations. These groups assist the lines of business in the development and implementation of risk management practices specific to the needs of the business groups.
Legal and Compliance Risk
Legal and compliance risk includes the risk of noncompliance with applicable legal and regulatory requirements, the risk of adverse legal judgments against the Corporation, and the risk that a counterparty’s performance obligations will be unenforceable. The Corporation is subject to extensive regulation in the different jurisdictions in which it conducts its business, and this regulatory scrutiny has been significantly increasing over the years. The Corporation has established, and continues to enhance, procedures that are designed to ensure compliance with all applicable statutory, regulatory and any other legal requirements. The Corporation has a Compliance Director who reports to the Chief Risk Officer and is responsible for the oversight of regulatory compliance and implementation of an enterprise-wide compliance risk assessment process. The Compliance division has officer roles in each major business area with direct reporting responsibilities to the Corporate Compliance Group.
Concentration Risk
The Corporation conducts its operations in a geographically concentrated area, as its main market is Puerto Rico. Of the total gross loan portfolio held for investment of $11.8 billion as of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had credit risk of approximately 79% in the Puerto Rico region, 17% in the United States region, and 4% in the Virgin Islands region.
Update on the Puerto Rico Fiscal Situation
A significant portion of our financial activities and credit exposure is concentrated in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, which has been in an economic recession since 2006.
Economy Indicators and Projections
Preliminary figures published by the Puerto Rico Planning Board (“PRPB”) on May 2020 show that Puerto Rico’s real gross national product (“GNP”) expanded by 1.5% during fiscal year 2019, compared to economic contractions of 3.2% and 4.3% during fiscal years 2017 and 2018, respectively. According to the PRPB, the economic growth seen during fiscal year 2019 primarily reflects the economic stimulus generated by the influx of federal recovery funds in response to the natural disasters that affected Puerto Rico in September 2017
On August 13, 2020, the PRPB published its macroeconomic projections for fiscal years 2020 and 2021. These projections take into consideration the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related mandatory restrictions, which the PRPB estimated at approximately 8% of GNP.
Fiscal Plan
On May 27, 2020, the PROMESA oversight board certified the 2020 Fiscal Plan for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico (the “certified fiscal plan”). The certified fiscal plan estimated that the Puerto Rico’s real GNP would contract by 4.0% in fiscal year 2020 with a limited recovery of 0.5% in the fiscal year of 2021, followed by negative real GNP growth in fiscal years 2022 and 2023 supported by the federal and local relief funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic, Hurricanes Irma and Maria, and earthquakes. However, as stated in the certified fiscal plan, there remains considerable uncertainty about the ultimate duration and magnitude of the pandemic and thus the size of the economic losses. The certified fiscal plan estimated that over 401,000 Puerto Rico residents (including self-employed residents) would file for unemployment due to the COVID-19 pandemic with unemployment claims beginning to decline in June 2020 through fiscal year 2021, however, unemployment levels at the end of fiscal year 2021 were projected to be five percentage points higher than at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The certified fiscal plan accounts for the impact of federal funds granted through several government programs, including the CARES Act of 2020 and a $787 million local package of direct assistance to workers and businesses (the “Puerto Rico COVID-19 Stimulus Package”), which disbursements were forecasted to occur between fiscal year 2020 and fiscal year 2021. Several U.S. government programs (the principal being the CARES Act of 2020) were estimated to provide aid to Puerto Rico and its residents of approximately $13.9 billion, which were primarily allocated for direct payments to Puerto Rico residents ($3.0 billion), relief to state and local governments ($2.2 billion), additional unemployment benefits ($3.5 billion) and the SBA PPP program ($1.7 billion). According to the certified fiscal plan, funds from the Puerto Rico COVID-19 Stimulus Package are primarily intended to purchase education related materials ($255 million), $126 million in bonus compensation for medical and support staff, $100 million to support municipalities, $100 million to provide direct payments to self-employed individuals, $69 million in bonus compensation for certain public safety employees, and $60 million in direct payments to small businesses. In addition, the certified fiscal plan assumed that, of the $787 million Puerto Rico COVID-19 Stimulus Package, $336 million would be reimbursed from the $2.2 billion of funding allocated to Puerto Rico under the CARES Act. The certified fiscal plan assumed a $750 million working capital fund to address the liquidity constraints associated with the reimbursement nature of disaster relief programs and a parametric insurance coverage required by the U.S. government in case of natural disasters. Similar to previous versions, the certified fiscal plan provides a roadmap for a series of fiscal and structural reforms in areas such as: (i) human capital and labor; (ii) ease of doing business; (iii) power sector reform; and (iv) infrastructure reform, and other fiscal measures; however, the certified fiscal plan provides a one-year delay in most categories of government rightsizing to allow the government to focus its efforts on implementation of efficiency reforms. This pause includes maintaining the subsidies to the University of Puerto Rico and to the municipalities at current fiscal year levels. Furthermore, the certified fiscal plan includes strategic one-time investments to speed up Puerto Rico’s recovery in light of the natural disasters and COVID-19 by allocating funds to strengthen Puerto Rico’s public healthcare system, human capital, and telecommunications infrastructure.
Despite the overall fiscal and structural reforms, as well as the economic stimulus created by these packages, the certified fiscal plan forecasted a central government pre-contractual debt service deficit starting in fiscal year 2032, six years earlier than the previous certified fiscal plan projection, and a total primary surplus of about $8 billion between fiscal years 2020 and 2032, a 65% reduction when compared to the previous certified fiscal plan figure of $23 billion. However, before measures and structural reforms (i.e., the “baseline forecast”), the certified plan estimated a pre-contractual debt service deficit for all years of the certified fiscal plan. Refer to the following section which provides an update on anticipated revisions to the fiscal plan and other developments, including status about the debt restructuring process.
Other Developments
On April 14, 2020, the PROMESA oversight board announced that it certified the Action Plan by the Puerto Rico Department of Housing (“PRDOH”) detailing the use of funds from the U.S. Department of Housing’s (“HUD”) Community Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery Program (“CDBG-DR”). PRDOH was appointed as the agency responsible for administering approximately $20 billion in CDBG-DR funding that Puerto Rico will receive from HUD, with oversight provided by the Central Office for Recovery, Reconstruction and Resilience of Puerto Rico. In February 2018, HUD had allocated the first grant of $1.5 billion. In January 2020, HUD announced the grant agreement for the second tranche of $8.2 billion, which requires PRDOH to submit an updated Action Plan for the PROMESA oversight board to review and certify that the programs are consistent with the certified fiscal plan and certified budget. In addition to these funds, HUD allocated to Puerto Rico $8.3 billion related to disaster resilience and $1.9 billion related to the energy grid. The PROMESA oversight board also certified the budget for the next $1.7 billion block of funding, as required by HUD prior to providing PRDOH access to the funds so that PRDOH can continue implementing the Action Plan.
In addition to the certified fiscal plan, during June 2020, the PROMESA oversight board certified revised fiscal plans for eighteen instrumentalities, agencies and municipalities, and, where required, budgets. On June 30, 2020, the PROMESA oversight board certified its own $22.2 billion fiscal year 2021 consolidated budget for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, which included $10.4 billion in spending from the General Fund as well as with special revenue and federal funds being allocated.
On June 26, 2020, the PROMESA oversight board certified Amendment No. 4 to HUD’s CDBG-DR Action Plan, which included, among other items, $227.9 million in additional CDBG-DR funds allocated to Puerto Rico for unmet infrastructure needs.
On August 18, 2020, the PROMESA oversight board published a revised Plan of Adjustment proposal that seeks to make the restructuring sustainable and affordable by increasing the amount of cash consideration by nearly $2 billion and reducing the maximum annual debt service to $1.05 billion, reflecting significantly lower longer-term projections. In response to the COVID-19, the PROMESA oversight board requested the court to put this plan on hold to assess the long-term effect of the pandemic on Puerto Rico.
On September 18, 2020, the Federal Government announced two agreements between the Federal Emergency Management Administration (“FEMA”) and the Government of Puerto Rico with regard to approximately $12.8 billion in funding to rebuild Puerto Rico’s electrical grid system and spur recovery of the territory’s education system. Such funding includes a commitment of the Federal Government of $11.6 billion for the projects. Approximately $9.6 billion are expected to allow PREPA to repair and replace thousands of miles of transmission and distribution lines, electrical substations, power generation systems, office buildings, and make other grid improvements. The $2 billion grant for the Puerto Rico Department of Education will focus on restoring school buildings and educational facilities.
On December 27, 2020, former President Trump signed into law a $900 billion COVID relief package. Key provisions in this stimulus package include an additional round of Economic Impact Payments of $600 per individual earning up to $75,000 ($1,200 for couples/joint filers earning up to $150,000 per year), and an additional $600 per child dependent; over $284 billion for first and second forgivable PPP loans; an extension of the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance (“PUA”) program; and an extension of the availability for funds provided to states and territories by the Coronavirus Relief Fund in the CARES Act until December 31, 2021.
On December 31, 2020, the PROMESA oversight board approved a 60-day extension request made by the Government of Puerto Rico for certain incentives included in the COVID-19 Emergency Support Package as well as the reopening of a specific incentive related to an amount awarded to the University of Puerto Rico. These packages, which have a combined monetary value of approximately $157 million, were extended until March 1, 2021.
On January 6, 2021, the PROMESA oversight board announced the reappointment of David A. Skeel Jr. and the appointment of Arthur J. Gonzalez as members of the Oversight Board. The reappointment of Skeel, who has been serving as chairman of the board since October 2020, and the appointment of González completed the appointment process for all seven members of the PROMESA oversight board for a three-year term. Former President Trump previously reappointed Andrew G. Biggs, and appointed Justin M. Peterson, John E. Nixon, Antonio L. Medina Comas, and Betty A. Rosa.
On January 19, 2021, Governor Pedro Pierluisi announced that the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) approved the Government of Puerto Rico’s disbursement plan for the Economic Impact Payments program. Approximately 2.8 million individuals are expected to benefit from this stimulus, which is estimated to have a total monetary value of $1.7 billion.
On January 29, 2021, the PROMESA oversight board held its 24th Public Meeting in which they provided an update on the fiscal year 2021 Certification Process. According to the PROMESA oversight board, the Government of Puerto Rico is expected to submit a revised Fiscal Plan to the oversight board for review by February 20, 2021. This plan is anticipated to take into consideration the latest pandemic relief funding announcements in addition to those already considered in the Fiscal Plan certified in May 2020. On February 2, 2021, the Puerto Rico government submitted to the PROMESA oversight board a budget proposal of $10.7 billion for fiscal year 2022. The oversight board anticipates certifying the revised Fiscal Plan in April 2021 and the fiscal year 2022 budget on June 30, 2021.
On February 2, 2021, HUD and Puerto Rico’s Housing Department announced two partial approvals of the Housing Department’s Action Plan, resulting in the approval of $6 billion in Community Development Block Grant Mitigation funding for Puerto Rico.
On February 23, 2021, the PROMESA oversight board announced the terms of a debt restructuring agreement with general obligation (“GO”) bondholders and Public Building Authority (“PBA”) bondholders that in summary:
 Reduces $18.8 billion of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico debt by GO and PBA bondholders by 61% to $7.4 billion.
 Reduces the maximum annual debt service payments to $1.15 billion for current interest bonds, compared to payments as high as $4.2 billion without restructuring. The annual payments add up to a total of $34.1 billion over the life of the debt under the new agreement (including principal and interest from the Puerto Rico Sales Tax Financing Corporation (by its Spanish acronym, COFINA) bonds), a 62% reduction from the $90.4 billion under the original contractual debt agreements.
 Provides GO and PBA bondholders with $7.4 billion in bonds and $7 billion in cash.
 Includes a contingent value instrument that gives GO and PBA bondholders incremental value only if the Puerto Rico economy grows more than projected in the 2020 certified fiscal plan.
The agreement is part of the amended Plan of Adjustment that the PROMESA oversight board expects to file with the United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico (Title III Court) on March 8, 2021.
Exposure to the Puerto Rico Government
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had $394.8 million of direct exposure to the Puerto Rico government, its municipalities and public corporations, compared to $204.5 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $201.5 million of the exposure consisted of loans and obligations of municipalities in Puerto Rico that are supported by assigned property tax revenues and for which, in most cases, the good faith, credit and unlimited taxing power of the applicable municipality have been pledged to their repayment, and $133.9 million consisted of municipal revenue and special obligation bonds. Approximately 70% of the Corporation’s exposure to Puerto Rico municipalities consisted primarily of senior priority obligations concentrated in four of the largest municipalities in Puerto Rico. The municipalities are required by law to levy special property taxes in such amounts as are required for the payment of all of their respective general obligation bonds and notes. During the second quarter of 2019, the PROMESA oversight board announced the designation of the Commonwealth’s 78 municipalities as covered instrumentalities under PROMESA. Meanwhile, the latest fiscal plan certified by the PROMESA oversight board did not contemplate a restructuring of the debt of Puerto Rico’s municipalities, but the plan did call for the gradual elimination of budgetary subsidies provided to municipalities. Furthermore, municipalities are also likely to be affected by the negative economic and other effects resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as expense, revenue or cash management measures taken to address the Puerto Rico government’s fiscal problems and measures included in fiscal plans of other government entities. In addition to municipalities, the total direct exposure also included $13.6 million in loans to an affiliate of PREPA, $41.8 million in loans to an agency of the Puerto Rico central government, and obligations of the Puerto Rico government, specifically a residential pass-through MBS issued by the PRHFA, at an amortized cost of $4.0 million as part of its available-for-sale investment securities portfolio (fair value of $2.9 million as of December 31, 2020).
The following table details the Corporation’s total direct exposure to Puerto Rico government obligations according to their maturities:
In addition, as of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had $106.5 million in exposure to residential mortgage loans that are guaranteed by the PRHFA, compared to $106.9 million as of December 31, 2019. Residential mortgage loans guaranteed by the PRHFA are secured by the underlying properties and the guarantees serve to cover shortfalls in collateral in the event of a borrower default. The Puerto Rico government guarantees up to $75 million of the principal for all loans under the mortgage loan insurance program. According to the most recently released audited financial statements of the PRHFA, as of June 30, 2016, the PRHFA’s mortgage loans insurance program covered loans in an aggregate amount of approximately $576 million. The regulations adopted by the PRHFA require the establishment of adequate reserves to guarantee the solvency of the mortgage loan insurance fund. As of June 30, 2016, the most recent date as to which information is available, the PRHFA had a restricted net position for such purposes of approximately $77.4 million.
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had $1.8 billion of public sector deposits in Puerto Rico, compared to $826.9 million as of December 31, 2019. Approximately 23% of the public sector deposits as of December 31, 2020 is from municipalities and municipal agencies in Puerto Rico and 77% is from public corporations, the central government and agencies, and U.S. federal government agencies in Puerto Rico.
Exposure to USVI government
The Corporation has operations in the USVI and has credit exposure to USVI government entities.
For many years, the USVI has been experiencing a number of fiscal and economic challenges that have deteriorated the overall financial and economic conditions in the area. According to the United States Bureau of Economic Analysis (“BEA”), real gross domestic product (“GDP”) estimates show that the economy grew by 1.5% in 2018 after contracting at a compounded annual rate of 1.2% between 2012 and 2017. Growth in 2018 was primarily driven by consumer spending, private fixed investment and government spending, reflecting the influx of federal disaster recovery funding in the aftermath of the two major hurricanes in 2017. Although the USVI government expects this expansionary trend to be reflected in the 2019 GDP estimates, the external economic threat posed by the COVID-19 pandemic may adversely affect growth in the short term. According to the USVI government, the results of a COVID-19 pandemic plan and other fiscal policy changes will not be evident until much later in fiscal year 2021 and beyond.
Similar to Puerto Rico, the USVI government has been processing stimulus checks and unemployment compensation checks. According to information published by the USVI government, as of January 31, 2021, the government had issued 52,908 unemployment insurance checks and an additional 29,348 Federal Pandemic Unemployment Compensation checks, totaling approximately $93.6 million. In addition, as of January 31, 2021, the Virgin Islands Department of Labor had issued $13.1 million in Pandemic Unemployment Assistance to self-employed individuals. Furthermore, as of August 8, 2020, the government announced that 2,057 applications from Virgin Islands businesses have been approved for the SBA PPP, totaling more than $126.4 million.
On February 21, 2020, Moody’s Investor Services (“Moody’s”) announced the completion of its periodic review of ratings of the Virgin Islands Water and Power Authority (“VI WAPA”). The Caa2 senior electric revenue bonds rating is constrained by VI WAPA’s limited unrestricted liquidity sources and unsustainable debt load, including its substantial unfunded pension liabilities, according to the rating agency. On May 28, 2020, Moody’s announced the completion of its periodic rating review of the USVI government. Despite the then improvement in the government’s liquidity and short-term financial position, the Caa3 rating reflected the risk that the reemergence of a significant structural deficit, combined with the expected insolvency of the Government Employees’ Retirement System (“GERS”), would lead the government to restructure its debt.
On September 28, 2020, the Governor of the U.S. Virgin Islands announced that the $1 billion Internal Revenue Matching Fund securitization transaction had been suspended. On December 21, 2020, Governor Albert Bryan Jr. announced the call of the 33rd Legislature back into Special Session to re-address his proposal to refinance the Government of the Virgin Islands’ debt to obtain a better interest rate and generate funds from the savings that can be used to shore up the GERS or any other use for the funds that the Senate chooses.
PROMESA does not apply to the USVI and, as such, there is currently no federal legislation permitting the restructuring of the debts of the USVI and its public corporations and instrumentalities. To the extent that the fiscal condition of the USVI government continues to deteriorate, the U.S. Congress or the government of the USVI may enact legislation allowing for the restructuring of the financial obligations of the USVI government entities or imposing a stay on creditor remedies, including by making PROMESA applicable to the USVI.
As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had $61.8 million in loans to USVI government instrumentalities and public corporations, compared to $64.1 million as of December 31, 2019. Of the amount outstanding as of December 31, 2020, public corporations of the USVI owed approximately $38.6 million and an independent instrumentality of the USVI government owed approximately $23.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, all loans were currently performing and up to date on principal and interest payments.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The financial statements and related data presented herein have been prepared in conformity with GAAP, which requires the measurement of the financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation.
Unlike most industrial companies, substantially all of the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a greater impact on a financial institution’s performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rate movements are not necessarily correlated with changes in the prices of goods and services.
BASIS OF PRESENTATION
The Corporation has included in this Form 10-K the following financial measures that are not recognized under GAAP, which are referred to as non-GAAP financial measures:
1. Net interest income, interest rate spread, and net interest margin excluding the changes in the fair value of derivative instruments and on a tax-equivalent basis are reported in order to provide to investors additional information about the Corporation’s net interest income that management uses and believes should facilitate comparability and analysis of the periods presented. The changes in the fair value of derivative instruments have no effect on interest due or interest earned on interest-bearing liabilities or interest-earning assets, respectively. The tax-equivalent adjustment to net interest income recognizes the income tax savings when comparing taxable and tax-exempt assets and assumes a marginal income tax rate. Income from tax-exempt earning assets is increased by an amount equivalent to the taxes that would have been paid if this income had been taxable at statutory rates. Management believes that it is a standard practice in the banking industry to present net interest income, interest rate spread, and net interest margin on a fully tax-equivalent basis. This adjustment puts all earning assets, most notably tax-exempt securities and tax-exempt loans, on a common basis that facilitates comparison of results to the results of peers. See “Results of Operations - Net Interest Income” above for the table that reconciles the non-GAAP financial measure “net interest income excluding fair value changes and on a tax-equivalent basis” to net interest income calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. The table also reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures “net interest spread and margin excluding fair value changes and on a tax-equivalent basis” to net interest spread and margin calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
2. The tangible common equity ratio and tangible book value per common share are non-GAAP financial measures that management believes are generally used by the financial community to evaluate capital adequacy. Tangible common equity is total equity less preferred equity, goodwill, core deposit intangibles, and other intangibles, such as the purchased credit card relationship intangible and the insurance customer relationship intangible. Tangible assets are total assets less goodwill, core deposit intangibles, and other intangibles, such as the purchased credit card relationship intangible and the insurance customer relationship intangible. Management and many stock analysts use the tangible common equity ratio and tangible book value per common share in conjunction with more traditional bank capital ratios to compare the capital adequacy of banking organizations with significant amounts of goodwill or other intangible assets, typically stemming from the use of the purchase method of accounting for mergers and acquisitions. Accordingly, the Corporation believes that disclosures of these financial measures may be useful to investors. Neither tangible common equity nor tangible assets, or the related measures, should be considered in isolation or as a substitute for stockholders’ equity, total assets, or any other measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. Moreover, the manner in which the Corporation calculates its tangible common equity, tangible assets, and any other related measures may differ from that of other companies reporting measures with similar names. See “Risk Management - Capital” above for a reconciliation of the Corporation’s tangible common equity and tangible assets.
3. Adjusted provision for credit losses for loans and finance losses to net charge-offs ratio is a non-GAAP financial measure that excludes the effects related to the net loan loss reserve release of $6.4 million and $16.9 million recorded in the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, and the $71.3 million charge to the provision for the year ended December 31, 2017, resulting from revised estimates of the qualitative reserve associated with the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria. Management believes that this information helps investors understand the adjusted measure without regard to items that are not expected to reoccur with any regularity or may reoccur at uncertain times and in uncertain amounts on reported results and facilitates comparisons with other periods. See below for the reconciliation of the GAAP ratio of the provision for credit losses for loans and finance leases to net charge-offs to the Non-GAAP ratio of the adjusted provision for credit losses for loans and finance leases to net charge-offs.
4. ACL for loans and finance leases to adjusted total loans held for investment ratio is a non-GAAP financial measure that excludes SBA PPP loans originated or acquired in 2020 amounting to $406.0 million as of December 31, 2020. The SBA PPP loans are fully-guaranteed by the SBA, and the principal amount of the loans may be forgiven in full or in part, thus presenting less credit risk than a non-SBA PPP loan. Management believes the use of this non-GAAP measure provides additional understanding when assessing the Corporation’s reserve coverage and facilitates comparison with other periods. See below for the reconciliation of the GAAP ratio of ACL for loans and finance leases to total loans held for investment to the Non-GAAP ratio of the ACL for loans and finance leases to adjusted total loans held for investment.
5. To supplement the Corporation’s financial statements presented in accordance with GAAP, the Corporation uses, and believes that investors would benefit from disclosure of, non-GAAP financial measures that reflect adjustments to net income and non-interest expenses to exclude items that management identifies as Special Items because management believes they are not reflective of core operating performance, are not expected to reoccur with any regularity or may reoccur at uncertain times and in uncertain amounts. This Form10-K includes the following non-GAAP financial measures for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 that reflect the described items that were excluded for one of those reasons
Adjusted net income reflects the effect of the following exclusions:
 Gain of $13.2 million on the sales of U.S. agencies MBS and U.S. Treasury notes recorded in 2020.
 COVID-19 pandemic-related expenses of $5.4 million in 2020.
 Merger and restructuring costs of $26.5 million and $11.4 million recorded in 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to transaction costs and restructuring initiatives in connection with the acquisition of BSPR.
 Benefit of $8.0 million related to the partial reversal of the deferred tax asset valuation allowance recorded in 2020.
 Gains of $0.1 million in 2020 related to the repurchase of $0.4 million in TRuPs reflected in the statement of income as Gain on early extinguishment of debt.
 Total benefit of $6.2 million and $1.9 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, resulting from hurricane-related insurance recoveries.
 Net loan loss reserve release of $6.4 million in 2019 resulting from revised estimates of the hurricane-related qualitative reserves.
 The $2.3 million expense recovery recognized in the first quarter of 2019 related to the employee retention benefit payment received by the Bank under the Disaster Tax Relief and Airport Extension Act of 2017, as amended.
 The tax-related effects of all the pre-tax items mentioned in the above bullets as follows:
− Tax benefit of $2.0 million in 2020 in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic-related expenses (calculated based on the statutory tax rate of 37.5%).
− Tax benefit of $9.9 million and $4.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to merger and restructuring costs in connection with the acquisition of BSPR (calculated based on the statutory tax rate of 37.5%)
− Tax expense of $2.3 million and $0.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to the benefit of hurricane-related insurance recoveries (calculated based on the statutory tax rate of 37.5%).
− Tax expense of $2.4 million in 2019 related to reserve releases associated with the hurricane-related qualitative reserve (calculated based on the statutory tax rate of 37.5%).
− No tax expense was recorded for the gain on sales of U.S. agencies MBS and U.S. Treasury Notes in 2020. Those sales consisted of tax-exempt securities or were recorded at the tax-exempt international banking entity subsidiary level.
− The employee retention benefit recognized in 2019 will not be treated as taxable income by virtue of the Disaster Tax Relief and Airport Extension Act of 2017.
− The gains realized on the repurchase of TRuPs in 2020 recorded at the holding company level, had no effect on the income tax expense.
Management believes that adjustments to net income and non-interest expenses of items that are not reflective of core operating performance, are not expected to reoccur with any regularity or may reoccur at uncertain times and in uncertain amounts, facilitates comparisons with prior periods and provides an alternate presentation of the Corporation’s performance.
The Corporation uses these non-GAAP financial measures and believes that these non-GAAP financial measures enhance the ability of analysts and investors to analyze trends in the Corporation’s business and understand the performance of the Corporation. In addition, the Corporation may utilize these non-GAAP financial measures as a guide in its budgeting and long-term planning process. Any analysis of these non-GAAP financial measures should be used only in conjunction with results presented in accordance with GAAP.
See “Overview of Results of Operations” above for the reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure “adjusted net income” to the GAAP financial measure. The following tables reconcile the “ACL for loans and finance leases to total loans held for investment ratio,” the GAAP financial measure, to the non-GAAP financial measure “ACL for loans and finance leases to adjusted total loans held for investment ratio,” as of December 31, 2020, and the “provision for credit losses for loans and finance leases to net charge-offs ratio,” the GAAP financial measure, to the non-GAAP financial measure “adjusted provision for credit losses for loans and finance leases to net charge-offs ratio,” for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017:
The following tables reconcile for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 the GAAP non-interest expenses to adjusted non-interest expenses, which is a non-GAAP financial measure that excludes the relevant Special Items discussed above:
Some infrequent transactions that significantly affected quarterly periods include:
 Fourth quarter of 2020 includes: (i) pre-tax merger and restructuring costs of $12.3 million related to the BSPR acquisition integration process and related restructuring initiatives, including a $4.3 million charge related to a voluntary separation program; and (ii) pre-tax COVID-19 pandemic-related expenses of $1.2 million.
 Third quarter of 2020 includes: (i) pre-tax charge to the provision for credit losses of $38.9 million as a result of the initial reserves required by CECL for non-PCD loans acquired in conjunction with the BSPR acquisition; (ii) pre-tax merger and restructuring costs of $10.4 million related to the BSPR acquisition and related restructuring initiatives; (iii) a one-time tax benefit of $8.0 million resulting from the partial reversal of the deferred tax asset valuation allowance; (iv) gain on sales of investment securities of $5.3 million; and (v) pre-tax COVID-19 pandemic-related expenses of $1.0 million.
 Second quarter of 2020 includes: (i) pre-tax merger and restructuring costs of $2.9 million related to the BSPR acquisition and related restructuring initiatives; (ii) a pre-tax benefit of $5.0 million resulting from the final settlement of the Corporation’s business interruption insurance claim related to lost profits caused by Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017; and (iii) pre-tax COVID-19 pandemic-related expenses of $3.0 million.
 First quarter of 2020 includes: (i) gain on sales of investment securities of $8.2 million; and (ii) a pre-tax benefit of $1.2 million resulting from insurance recoveries associated with hurricane-related expenses.
 Fourth quarter of 2019 includes pre-tax merger and restructuring costs of $10.9 million in connection with the then pending acquisition of BSPR and related restructuring initiatives, including a $3.4 million charge related to a voluntary separation program.
 First quarter of 2019 includes: (i) pre-tax net loan loss reserve releases of $6.4 million in connection with revised estimates of the hurricane-related qualitative reserves associated with the effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria; and (ii) $2.3 million expense recovery related to an employee retention benefit payment received by the Bank by virtue of the Disaster Tax Relief and Airport Extension Act of 2017, as amended.
CEO and CFO Certifications
First BanCorp.’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have filed with the SEC certifications required by Section 302 and Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 as Exhibits 31.1, 31.2, 32.1 and 32.2 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition, in 2020, First BanCorp’s Chief Executive Officer provided to the NYSE his annual certification, as required for all NYSE listed companies, that he was not aware of any violation by the Corporation of the NYSE corporate governance listing standards.