Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. The known risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, those identified and described in detail under the caption “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
Forte Biosciences, Inc. and its subsidiary (www.fortebiorx.com) (“Forte”, “we”, “our”) is a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on advancing through clinical trials our lead product candidate, FB-401, which is a live biotherapeutic for the treatment of inflammatory skin disease, including pediatric and adult patients with atopic dermatitis (“AD”). There is currently a significant unmet need for safe and effective therapies for pediatric atopic dermatitis patients. FB401 was developed in collaboration with the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”), and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (“NIAID”).
On June 15, 2020, Forte completed a business combination (“Merger”) with Tocagen, Inc. (“Tocagen”), a publicly traded biotechnology company, with Forte being the surviving business. As part of the Merger, the then outstanding Tocagen common stock was adjusted with a reverse split ratio of 1-for-15 and each share of Forte’s common stock was converted into the right to receive approximately 3.1624 shares of Tocagen common stock (prior to giving effect to the Merger). Immediately prior to the closing of the Merger, the Tocagen legal entity that survived the Merger changed its name to Forte Biosciences, Inc. Our common stock is publicly traded on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the ticker symbol FBRX. Prior to the Merger, Forte was a privately held company incorporated in Delaware on May 3, 2017.
On September 4, 2020, we entered into an “at-the-market” equity offering program (“ATM Facility”), as amended on October 28, 2020, whereby we may from time to time offer and sell shares of our common stock up to an aggregate offering price of $10,000,000 during the term of the ATM Facility. We are not obligated to sell any shares under the ATM Facility. The ATM Facility may be terminated at any time upon ten days’ prior notice, or at any time in certain circumstances, including the occurrence of a material adverse event. As of the filing date of this Form 10-K, we have not issued any common stock under the ATM Facility.
On November 2, 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering of 1,614,035 shares of common stock at $28.50 per share, which includes the over-allotment option exercised by the underwriters to purchase an additional 210,526 shares. Total net proceeds were $42.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering expenses of approximately $3.3 million.
FB-401
We are developing a new approach to treating inflammatory skin disease using a topical live biotherapeutic, FB-401, which consists of three therapeutic strains of a commensal Gram-negative bacteria, Roseomonas mucosa, that were specifically selected for their impact on key parameters of inflammatory skin disease. Genetic-based microbiome identification revealed significant differences in the Gram-negative skin biome between AD patients and healthy volunteers (“HV”). Over 50% of AD patients did not have any culturable Gram-negative flora. Our extensive preclinical and mechanism of action data demonstrate that FB-401 improves AD disease parameters by driving tissue repair and anti-inflammation as well as potentially suppressing harmful bacteria like S. aureus. Specifically, Forte believes that FB-401:
•
drives immune pathways that are defective;
•
potentially suppresses S. aureus growth; and
•
improves skin barrier function.
To date, a Phase 1/2a study has been completed with pediatric and adult patients, demonstrating significant reduction in AD disease and pruritus (severe itch), as well as control of S. aureus while tapering or eliminating steroid use.
In September 2020, Forte initiated a multi-center, placebo-controlled and double-blinded clinical trial of FB-401 which is expected to enroll adolescent and adult AD subjects aged 2 years of age and older. For additional information about the trial, see ClinicalTrials.gov using the identifier NCT04504279.
In October 2020, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) granted Fast Track Designation to FB-401 for the treatment of AD.
Intellectual Property
On June 18, 2020, we announced the issuance of our seventh U.S. patent (10,682,379), broadening protection to include methods for culturing Gram-negative bacteria from the skin. Together with the six U.S. patents previously issued, we now have extensive patent protection covering the composition and method of use of our technology which is focused on inflammatory skin conditions.
In December 2017, Forte entered into an exclusive license agreement with the Department of Health and Human Services (“DHHS”), as amended in May 2020. Under the agreement, the DHHS granted Forte an exclusive, sublicensable and worldwide license to certain patent rights under which we may develop and commercialize pharmaceutical and biological compositions comprising Gram-negative bacteria for the topical treatment of dermatological diseases and conditions.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. In the future, we may generate revenue from product sales, royalties on product sales, license fees, milestones, or other upfront payments if we enter into any collaborations or license agreements. We expect that our future revenue will fluctuate from quarter to quarter for many reasons, including the uncertain timing and amount of any such payments and sales.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development costs consist primarily of salaries and benefits of research and development personnel, costs related to research activities, preclinical studies, clinical trials and drug manufacturing. Non-refundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used in future research and development activities are deferred and capitalized and are only expensed when the goods have been received or when the service has been performed rather than when the payment is made.
Drug manufacturing and clinical trial costs are a component of research and development expenses. The Company expenses costs for its drug manufacturing activities performed by Contract Manufacturing Organizations (“CMOs”), costs for its preclinical and clinical trial activities performed by Contract Research Organizations (“CROs”) and other service providers, as they are incurred, based upon estimates of the work completed over the life of the individual study in accordance with associated agreements. The Company uses information it receives from internal personnel and outside service providers to estimate the percentage of completion and therefore the expense to be incurred.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to conduct our ongoing regulatory and development activities, initiate new clinical trials and build our pipeline. The process of conducting clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for any of our product candidates. Due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we cannot determine with certainty the duration, costs and timing of our clinical trials, and as a result, the actual costs to complete our planned clinical trials may exceed the expected costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of professional fees for legal, auditing, tax and business consulting services, personnel expenses and travel costs. We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we expand our operating activities. In addition, we expect to incur significant additional costs associated with being a SEC registrant. These increases will likely include legal fees, costs associated with Sarbanes-Oxley compliance, accounting fees, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance premiums, and other expenses.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development Expense
The Company acquired in-process research and development assets in connection with its Merger with Tocagen. As the acquired in-process research and development assets were deemed to have no current or alternative future use, an expense of $32.1 million was recognized in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expenses, net
Other Expenses, net consists of foreign exchange gains or losses and franchise taxes, partially offset by interest earned on our cash balances.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and commitments, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed for us and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. We make estimates of our research and development expenses in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. If our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differs from the actual status and timing of services performed, we may report amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences from our estimates to the amounts actually incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation arrangements with employees, directors and non-employees in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718, Stock Compensation. Stock-based awards issued by us have been primarily stock options with time-based vesting or performance-based vesting and restricted stock units. ASC 718 requires the recognition of compensation expense, using a fair value-based method, for costs related to all stock-based awards. To determine the grant-date fair value of stock-based awards with time-based vesting, we utilize the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is impacted by the fair value of our common stock as well as other variables including, but not limited to, the expected term that stock-based awards will remain outstanding, expected common stock price volatility over the expected term of the stock-based awards, risk-free interest rates and expected dividends. Prior to the Merger with Tocagen, there was no public market for Forte Biosciences’ common stock. As such, the estimated fair values of our common stock underlying our stock-based awards were determined at each grant date by our board of directors, with input from management, based on the information known to us on the grant date, including a review of any recent events and their potential impact on the estimated per share fair value of our common stock. Valuations of our common stock were prepared by a third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Technical Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (the “Practice Aid”).
For stock-based awards with time-based vesting, stock-based compensation is recognized over the period during which an awardee is required to provide services in exchange for the stock-based award, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period), on a straight-line basis. For stock-based awards with performance-based vesting, the fair value of the award is recognized as expense when the achievement of the associated performance criteria becomes probable. For both time-based and performance-based stock-based awards, stock-based compensation expense is recognized based on the fair value determined on the date of grant.
Estimates of the fair value of stock-based awards as of the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model are affected by assumptions regarding a number of complex variables. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. These inputs are:
Expected term - The expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards granted is expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method which is based on the mid-point between the vesting period and the end of the contractual term. We have very limited historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior for our stock-based awards.
Expected volatility - Prior to the Merger, we did not have any trading history for our common stock, so the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded biopharmaceutical companies over a period, where available, equal to the expected term of the stock-based awards. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, life cycle stage or area of specialty.
Risk-Free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the stock-based awards.
Expected Dividend - We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility, expected terms and interest rates utilized for our stock-based compensation expense calculations on a prospective basis.
Income Taxes
We provide for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Current income tax expense or benefit represents the amount of income taxes expected to be payable or refundable for the current year. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial statement reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, net operating loss and credit carryforwards, and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when such items are expected to reverse. Deferred income tax assets are reduced, as necessary, by a valuation allowance when management determines it is more likely than not that some or all of the tax benefits will not be realized.
Due to our lack of earnings history and uncertainties surrounding our ability to generate future taxable income, the net deferred tax assets have been fully offset by a valuation allowance. The deferred tax assets were primarily comprised of federal and state tax net operating losses (“NOLs”). Utilization of NOLs may be limited by the “ownership change” rules, as defined in Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code. Similar rules may apply under state tax laws.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC 740-10, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes. We assess all material positions taken in any income tax return, including all significant uncertain positions, in all tax years that are still subject to assessment or challenge by relevant taxing authorities. Assessing an uncertain tax position begins with the initial determination of the position’s sustainability and is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. As of each balance sheet date, unresolved uncertain tax positions must be reassessed, and we will determine whether (i) the factors underlying the sustainability assertion have changed and (ii) the amount of the recognized tax benefit is still appropriate. The recognition and measurement of tax benefits requires significant judgment. Judgments concerning the recognition and measurement of a tax benefit might change as new information becomes available.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following tables summarize our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $10.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.7 million during the same period in 2019. The increase of $7.3 million was primarily due to an increase of approximately $5.4 million of manufacturing, clinical and regulatory expenses as we advanced our FB-401 program through FDA clinical trials, an increase of approximately $1.4 million in payroll and related expenses including stock-based compensation expense as we expanded our research and development headcount in 2020, and an increase of approximately $0.5 million in other research and development expenses. We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially during the next few years as we advance FB-401 through US FDA clinical trials and possibly initiate additional trials.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.4 million for the same period of 2019. This increase of $2.8 million was primarily due to an increase of approximately $1.2 million in legal and professional expenses driven by the increased expense of being a public company, an increase of approximately $1.0 million in payroll and related expenses including stock-based compensation expense as we expanded our headcount, an increase of approximately $0.4 million in insurance expenses primarily for directors and officers, and an increase of approximately $0.2 million in other general and administrative expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase substantially during the next few years as a result of staff expansion, costs associated with being a public company, including higher insurance premiums, legal and accounting fees and other compliance costs associated with operating a public company.
In-process research and development assets acquired
In connection with the Merger, we recognized a charge of $32.1 million of acquired in-process research and development expenses for assets with no alternative use for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expenses, net
The increase in other expenses, net of approximately $0.2 million was primarily due to foreign currency transaction losses related to contracts denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar as a result of differences between the exchange rates on the billing dates and the payment dates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales or out-licenses. We have never been profitable and have incurred operating losses in each year since inception. Our net losses were approximately $46.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which includes a $32.1 million charge for in-process research and development expenses. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $51.5 million. We expect to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue the clinical development of FB-401. In addition, operating as a SEC registrant may involve the hiring of additional financial and other personnel, upgrading financial information systems, and incurring costs associated with operating as a public company. We expect that our operating losses will fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year due to the timing of clinical development programs.
Prior to the closing of the Merger, we had raised net cash proceeds of approximately $9.9 million in a Series A financing round from private placements of preferred stock. In connection with the Merger, we issued 3,804,817 shares of our common stock (after giving effect to the exchange ratio and reverse split), and warrants to purchase 2,752,546 shares of our common stock (after giving effect to the exchange ratio and reverse split) for net proceeds of $19.4 million. In addition, on June 16, 2020, we issued an additional 411,112 shares of common stock for net proceeds of $4.6 million.
On September 4, 2020, as amended on October 28, 2020, we entered into an “at-the-market” equity offering program (“ATM Facility”) whereby we may from time to time offer and sell shares of our common stock up to an aggregate offering price of $10.0 million during the term of the ATM Facility. We are not obligated to sell any shares under the ATM Facility. The ATM Facility may be terminated at any time upon ten days’ prior notice, or at any time in certain circumstances, including the occurrence of a material adverse event. We have not issued any common stock under the ATM Facility as of the filing date of this Form 10-K.
On November 2, 2020, we completed a public offering of 1,614,035 shares of our common stock at $28.50 per share, which includes the over-allotment option exercised by the underwriters to purchase an additional 210,526 shares. Total net proceeds were $42.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering expenses of approximately $3.3 million.
In February 2021, we issued 673,463 shares of our common stock pursuant to cashless exercises by certain warrant holders.
We had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $58.8 million as of December 31, 2020. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to allow us to fund our operations for at least 12 months from the filing date of this Form 10-K.
Future Capital Requirements
We have not generated any revenue from product sales or from out-licensing. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from product sales or out-licensing. We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval and commercialize our product candidates. At the same time, we expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development and manufacturing activities, particularly as we continue the research, development, manufacturing and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for FB-401. We expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a SEC registrant. We anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
We expect our research and development expenses to substantially increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue to advance FB-401 in the clinic.
Our future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including but not limited to:
•
the terms and timing of any strategic alliance, licensing and other arrangements that Forte may establish;
•
the initiation and progress of Forte’s ongoing clinical trials for its product candidates;
•
the number of programs Forte pursues;
•
the outcome, timing and cost of regulatory approvals;
•
the cost and timing of hiring new employees to support Forte’s continued growth;
•
the costs involved in patent filing, prosecution, and enforcement; and
•
the costs and timing of having clinical supplies of Forte’s product candidates manufactured.
If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience dilution. Any future debt financing may impose upon us covenants that restrict our operations, including limitations on our ability to incur liens or additional debt, pay dividends, repurchase our common stock, make certain investments and engage in certain merger, consolidation or asset sale transactions. Any equity or debt financing may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials. We may also be required to sell or license to other parties rights to develop or commercialize our drug candidates that we would prefer to retain.
See “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Summary Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year end December 31, 2020 was $18.4 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $46.5 million adjusted for non-cash items primarily related to acquired in-process research and development expense of $30.9
million, depreciation and stock-based compensation expense of $1.0 million, and cash used by increases in net operating assets of $3.8 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $2.8 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $4.1 million adjusted for decreases in net operating assets of $1.3 million.
Investing activities
Cash provided by investing activities of $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of cash acquired from the reverse merger with Tocagen, Inc. that closed on June 15, 2020. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of cash paid for the acquisition of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $66.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily from net proceeds of $66.7 million received from the sale of shares of the Company’s common stock, $0.3 million of proceeds received from the exercise of employee stock options, and cash used for prepaid financing costs of $0.3 million. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $4.9 million was from net proceeds received from the sale of our preferred stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC.
Indemnification
As permitted under Delaware law and in accordance with our bylaws, we indemnify our officers and directors for certain events or occurrences while the officer or director is or was serving in such capacity pursuant to indemnification agreements. We believe the fair value of the indemnification rights and agreements is minimal. Accordingly, we have not recorded any liabilities for these indemnification rights and agreements as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Contractual Obligations
See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Recent Accounting Standards
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.